Thousands of people living with HIV in Britain are to be freed from the burden of taking daily pills, after health chiefs gave the green light for a revolutionary treatment by injection every two months. Draft guidance from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) recommends offering the antiretroviral drugs cabotegravir and rilpivirine in England and Wales after trials proved they work as effectively as daily tablets. The Scottish Medicines Consortium has also approved the injections for adults living with HIV in Scotland. Although HIV, which attacks the immune system, is still incurable, researchers found that patients who had the new treatment could reach a point where the virus particles in their blood (the viral load) were so low those particles could not be detected or transmitted between people. “We still have a long way to go in educating around HIV, but today’s announcement demonstrates how far we’ve come since the 1980s epidemic,” said Garry Brough of Positively UK. “It is a huge step forward. Having to take tablets every day can be physically, emotionally and socially burdensome for some people. This decision reflects the rightful need for people living with HIV to have the freedom to manage their HIV in a way that works best for them, helping them to live their life to the full.” Debbie Laycock, head of policy at Terrence Higgins Trust, described the breakthrough as “incredible news”. The treatment is the first long-acting, injectable treatment for adults with HIV. It is also the first recommendation Nice has made about the use of HIV treatments since they came under its remit two years ago. Cabotegravir with rilpivirine is now being recommended as an option for adults with HIV infection when antiretroviral medicines they are already taking have kept the virus at a low level, and where there is no evidence to suspect viral resistance and no previous failure of other anti-HIV medicines. About 100,000 people have HIV in Britain. It is estimated that initially at least 13,000 people will be eligible for the new jab in England alone. At present treatment for HIV involves life-long antiretroviral regimens taken as tablets every day. Clinical trial results show cabotegravir with rilpivirine is as effective as oral drugs at keeping the viral load low. The antiretrovirals are administered as two separate injections every two months. Chloe Orkin, professor of HIV medicine at Queen Mary University of London, said: “This is a paradigm-shifting moment in the UK where, for the first time, it is possible to release people with HIV from the burden of daily oral therapy and offer them instead just six treatments per year.” Deborah Gold, chief executive of the National AIDS Trust, said: “Long-acting injectables have been proven to be a safe and effective method of delivering HIV treatment, so we are delighted that Nice has approved the use of cabotegravir with rilpivirine for adults living with HIV. “It won’t be right for everyone but, for some, monthly injections are highly preferable to daily pills. Innovations that can make it easier for people to stick to their treatment plans both improve the wellbeing of people living with HIV and bring us one step closer to the goal of ending transmissions by 2030.” A treatment only required six times a year will make taking medicine easier for some people, and is more discreet for those who feel unable to be open about their HIV status. Experts say removing the need to take pills every single day may also lessen the emotional toll of living with HIV, and improve the numbers of people who adhere to their treatment regime. Meindert Boysen, deputy chief executive and director of the Centre for Health Technology Evaluation at Nice, said: “Despite scientific advances HIV is still incurable, but the virus can be controlled by modern treatment. However, for some people, having to take daily multi-tablet regimens can be difficult because of drug-related side effects, toxicity and other psychosocial issues such as stigma or changes in lifestyle. The committee heard that stigma remains an issue for people living with HIV and can have a negative impact on people’s health and relationships. “We’re pleased therefore to be able to recommend cabotegravir with rilpivirine as a valuable treatment option for people who already have good levels of adherence to daily tablets, but who might prefer an injectable regimen with less frequent dosing.”An offshoot of the Covid Delta variant that is on the rise in England appears to be less likely to cause symptoms than the dominant form, researchers have revealed – although experts say the finding requires further scrutiny. Scientists on the React-1 study analysed more than 100,000 swabs taken across England with the majority taken between 19 October and 5 November. The results suggest that over that period, the infection rate for England was 1.57% – a figure that includes both symptomatic and asymptomatic infections – with prevalence highest among children aged 13-17, at over 5%. The team added that while rates were lower in older adults, levels had doubled in those aged 65 and over compared with the previous round of the study carried out in September. While overall the infection rate in the latest study period was higher than in the September round of the study, the findings suggest there was a peak around 20-21 October, with the rate subsequently declining: results released earlier this month suggested the infection rate in the first half of the most recent study period was 1.72%. The decline, the team add, reflects a fall in prevalence of infections among both children and adults below the age of 55 during overall study period. The drop chimes with trends seen in data from other sources including the Office for National Statistics, although some have suggested it may be partly down to the impact of half-term. Prof Christl Donnelly of Imperial College London and a co-author of the study added a similar dip was seen around the same time last year. Among other findings, the study revealed there has been an increase in infections among double vaccinated individuals in recent months, while an offshoot of the Delta variant, known as AY.4.2 and which is on the rise in England, appears to be less likely to cause symptoms than the dominant Delta variant, AY.4. It has previously been suggested that AY.4.2 may be around 10-15% more transmissible than the original Delta variant. But others said the new finding requires further scrutiny. Dr Simon Clarke, associate professor in cellular microbiology at the University of Reading, said: “What the data doesn’t tell you is who those infections [of AY.4.2] are in. So if they’re in younger people, or if they’re in a community that has a higher than average vaccine uptake, then that might account for things,” he said. Donnelly said a reduction in coughing may reduce spread, but suggested it is also possible a reduced tendency to cause symptoms may boost spread of the virus. “It is absolutely the case that if people are waiting for symptoms to do a test and to therefore identify that they are infected and therefore should cut back their contacts, being asymptomatic may facilitate transmission,” she said. Clarke said: “It’s an interesting suggestion, but it’s not what’s been seen with the other [variants].” Using linked health records, the team were also able to probe the impact of vaccination, revealing a single jab appeared to be 56.2% effective against infection, whether symptomatic or not, in children aged 12 to 17, two weeks after vaccination, and 67.5% effective against symptomatic infection. Prof Paul Elliott, director of the React study, added the research also shed light on the impact of boosters. “We found that within 14 days of having had a third dose, the risk of infection was reduced by two-thirds,” he said.The average pay deal across the UK is worth just 2%, despite a rise in prices that pushed the retail prices index (RPI) – a widely used measure of inflation in pay bargaining – to 6% this month. According to the latest figures from the consultancy XpertHR, pay bargaining across some of Britain’s biggest private and public sector employers showed median basic pay increased 2% in the three months to the end of October, unchanged for the seventh consecutive month. “The data shows that pay awards are at the same level as this time last year and confirms a period of stability after awards dipped in the middle of 2020 and the beginning of 2021,” the firm said. In a clear signal that inflation is causing a sharp decline in disposable incomes across much of the workforce, a survey of employers also found they were expecting to increase pay by only 2.5% over the next year. Sheila Attwood, the firm’s pay and benefits editor, said: “Many employers are already looking ahead to the new year and gathering information in advance of finalising their pay budgets. They will be acutely aware that inflation is going to eat into the value of any employee pay rises over the coming year.” Official figures showed a spike in earnings growth earlier this year as pay recovered from wage cuts and freezes imposed by employers in the wake of the first lockdown in March 2020. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) said total annual pay growth including bonuses and job promotions rose above 8% before falling back to below 5% in the last month, though it cautioned that the pay trends were difficult to track during the pandemic. It said pay growth was more likely averaging nearer 3.5% to 4% in the year to September. Elsewhere, employees paid the national living wage will receive an uplift of 6.6% to their hourly rate next April, while the Living Wage Foundation said its member organisations would increase basic pay by 4.2% from November. Bank of England officials have become concerned that workers will demand higher pay to compensate for spiralling rates of inflation. The Bank’s preferred measure of inflation, the consumer prices index (CPI), jumped more than one percentage point last month to 4.2% while the more volatile RPI, which is not considered a reliable national statistic by the ONS, jumped to 6%. Most union negotiators consider RPI, which includes mortgage interest bills, to be a more realistic measure of the current cost pressures faced by most households. CPI takes no account of housing costs.The world’s biggest drugs makers have pressed on in the fight against superbugs despite the pandemic, but millions of people in poorer countries, where the risk of drug-resistant infections is highest, are still missing out on key antibiotics. A report from the Access to Medicine Foundation, an Amsterdam-based non-profit group, shows that only 54 of 166 medicines and vaccines assessed are covered by an access strategy to make them available to low- and middle-income countries. Policies that can help poorer nations include tiered pricing, voluntary licensing agreements to boost supply, local manufacturing, technology transfers, public-private partnerships or donations. Most of the 54 products are vaccines, anti-tuberculosis medicines, or antibiotics that the World Health Organization rates as a priority for greater access. Jayasree Iyer, the foundation’s executive director, said: “Those facing the highest risk of infection and the highest rates of drug resistance have the hardest time getting the antibiotics they need.” Annually an estimated 5.7 million people, mainly in low- and middle-income countries, die from treatable infectious diseases, owing to a lack of access to antibiotics. “We’re happy to see some of the leaders, GSK and Pfizer, really taking steps in the last couple of years in the middle of a pandemic, but the gaps are huge in the research and development pipeline and in access plans,” said Iyer. “We’re on a bit of a slippery slope here.” In a more positive development almost all new medicines in late-stage development (18 of 20) and all 11 late-stage vaccine projects are covered by plans to make them available to poorer countries, a big improvement on the finding of the foundation’s first report, in 2018, which showed only a handful had access plans. The study also ranked 17 of the world’s biggest pharmaceutical companies that produce antibiotics and antifungals. While the R&amp;D pipeline remains small given the scale of the threat from drug-resistant superbugs, the number of projects has risen from 77 to 92. There are potential game-changers being tested by the companies in the report, including treatments for drug-resistant gonorrhoea, E coli and C difficile, bacteria that can infect the bowel and cause diarrhoea. Pfizer’s newly acquired antifungal drug candidate fosmanogepix targets a fungus which is often multiple-drug resistant and which spreads in hospitals, causing infections that can be severe or deadly.The man accused of raping Brittany Higgins will stand trial in June. On Thursday the Australian Capital Territory supreme court extended Bruce Lehrmann’s bail until a criminal case conference in February, and set a tentative date of 6 June for a trial expected to last three to four weeks. Lehrmann is facing one charge of sexual intercourse without consent in relation to the alleged assault in the Parliament House office of the former defence industry minister Linda Reynolds in the early hours of 23 March 2019. He is pleading not guilty to the charge and denies that any form of sexual activity took place. On Thursday the ACT director of public prosecutions, Shane Drumgold, asked the court for a trial date, indicating that an indictment and case statement had been filed and served on Lehrmann’s legal team. Drumgold initially resisted holding a criminal case conference, telling the court there would be “not a lot of benefit” from the procedure, which is designed to reduce the issues in dispute at trial by requiring prosecutors to meet the defence to discuss the available evidence and the strength and weaknesses of the case. The ACT supreme court registrar J Reece said the practice was to hold a conference for all criminal matters, prompting Drumgold and Lehrmann’s lawyer Warwick Korn to agree to meet on 7 February. Reece extended Lehrmann’s bail to that date. Reece listed the matter as a “special fixture” on 6 June. Practice directions and court rules indicate special fixtures are used for “complex” matters, expected to take more than a week. Listing the trial date as a special fixture ensures it is heard by a particular magistrate, with no prospect of the date being given away. Nevertheless the 6 June date is only tentative because the availability of Lehrmann’s barrister John Korn could not be immediately confirmed. Reece considered an earlier trial of 11 April but John Korn was unavailable. Drumgold indicated the prosecution case would take two weeks and his estimate of the total trial length was three weeks; the defence suggested it may take three to four. The matter was also listed for further mentions on 16 December and 28 February. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The summons, seen by Guardian Australia, alleges one breach of the Crimes Act by Lehrmann for “sexual intercourse with Brittany Higgins, without her consent, and [that he] was reckless as to whether she had consented”. The offence is punishable by up to 12 years in prison. In August John Korn said: “My client absolutely and unequivocally denies that any form of sexual activity took place at all. He will defend the charge.” Australian federal police began investigating the allegation Higgins had been raped by a colleague at Parliament House in 2019 after she made a formal complaint in February. After a lengthy investigation, a brief of evidence was passed to the director of public prosecutions in June.Mask-wearing is the single most effective public health measure at tackling Covid, according to the first global study of its kind, which found that the measure was linked to a 53% fall in the incidence of the disease. Vaccines are safe and effective and saving lives around the world. But most do not confer 100% protection, most countries have not vaccinated everyone, and it is not yet known if jabs will prevent future transmission of emerging coronavirus variants. Globally, Covid cases exceeded 250 million this month. The virus is still infecting 50 million people worldwide every 90 days due to the highly transmissible Delta variant, with thousands dying each day. Now a systematic review and meta analysis of non-pharmaceutical interventions has found for the first time that mask wearing, social distancing and handwashing are all effective measures at curbing cases – with mask wearing the most effective. “This systematic review and meta analysis suggests that several personal protective and social measures, including handwashing, mask wearing, and physical distancing are associated with reductions in the incidence of Covid-19,” the researchers wrote in the BMJ. They said the results highlight the need to continue mask wearing, social distancing and handwashing alongside vaccine programmes. Researchers at Monash University and the University of Edinburgh say multi-faceted measures, such as lockdowns and closures of borders, schools and workplaces need further analysis to assess their potential negative effects on populations. Public health or non-pharmaceutical interventions are known to be beneficial in fighting respiratory infections like flu, and countries around the world have tried using them to curb the spread of Covid. However, until now, reviews have not been robust enough to allow experts to make firm conclusions about the effectiveness of such measures in tackling Covid. Results from more than 30 studies from around the world were analysed in detail, showing a statistically significant 53% reduction in the incidence of Covid with mask wearing and a 25% reduction with physical distancing. Handwashing also indicated a substantial 53% reduction in Covid incidence, although this was not statistically significant after adjusting for the small number of handwashing studies included. Detailed analysis was not possible for other measures, including quarantine and isolation, universal lockdowns, and closures of borders, schools, and workplaces, due to differences in study design, outcome measures and quality, the researchers said. Mask wearing was adopted by many countries at the start of the pandemic, but nearly two years later many have now dropped some or all their original requirements. The Dutch government this month decided to re-impose the mandatory wearing of face masks in an effort to slow the latest spike in infections. Romania, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Poland have also recently tightened rules on mask wearing. But Hungary, which has seen a sharp rise in cases this month, has resisted making mask wearing mandatory in closed spaces. In England, the legal requirement to wear a mask ended in July, apart from in healthcare settings and care homes, unless exempt. In Wales, they are still legally required on public transport and in all public indoor areas apart from pubs and restaurants. In Scotland, masks must still be worn in shops and on public transport, and in pubs and restaurants when not seated. In Northern Ireland, masks must still be worn on public transport and in shops. Boris Johnson, the UK prime minister came under fire this month from the World Health Organization’s special envoy for Covid after being photographed without a face covering during a hospital visit. Asked about pictures of Johnson walking maskless through Hexham General, Dr David Nabarro told Sky News: “I’m not sitting on the fence on this one – where you’ve got large amounts of virus being transmitted, everybody should do everything to avoid either getting the virus or inadvertently passing it on. “We know that wearing a face mask reduces the risk, we know that maintaining physical distance reduces the risk, we know that hygiene by regular handwashing and coughing into your elbow reduces the risk. We should do it all and we should not rely on any one intervention like vaccination on its own.” • This article was amended on 23 November 2021. An earlier version of the text and headline implied that the study concerned found a causal link between mask-wearing and the reduction in covid incidence. To clarify: the authors said the systematic review “indicates a benefit associated with … mask wearing … in reducing the incidence of Covid-19”.That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today’s blog. Please follow along with all our coronavirus coverage here. Also feel free to send tips or suggestions to me at samantha.lock@theguardian.com or via Twitter @Samantha__Lock I’ll be back with you shortly. Here’s a quick summary of the latest headlines: The US is set to boost vaccine manufacturing and produce at least a billion doses a year. The Biden administration is planning to dedicate billions of dollars to build up vaccine manufacturing in the US to produce at least a billion doses each year, in an effort to shore up global Covid-19 supply for poorer countries while also pre-empting future pandemics. Europe is the only region with increasing Covid deaths, the World Health Organization reports. Covid deaths rose 5% in the last week as deaths in all regions other than Europe remained stable or declined, and totalled 50,000 worldwide last week. Of the 3.3 million new infections reported, 2.1 million came from Europe. Sweden is introducing a digital Covid-19 vaccination certificate for public gatherings and events with more than 100 people indoors, authorities said Wednesday. Spain has approved the use of a Covid-19 booster shot for people between 60-69 years old and for health workers, as part of an effort to combat an uptick in infections. The Czech Republic and Slovakia both reported record daily new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, a day before the two European Union countries plan to approve new restrictions for unvaccinated people in response to rising infections. A fourth Covid wave is hitting Germany with ‘full force’, Merkel says. Germany reported 52,826 new infections on Wednesday - up by a third from a week ago and another daily record, while 294 people died, Belgium tightened its coronavirus restrictions, mandating wider use of masks in indoor settings and enforcing work from home, as cases rose in the country’s fourth Covid wave. The country has one of the highest cases per capita rates in the EU. The UK reported another 38,263 Covid infections and a further 201 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. Mandatory vaccine passports are set to be introduced in Northern Ireland. Covid deaths have decreased 17% in the Americas over the past week, but the most populous countries like the US, Brazil and Colombia are seeing a levelling of new infections after weeks of declining trends, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said on Wednesday. Hungary reported 10,265 new Covid-19 infections, its highest daily tally since the end of March. A Florida man has been sentenced to two years in federal prison for collecting nearly $1m in Covid-19 relief funds after submitting more than 100 fraudulent applications for himself and others, AAP reports. Leonel Rivero, 35, was sentenced in Miami federal court, according to court records. He previously pleaded guilty to wire fraud. He was also ordered to pay over $1m in restitution. Rivero owned a tax-preparation business and submitted approximately 118 fraudulent Paycheck Protection Program loan applications on behalf of himself and his accomplices, according to the criminal complaint. Those loan applications sought a total of more than $2.3 million, and Rivero and his accomplices received approximately $975,582, investigators said. It’s Samantha Lock back with you and taking over from my colleague Tom Ambrose. As usual, a quick rundown of where Australia stands with Covid before I begin. The state of NSW has recorded 262 new Covid-19 cases and 3 deaths over the latest reporting period. Victoria’s daily case numbers have jumped back over the 1,000 mark, with 1,007 new infections recorded in the state. Sadly, 12 people infected with the virus have died. Australia is also hoping a tourism campaign lures travellers from Singapore when two-way quarantine-free travel resumes between the two countries, AAP reports. From Sunday, fully vaccinated Singaporeans can arrive in Australia without quarantining as long as they return a negative Covid-19 test. Brazil registered 11,977 new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, the country’s health ministry confirmed today. It also recorded a further 373 Covid deaths in the last 24 hours. Wales’ first minister has said there will be no changes to the nation’s Covid rules this week. Mark Drakeford confirmed on Wednesday that restrictions would remain the same and the country would stay on alert level 0. He thanked residents for helping to reduce record-high coronavirus case rates over the last three weeks. But he warned of a fourth wave sweeping across Europe, and said extending the Covid Pass across the hospitality sector in future weeks remains an option should cases again soar. The case rate in Wales has fallen to 507.4 per 100,000 people, and is no longer the highest in the UK, having dipped slightly below Northern Ireland where the case rate is 509.2. Drakeford said: Three weeks ago we were facing a very serious situation in Wales but everyone has pulled together and cases have fallen back from those record high levels. I want to thank everyone for their hard work and the steps they have taken to protect themselves and their loved ones. Saying yes to the vaccine and crucially to the booster remains an essential step to help keep Wales safe,” he added. As we start to plan for Christmas we need to keep on working together to bring coronavirus under control. The pandemic hasn’t gone away – a fourth wave is sweeping across Europe, with many countries introducing stricter restrictions once again. We will do everything we can to keep Wales open and to keep Wales safe. This means keeping the option of extending the use of the Covid Pass if cases rise again and pandemic pressures on the NHS increase, to help keep the hospitality sector open and trading through the busy festive period. In the United States, the White House says about 10% of eligible children aged 5 to 11 have received a dose of the Pfizer Covid vaccine since its approval for their age group two weeks ago. At least 2.6 million kids have received a shot, White House Covid-19 coordinator Jeff Zients said on Wednesday, with 1.7 million doses administered in the last week alone, roughly double the pace of the first week after approval. The Associated Press reported: It’s more than three times faster than the rate adults were vaccinated at the start of the nation’s vaccination campaign 11 months ago. Zients said there are now 30,000 locations across for kids to get a shot, up from 20,000 last week, and that the administration expects the pace of pediatric shots to pick up in the coming days. Kids who get their first vaccine dose by the end of this week will be fully vaccinated by Christmas, assuming they get their second shot three weeks after the first one. The Biden administration is planning to dedicate billions of dollars to build up vaccine manufacturing in the US to produce at least a billion doses each year, in an effort to shore up global Covid-19 supply for poorer countries while also pre-empting future pandemics. As part of a public-private partnership, the government will draw on knowledge from companies that already use mRNA technology to make vaccines. Its ambitious goal is to get to a point where the US can produce at least a billion doses each year starting around mid-2022, according to the New York Times, which first reported the news. “This is about assuring expanded capacity against Covid variants and also preparing for the next pandemic,” David Kessler, who leads vaccine distribution for the White House, told the Times. “The goal, in the case of a future pandemic, a future virus, is to have vaccine capability within six to nine months of identification of that pandemic pathogen, and to have enough vaccines for all Americans.” Sajid Javid’s criticisms of how GPs work have fuelled a rise in verbal and physical attacks on them and their staff, the leader of Britain’s family doctors has claimed. Dr Richard Vautrey said comments by the health secretary and NHS bosses, alongside negative coverage of GPs in some newspapers, had wrongly made the public think they were “hiding away” from patients, and exposed staff to abuse. Vautrey, the outgoing chair of the British Medical Association’s GPs committee, made the claim in an interview with the Guardian before the union’s decision on Thursday about whether to press ahead with industrial action in protest at a government edict that GPs in England must see any patient face to face if requested. Before the pandemic 80% of consultations in England were face-to-face. That fell dramatically on government and NHS orders when the Covid pandemic struck, though in recent months it has risen again to 60%. Good evening, I’m Tom Ambrose and I will be bringing you the latest Covid news from home and abroad over the next couple of hours. We start with the news that the Czech Republic and Slovakia both reported record daily new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, a day before the two European Union countries plan to approve new restrictions for unvaccinated people in response to rising infections. Thousands in the capitals of both countries, Prague and Bratislava, used Wednesday’s anniversary of the 1989 anti-communist Velvet Revolution to rally against their government’s upcoming coronavirus restrictions. The protesters ignored social distancing and didn’t wear masks. Police didn’t intervene in Prague. In Bratislava, police said two officers sustained injuries after the crowd near the seat of the government detonated fire crackers. The Czech daily tally soared to 22,479 new cases, eclipsing the previous record set 7 January by almost 5,000 and nearly 8,000 more than just a week ago. The country’s infection rate rose to 813 new cases per 100,000 residents over the past seven days, up from 558 a week earlier. That’s it from me for today. Thank you all so much for reading along, writing in and generally keeping me company. My colleague Tom Ambrose will be along shortly to continue our coronavirus coverage, and I’ll see you all again tomorrow. Germany’s coronavirus situation is dramatic, the chancellor Angela Merkel has said, calling for an extra push on vaccinations ahead of a crisis meeting with federal and regional leaders to agree on measures to curb a fourth wave of the virus. Germany reported 52,826 new infections on Wednesday - up by a third from a week ago and another daily record, while 294 people died, bringing the total to 98,274, as the pandemic tightens its grip on Europe. The surge in infections comes at an awkward time in Germany with the conservative Merkel acting in a caretaker capacity while three other parties negotiate to form a new government after an inconclusive September election. Merkel said a national effort was needed and appealed to federal and regional leaders meeting on Thursday to introduce steps to trigger tighter restrictions based on the number of infected people being hospitalised in a week. A draft of the document to be discussed and seen by Reuters sets out steps, including forcing people to show proof of vaccination or recovery or a negative Covid test on public transport and at work and imposing tighter restrictions for leisure activities. In addition, financial aid for companies and individuals hit by the crisis could be extended by three months to the end of March 2022. Merkel appealed to vaccine-sceptics to change their minds and called for a speedier distribution of booster shots. Merkel told a congress of German city mayors: The fourth wave is hitting our country with full force. The number of daily new infections is higher than ever before... and the daily death toll is also frightening. It is not at all too late to decide for a first vaccination. If enough people get vaccinated that is the way out of the pandemic. Only 68% of people in Europe’s most populous country are fully vaccinated - lower than the average in western Europe due to a tradition of vaccine hesitancy, while 5% of the population has had a booster shot. The Social Democrats, Greens and Free Democrats, who aim to form the next government, will also propose measures to fight the pandemic in a draft law to go to parliament on Thursday. That would replace emergency powers, due to end on 25 November, which provide a national legal framework for restrictions. Merkel’s conservatives want to extend these powers instead. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Belgium tightened its coronavirus restrictions, mandating wider use of masks in indoor settings such as cafes and restaurants, and enforcing work from home, as cases rose in the country’s fourth Covid wave. The country has one of the highest cases per capita rates in the EU, at around one per hundred people over the past 14 days, according to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The prime minister Alexander De Croo said: “The alarm signals are all red.” Spain is now offering third doses of Covid vaccines to people aged 60 and over, expanding the booster shot programme from the previous age threshold of 70 as infections rise, the prime minister Pedro Sanchez said. The UK Health Security Agency said children aged between 12 and 15 should delay getting a Covid vaccine if they’ve recently had Covid to at least 12 weeks after they were infected. The advice brings guidance for 12 to 15-year-olds into line with that for 16 and 17-year-olds, who were advised to wait 12 weeks after infection before getting a shot when officials gave a go ahead for second doses for that age group. The UKHSA said that the increase in the gap, from previous guidance of a 4-week interval, could cut rare cases of a mild and usually short-lived side effect of heart inflammation known as myocarditis further. The UK reported another 38,263 Covid infections and a further 201 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. Mandatory vaccine passports are set to be introduced in Northern Ireland after Stormont ministers voted by a majority to support the move. It is understood that, amid rising infections and increasing pressure on the healthcare system, the health minister Robin Swann wants to see enforceable Covid certification in operation across a range of hospitality settings from 13 December. Sweden plans to introduce a requirement for Covid vaccine passes at indoor events where more than 100 people attend, a step recommended by health officials warning of a rising tide of infections in coming weeks. “The spread is increasing in Europe. We haven’t seen it yet in Sweden, but we are not isolated,” the health minister Lena Hallengren said. “We need to be able to use vaccination certificates.” Also in Sweden, the Public Health Agency said it would reverse a widely-criticised decision to stop recommending testing for people who are fully vaccinated but show symptoms of Covid-19. Covid testing in Sweden has fallen by some 35% after the health agency announced in October that people displaying symptoms no longer needed to get tested if they were fully vaccinated against the virus. The recommendation drew heavy criticism at a time when the pandemic is gaining traction again across Europe. Hungarian doctors have warned of a “very sad Christmas” ahead and called for preventive measures as infections and hospitalisations continue to rise. Hungary reported 10,265 new Covid cases on Wednesday, its highest daily tally since the end of March, prompting the country’s Medical Chamber to call for a ban on mass events and mandatory mask-wearing in closed spaces. In a statement, the Hungarian Medical Chamber also said entry to restaurants, theatres and cinemas should be conditional on a Covid immunity certificate. The World Health Organization said coronavirus deaths in Europe rose by 5% in the last week, making it the only region in the world where Covid-19 mortality increased. In its weekly report on the pandemic, the WHO said Covid deaths in all regions other than Europe remained stable or declined, and totalled 50,000 worldwide last week. Of the 3.3 million new infections reported, 2.1 million came from Europe. It was the seventh consecutive week that Covid cases continued to mount across the 61 countries the WHO counts in its European region. The Czech Republic will ban people who have not been vaccinated against Covid from access to public events and services from Monday, the prime minister Andrej Babiš announced, and negative tests will no longer be recognised as qualification to enter events and service establishments. The restrictions, to be approved by the full cabinet on Thursday, come after a surge in new infections to a record 22,479 on Tuesday. “People have to finally believe that Covid kills,” Babiš said. Belgium tightened its coronavirus restrictions on Wednesday, mandating wider use of masks and enforcing work from home, as cases rose in the country’s fourth Covid wave, Reuters reports. From Saturday, all people in indoor venues such as cafes and restaurants will need to wear a mask unless seated and the rule will apply to those aged 10 or older. The previous age threshold was 12. Nightclubs may have to test their guests if they want to let them dance mask-free. People wanting to eat in a restaurant or go to the theatre already must present a Covid pass, showing vaccination, a negative test or recent recovery. Most Belgians will also have to work from home four days a week until mid-December, and for three days after that. Belgium has one of the highest cases per capita rates in the European Union, at around one per hundred people over the past 14 days, according to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. “The alarm signals are all red,” the prime minister Alexander De Croo told a news conference. “We had all hoped to have a winter without coronavirus, but Belgium is not an island.” The new restrictions are still milder than the lockdown imposed on the unvaccinated in Austria and the shortening of bar and restaurant opening hours in the Netherlands. De Croo said Belgium planned to give booster jabs, currently limited mostly to the elderly, to the wider population. Belgium’s infections rise has been sharpest in the northern region Flanders, where vaccination rates are higher, prompting eased restrictions in October. Spain is now offering third doses of Covid vaccines to people aged 60 and over, expanding the booster shot programme from the previous age threshold of 70 as infections rise, the prime minister Pedro Sanchez said on Wednesday. Spain has fully vaccinated 79% of its population, and started the campaign to administer booster shots last month, including for cancer patients, nursing home residents and other vulnerable groups. “The meeting of the vaccines panel has just ended, and it has been agreed that a third dose of vaccination will be given to health and social-health professionals and for people over 60 years of age,” Sanchez told reporters during a visit to Turkey. The country’s infection rate, as measured over the preceding 14 days, has been rising steadily since late October. It rose to 96 per 100,000 on Wednesday from about 89 on Tuesday, though remains well below levels in some countries like Austria, with over 1,400 cases per 100,000, or the Netherlands with over 900. Spain reported 6,667 cases on Wednesday, bringing the total to 5,067,712 since the pandemic began, while the number of deaths rose by 30 to an overall 87,775. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has said that children aged between 12 and 15 should delay getting a Covid vaccine if they’ve recently had Covid to at least 12 weeks after they were infected, Reuters reports. The advice brings guidance for 12 to 15-year-olds into line with that for 16 and 17-year-olds, who were advised to wait 12 weeks after infection before getting a shot when officials gave a go ahead for second doses for that age group. Currently, 12 to 15-year-olds are only advised to get an initial shot of Pfizer’s vaccine, which has been associated with rare, mild and usually short-lived side effect of heart inflammation known as myocarditis. The UKHSA said that the increase in the gap, from previous guidance of a 4-week interval, could cut rare cases of myocarditis further. “The Covid-19 vaccines are very safe. Based on a highly precautionary approach, we are advising a longer interval between Covid infection and vaccination for those aged under 18,” Dr Mary Ramsay, head of immunisations at UKHSA, said in a statement. “This increase is based on the latest reports from the UK and other countries, which may suggest that leaving a longer interval between infection and vaccination will further reduce the already very small risk of myocarditis in younger age groups,” she added. Children have had some of the highest rates of infection in England since schools went back at the start of September, although prevalence has fallen from its peak since a half-term school holiday at the end of October. UKHSA said that current advice for at-risk children between 12-17 was unchanged, owing to their higher risk from Covid which would outweigh any benefit from delaying the shots. Canada is set to announce it will no longer require travellers returning from short foreign trips to take PCR Covid tests, a government source has said. Reuters reported that the source, who requested not to be named, said the change will affect those taking trips of 72 hours or less. The travel industry complains that the requirement to take the tests, the most reliable commonly-used method of detecting Covid, is deterring tourism. The official announcement is expected to be made on Friday. Covid deaths have decreased 17% in the Americas over the past week, but the most populous countries like the US, Brazil and Colombia are seeing a levelling of new infections after weeks of declining trends, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said on Wednesday. Mexico is reporting an increase in new deaths and in the Caribbean, Trinidad and Tobago had a sharp rise in deaths as intensive care unit (ICU) beds fill with patients with Covid, PAHO said. In an important milestone, half of the people in Latin America and the Caribbean have now been fully vaccinated against Covid, though coverage remains below 10% in Nicaragua and Haiti, PAHO director Carissa Etienne said. “The Covid pandemic is still very active in our region,” she warned in a webcast news conference. Countries across Central and South America have seen a decline in new infections, except for Bolivia, it said. As Uruguay and Chile have relaxed pandemic restrictions, Covid cases have risen, even with their high vaccination coverage, the health agency said. Etienne urged people in the region to get vaccinated and stick to social distancing and mask wearing as the holiday season approaches. The UK has reported another 38,263 Covid infections and a further 201 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That compares with 37,243 cases and 214 fatalities reported in the 24 hours prior. Mandatory vaccine passports are set to be introduced in Northern Ireland after Stormont ministers voted by a majority to support the move. The PA news agency understands DUP ministers opposed the health minister Robin Swann’s proposal at the executive meeting on Wednesday. However, the other four executive parties – Sinn Féin, SDLP, Alliance and Mr Swann’s UUP – backed the move. Swann wants to see enforceable Covid certification in operation across a range of hospitality settings from §3 December. While the four DUP ministers voted against the proposal, the party did not deploy a cross-community voting mechanism that could have blocked the introduction of vaccine certification in the region. The Department of Health is set to produce a further paper detailing how the policy will be rolled out. PA Media understands Swann has proposed that passports are used to gain entry to nightclubs, hospitality premises that serve food and/or drink, cinemas, theatres and conferences halls. Covid certificates would also be needed to access indoor events with 500 or more attendees where some or all of the audience is not normally seated. They would be required for outdoor events with 4,000 or more attendees where some or all of the audience is not normally seated. They would also be mandatory at all events of 10,000 or more attendees whether the audience is seated or not. Swann is proposing that regulations needed for the law change come into effect on 29 November, with a 14-day grace period prior to becoming enforceable on 13 December. Under the proposals, people wishing to gain entry to the venues would need to demonstrate evidence of Covid-19 vaccination, a negative lateral flow test result, or proof of a coronavirus infection within the previous six months. A modelling paper from health officials presented to the Executive ahead of Wednesday’s meeting warned passports may not be enough to suppress rapidly increasing Covid case numbers, which have surged 23% in a week, and that “more severe restrictions” may need to be considered in mid-December to avoid hospitals being overwhelmed. Swann’s proposals come amid escalating pressures on the region’s beleaguered health system. Covid-19 transmission rates have soared in recent weeks, particularly among young people. Making certification a legal entry requirement for hospitality venues has been credited with driving up vaccination rates among young people in the Irish Republic. Proof of vaccination has already been required to access cinemas, nightclubs, theatres, concert halls and large events in Wales. Scotland has similar requirements, though the government is considering whether to expand it to other sectors. In England, the government ditched its plans for vaccine passports for access to nightclubs and large events, which had been due to start at the end of September. However, they could still be introduced under its so-called winter “plan B” if the situation deteriorates. Dutch health authorities said on Wednesday they were running short of Covid tests, as the Netherlands registered more than 20,000 new cases for the second day in a row, the highest since the pandemic began, Reuters reports. “We are coming up against the maximum of our capacity,” Jaap Eikelboom, head of Covid-19 operations at the National Public Health Service, said in a statement. The service said it was working to expand test capacity amid a new surge that has caught health authorities and the prime minister Mark Rutte’s government off guard. About 85% of the adult Dutch population is fully vaccinated. The National Institute for Health (RIVM) on Tuesday reported a record of more than 110,000 new cases in the week ended 16 November, an increase of 44% from the week before, with the strongest rise among children aged 4-12. Hospital admissions are rising and several are curtailing regular care to accommodate patients with coronavirus. The latest wave began shortly after the government ended social distancing and other measures in September – a decision that has been reversed as cases surge. Earlier this month, Rutte’s government reintroduced masks in stores, and last weekend it reimposed a partial lockdown, including closing bars and restaurants after 8pm. But the impact of those measures has not yet been seen in the daily numbers. Parliament met with Rutte on Tuesday night to debate whether to restrict access to indoor public venues to people who have a “corona pass” showing they have been vaccinated or already recovered from an infection. Politicians were sharply divided on the idea, with some arguing that it discriminates unfairly against the unvaccinated and others arguing that it may be necessary anyway as a matter of public health. No law has yet been proposed for a vote. The Swedish government plans to introduce a requirement for Covid vaccine passes at indoor events where more than 100 people attend, a step recommended by health officials warning of a rising tide of infections in coming weeks, Reuters reports. Infection rates have soared across large swaths of Europe in recent weeks and while Sweden - hard hit at times earlier in the pandemic - has yet to record a similar surge, healthy agency modelling suggests infections will reach a peak in mid-December. The centre-left government was preparing a bill to be put forward to parliament with the aim to having the vaccination passes in effect from 1 December, the health minister Lena Hallengren said. “The spread is increasing in Europe. We haven’t seen it yet in Sweden, but we are not isolated,” she told a news conference. “We need to be able to use vaccination certificates.” Sweden’s health agency said earlier on Wednesday it would reverse a widely criticised decision to stop recommending testing for people who were fully vaccinated but show symptoms of Covid. [see 12.16pm.] Around 85% of all Swedes over 16 have received one dose vaccine and 82% have had two doses or more. Sweden currently has the lowest number of patients with Covid in hospital and in intensive care in the European Union, relative to the size of the population, according to OurWorldinData, but has been hit hard by earlier waves. Sweden has opted against lockdowns and relied mostly on voluntary measures aimed at social distancing. It has seen several times higher deaths per capita than its Nordic neighbours but lower than most European countries that opted for strict lockdowns. Several aspects of Sweden’s handling of the pandemic, such as poor testing, have been strongly criticised by a government-appointed Covid commission. As Covid cases in the US begin to rise once more and health agencies consider booster shots for all adults, some states and cities are taking matters into their own hands and urging additional shots, advice that goes beyond current federal guidelines. Leaders in Colorado, California, New Mexico, Arkansas, West Virginia, and New York City recommend that residents older than 18 seek an additional shot six months after their initial immunisation. These states and cities have little in common, except their health systems have been stretched to a breaking point before during the pandemic – and one-third or more of their population is still unvaccinated. Read more here: Hungarian doctors have warned of a “very sad Christmas” ahead and have called for preventive measures as infections and hospitalisations continue to rise, Reuters reports. The country reported 10,265 new Covid cases on Wednesday, its highest daily tally since the end of March, prompting the country’s Medical Chamber to call for a ban on mass events and mandatory mask-wearing in closed spaces. In a statement, the Hungarian Medical Chamber also said entry to restaurants, theatres and cinemas should be conditional on a Covid immunity certificate. “We must slow down the increase in the number of patients, a flooding of hospitals [with patients with Covid] or many families will have a very sad Christmas,” they said. “Apart from a slowing vaccination campaign, we have not seen any preventive measures [to contain the pandemic].” The daily tally is getting close to the peak of 11,265 reached during the third wave of the pandemic in a country with hardly any restrictions in place and where the vaccination rate is below the European Union average. A new wave of infections has swept across central Europe with hospitals struggling to cope in some countries such as neighbouring Romania. Romania, the Czech Republic, Slovakia and Poland have all tightened rules on mask-wearing and introduced measures to curb infections. In Hungary, the government of the prime minister Viktor Orbán, who is facing a close election in early 2022, has urged people to take up vaccines and announced mandatory inoculations at state institutions. It also empowered private companies to make vaccinations mandatory for employees. But it has refrained from making mask wearing mandatory in closed spaces – apart from on public transport and in hospitals – and there are no other restrictions in place. On Tuesday, the government said it was monitoring cases, and “if necessary will take further measures”. The government has not replied to emailed Reuters questions. The country of 10 million has reported 32,514 deaths from Covid since the start of the pandemic but only 5.78 million of its people are fully vaccinated. More than 1.66 million people have received a booster shot. The European Union’s drug regulator said on Wednesday it could issue an opinion on Novavax’s Covid-19 vaccine “within weeks” if the data it has received so far is sufficient to show the shot’s effectiveness and safety, Reuters reports. The vaccine, called Nuvaxovid or NVX-CoV2373, has been under a rolling review since February making the speedy timeline for potential approval possible, the European Medicines Agency said. If approved, the shot would be the region’s fifth coronavirus vaccine, joining those from Pfizer/BioNTech , Moderna, AstraZeneca and Johnson &amp; Johnson. The major approval could come ahead of authorisation in the United States, where Novavax had to resolve manufacturing issues and expects to file for approval by the end of the year. The EMA said two of its advisory panels were looking into various plans submitted by Novavax on risk management, and development and studies of the vaccine for use in children. Novavax’s shot received its first emergency use approval earlier this month in Indonesia. The company has also sought backing from the World Health Organization. The Philippines on Wednesday authorised emergency use of a version made by India’s Serum Institute. The World Health Organization said coronavirus deaths in Europe rose by 5% in the last week, making it the only region in the world where Covid-19 mortality increased, AP reports. The UN health agency said confirmed cases jumped 6% jump globally, driven by increases in the Americas, Europe and Asia. In its weekly report on the pandemic issued late on Tuesday, the WHO said Covid deaths in all regions other than Europe remained stable or declined, and totalled 50,000 worldwide last week. Of the 3.3 million new infections reported, 2.1 million came from Europe. It was the seventh consecutive week that Covid cases continued to mount across the 61 countries the WHO counts in its European region, which stretches through Russia to central Asia. While about 60% of people in western Europe are fully immunised against Covid, only about half as many are vaccinated in the eastern part of the continent, where officials are struggling to overcome widespread vaccine hesitancy. The WHO said infections have been falling in Africa, the Middle East and south-east Asia since July. Within Europe, the highest numbers of new cases were in Russia, Germany and the UK, the WHO said. It noted that deaths jumped by 67% in Norway and by 38% in Slovakia. The health agency previously described Europe as being the epicentre of the ongoing pandemic and warned that there could be 500,000 more deaths by January if urgent actions aren’t taken. In the last week, Austria, the Netherlands and other countries reintroduced some lockdown measures to try to slow infections, while the UK decided to roll out booster doses to everyone over the age of 40. The number of Covid-related deaths in Scotland has continued to fall from a recent peak in late summer, with 115 deaths recorded during the week ending Sunday 14 November, 25 fewer than the previous week. National Records of Scotland, the government records agency, said that brought the total number of deaths where Covid was mentioned on the death certificate up to 11,933. The latest surge in fatalities by that measure peaked at 167 in early September, as Scotland experienced a significant surge in Covid infections. NRS said its assessment of deaths among different ethnic groups showed Scots of Pakistani origin were 3.7 times more likely to die of Covid, relative to the population as a whole, Chinese-origin Scots 1.7 times more likely to die. White British residents not of Scottish origin were 0.8 times less likely to die. Some studies show people of Asian heritage are genetically far more susceptible to the Delta variant than other ethnic groups, but poverty and other health issues, including a higher proportion of chronic diseases such as diabetes and heart disease, could also be a factor within Scotland. A year after he left hospital, Ray Connolly is still getting over the Covid that almost killed him. But, he writes, “I’m not going to waste another minute of my life”. Here are some extracts: I was in a wheelchair when they brought me home at the end of September 2020. I had been in intensive care for 102 days. For the first two months my wife, Plum, had not been allowed to visit, instead receiving daily reports on my condition – recurrent delirium, two heart attacks, stents, kidney dialysis, pneumonia, memory loss and tracheotomy – all brought on by Covid. Three times she was told I wouldn’t be resuscitated if I suffered any further deterioration and she had come to dread the ringing of the phone. But only when I got home did I fully realise how much she and the families of other Covid patients had suffered. Until I was ill, all I liked to do was to work; writing was my hobby as much as my job. There was always another project. Now I realise that I’ve travelled in the US and France far more than in the UK. There’s so much here to do, so much architecture and country to be admired, so much gardening to enjoy, so many books to read and so many family and friends to see. I’ve been given a second chance. I’m not going to waste it. You can read his full story here: The Czech Republic will ban people who have not been vaccinated against Covid from access to public events and services from Monday, the prime minister Andrej Babiš has announced, and negative tests will no longer be recognised as qualification to enter events and service establishments. The restrictions, to be approved by the full cabinet on Thursday, come after a surge in new infections to a record 22,479 on Tuesday. Many European countries, including Czech neighbours Germany, Austria and Slovakia, have recorded rises in infections and have started tightening curbs on unvaccinated people. Slovakia reported a record number of cases on Wednesday, and Hungary and Poland had the highest numbers in more than six months. “From that time [Monday] only vaccinations and having recovered from Covid will be recognised when it comes to services and public events,” Babiš said, adding: People have to finally believe that Covid kills. The Czech Republic, with a population of 10.7 million, has observed relatively light restrictions in the latest Covid wave, with the government pledging no school closures or lockdowns. The government has resisted tightening rules while in transition to a new administration, but the worsening situation in hospitals has made it consider restrictions on unvaccinated people. Hospitals reported 4,425 patients with coronavirus on Tuesday, fewer than half the record highs seen in March, and 661 people in intensive care, the Health Ministry said. The country has recorded a total of 31,709 Covid deaths, with the daily count mostly over 60 in the past days. Its vaccination rate has lagged those of other countries, with 57.6% of the population fully vaccinated versus an EU average of 64.9%, according to data from the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. The US is planning to invest billions of dollars in expanding Covid vaccine manufacturing capacity to have at least a billion doses by the second half of next year, the New York Times reports, citing top White House advisers. The announcement, to be made on Wednesday, comes as the Biden administration faces pressure from activists to increase the vaccine supply to poorer countries. The investment in vaccine production is part of a private-public partnership to address vaccine needs at home and around the world and also to prepare for future pandemics, Dr David Kessler, who oversees vaccine distribution, and Jeff Zients, the White House coronavirus response coordinator, told the Times. The plan is estimated to cost several billion dollars and will be paid for with funds from the American Rescue Plan Biden signed into law in March, Kessler told the paper. “This is about assuring expanded capacity against Covid variants and also preparing for the next pandemic,” Kessler added. “The goal, in the case of a future pandemic, a future virus, is to have vaccine capability within six to nine months of identification of that pandemic pathogen, and to have enough vaccines for all Americans,” he said. Sweden’s Public Health Agency said it would reverse a widely-criticised decision to stop recommending testing for people who are fully vaccinated but show symptoms of Covid-19, Reuters reports. Covid testing in Sweden has fallen by some 35% after the health agency announced in October that people displaying symptoms no longer needed to get tested if they were fully vaccinated against the virus. “The Public Health Agency has decided to recommend that the regions offer testing to everyone who is 6 years and older who gets symptoms that may be Covid-19,” it said in a statement. The recommendation not to test people who were vaccinated but showed symptoms drew heavy criticism at a time when the pandemic is gaining traction again across Europe. Prof Devi Sridhar, chair of global public health at the University of Edinburgh, has written for the Guardian about how Seoul has probably the best Covid response in the world. At the start of the pandemic, South Korea pursued a zero-Covid policy. How this could affect the west’s response to the next pandemic? Here is an extract: South Korea has attracted a lot of attention for following a specific “east Asian” playbook of maximum suppression: I wrote about this in March 2020, pushing countries to follow the “Seoul model”, and again in May 2020, laying out the key components of the strategy. This involved finding Covid cases through mass testing, tracing contacts, and supporting isolation to ensure chains of transmission were broken. This was supported by strict travel restrictions to prevent new cases being imported, and strong messaging to the public about wearing masks in public spaces, and the dangers of a new infectious disease. The government worked to protect its people (not to enrich its own interests) and the response was pre-emptive, organised like clockwork, and efficiently delivered. South Korea had experienced Mers, another coronavirus, and understood the dangers of a hands-off approach. As a short-term strategy, maximum suppression helped buy time for scientists to get to work, and therefore find a sustainable exit from the crisis. In 2020, it allowed numerous vaccines to be developed and approved, followed in 2021 by several promising therapeutics that keep people out of hospital and safer from descending into severe disease. Once these new tools became available, the medium- to longer-term strategy evolved, too. The next step after zero Covid has been a focus on vaccinating the population to a high threshold, and acquiring antivirals that can be given in outpatient care to keep the burden off healthcare services. The pivot from maximum suppression to mass vaccination was a rational and logical shift to achieve a successful transition out of the pandemic. The countries that followed this model – South Korea, Taiwan, and even their Pacific neighbours, Australia and New Zealand – are now managing to vaccinate their populations and protect both lives and livelihoods. Each person that wasn’t infected in 2020, thanks to these maximum suppression strategies, could live on into the phase we are now in: where vaccines and therapeutics are allowing people who catch Covid to survive, when they might otherwise have died. You can read the full piece here: The mulled wine is brewing and the chestnuts are ready to roast, but with Covid-19 cases soaring the festive season is hanging in the balance for Germany’s famous Christmas markets. As the government scrambles to respond to a dramatic rise in infections over the past two weeks, some of the traditional markets have already been cancelled while others are still waiting nervously for decisions. The Striezelmarkt in Dresden, the oldest Christmas market in Germany, which draws about 3 million visitors annually, is due to open on 22 November. Stallholders have already built their wooden huts and are busy hanging decorations and assembling wooden figures. But they might have to take it all down again at any moment. “I can’t describe what we are going through at the moment,” Karin Hantsche, who has been selling traditional gingerbread at the market for 32 years, told AFP. “We are not sleeping at night, we are so nervous and tense.” The state of Saxony has said the markets can go ahead, but local authorities in Dresden are due to meet on 25 November and could take a different view. The central government and the leaders of Germany’s 16 states are also due to meet this week to discuss new national measures. With the country’s seven-day incidence rate striking a new record high for the 10th day in a row on Wednesday, they are expected to agree new restrictions such as limiting large gatherings to those who have been vaccinated or recovered from the disease. But these rules would be impossible to implement at the Striezelmarkt, which has no perimeter fence or entrance controls. For Hantsche, whose company brings in 50% of its income over the Christmas period, the closure of the market would be a disaster. “Not everyone will survive this, and for me I can’t say yet,” she said. “We are prepared to immediately lay everyone off again if the pandemic situation requires it. But we need some form of compensation for costs, and at the moment we do not have that.” Christmas markets have been an annual fixture in Germany since the 15th century, when craftsmen and bakers were given special permission to ply their wares in town squares in the run-up to Christmas. In pre-pandemic times, the markets drew about 160 million visitors annually and brought in revenues of €3-5bn, according to the BSM stallkeepers’ industry association. Most German cities cancelled their Christmas markets last year as Covid-19 cases began spiralling, despite the financial losses. Munich on Tuesday became the first major German city to cancel its 2021 Christmas market, with several smaller markets already cancelled across Germany. Others are still planning to go ahead, but with restrictions: in Leipzig there will be no alcohol, while in Nuremberg, the market will be pared down and split across several locations. Markus Harich, who has been selling traditional festive mulled wine and other drinks at the Striezelmarkt for 30 years, is busy putting the finishing touches to his wooden hut. “We are in a very difficult situation at the moment,” he said. “We don’t know what will happen next. Will we open at all? Will the regulations be changed?” He too has had “sleepless nights” worrying about the future of his business. “The goods are ordered, but nobody is giving us any information … At the moment we have really been left alone in a vacuum.” Ulrich Poetschke, who sells traditional artwork from Germany’s Erzgebirge region, spends most of the year preparing for the festive season because “the most important business for us is the Christmas business”. “We are hearing different news every day about whether the market is taking place, so it is a very, very difficult situation for the traders,” he said. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Seoul has reported a record number of daily coronavirus cases, as a recent surge centred on the capital of South Korea strains medical services a fortnight after the country eased social distancing rules as part of its “living with Covid” project. Hungary reported 10,265 new Covid-19 infections today, its highest daily tally since the end of March. The country has had limited restrictions in place and the country’s vaccine take-up is below the EU average at 60%. The Czech Republic reported 22,479 new coronavirus cases, the highest tally recorded in the country of 10.7 million since the pandemic started. The country is celebrating the 17 November anniversary of the Velvet Revolution. Germany’s disease control agency reported 52,826 new coronavirus cases today, as infection rates continue to climb. The seven-day average is at 41,052 cases, the highest it has been during the pandemic. Acting health minister Jens Spahn has called on doctors not to be too strict about waiting at least six months before giving patients vaccine booster shots. Covid infections in Austria have hit a new daily record, with daily infections rising to 14,416. It is the first time they have passed the 14,000 mark. On Monday, the country introduced lockdown regulations targeted specifically at the unvaccinated. A health department paper in Northern Ireland has warned that adherence to Covid guidelines by the public is declining and that there has been very low uptake of Covid certification on a voluntary basis by the hospitality sector. The paper goes on to say that without a significant decline in community transmission in the next three weeks “there is a risk that more severe restrictions will need to be considered from mid-December to avoid hospital capacity from being overwhelmed”. Latest polling suggests that the public in Switzerland will continue back the Covid laws that the government introduced in March in a referendum being held on 28 November. Broadcaster SRG suggests the law will be confirmed with 61% backing it, 38% opposed and 1% undecided. Willie Walsh, the director general of the International Air Transport Association, has told the Commons transport select committee that the UK’s testing requirements for international arrivals have “suppressed demand” and caused “great confusion”. Delivery and logistics firm FedEx has announced it is closing its operations base in Hong Kong over the city’s quarantine requirements. Strict new Covid-19 restrictions come into force for visitors to Beijing. All visitors to the capital must now show a negative Covid test result from the past 48 hours, while flights from higher risk areas within China will be cancelled or limited to one a day at reduced capacity In Greece, the ERT news network is carrying an announcement that prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis is expected to make a televised address about the pandemic tomorrow. The US has signed contracts worth roughly $1bn to secure the antibody-based Covid-19 treatment Sotrovimab from GSK and Vir Biotechnology. The pharmaceutical companies, while announcing the deal, said supply was expected by 17 December. Aucklanders will be allowed to leave the city this summer after months in lockdown, the New Zealand prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has announced, but public health experts warn it could lead to a torrent of Covid-19 spreading into other parts of the country. That’s it from me, Martin Belam, for today. I will be back with you tomorrow. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly. Coronavirus infections in Austria have hit a new daily record. Daily infections rose to 14,416 on Wednesday, official data showed. It is the first time they have passed the 14,000 mark. The peak of the biggest wave of infections before this was 9,586 about a year ago, when the country went into full lockdown. On Monday, the country instituted a lockdown for those not fully vaccinated, aimed at halting the surge. Roughly 65% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against the virus. Reuters report that the situation is worst in two of Austria’s nine provinces, Upper Austria and Salzburg, where hospitals are coming under increasing strain. Salzburg has said it is preparing for a triage situation when the number of people needing intensive care beds exceeds supply, though that stage has not yet been reached. PA Media is carrying quotes from Willie Walsh, the director general of the International Air Transport Association. He has told the Commons’ transport select committee that the UK’s testing requirements for international arrivals have “suppressed demand” and caused “great confusion”. He said: “I think the restrictions were excessive for too long a period and continue to discourage people principally because of the cost of testing – even though it’s been reduced now where an antigen test is required rather than a PCR test. There’s no justification for the continued use of these tests based on the data.” He added: “The recovery is definitely being hampered by the bureaucracy associated with UK travel, where a lot of other countries have simplified their procedures. “Where we see restrictions relaxed or removed, there’s an immediate response in terms of passenger demand, and that’s been witnessed right across the world.” Germany’s disease control agency reported 52,826 new coronavirus cases today, as infection rates continue to climb. The seven-day average is now at 41,052 cases, the highest it has been during the pandemic. Reuters report that the Robert Koch Institute said 294 more people died in Germany of Covid-19 since the previous day, bringing the country’s pandemic official death toll to 98,274. Acting health minister Jens Spahn has called on doctors not to be too strict about waiting at least six months before giving patients vaccine booster shots. This chart from yesterday’s Robert Koch Institute bulletin gives an idea of the regions most affected in Germany, although authorities may take some encouragement from the fact that a few of the lines on the chart look as if they may be beginning to dip. In Greece, the ERT news network is carrying news that prime minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis is expected to make a televised address about the pandemic tomorrow. It is anticipated that he will call on Greek citizens to keep getting vaccinated, and take booster jabs, and will also call for greater caution in the next few weeks in order to avoid having to put in extra measures before Christmas. Earlier this week, many hospitality venues owners in Greece remained closed in protest against anti-Covid measures and seeking greater financial assistance from the government. Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK politics live blog for today. He will have his hands full with the continued fallout from Tory sleaze accusations and prime minister’s questions. I’ll continue here with the latest UK Covid developments, as well as coronavirus developments from around the globe. An interesting little quote here from Germany’s acting health minister Jens Spahn this morning. He has said that the Covid-19 pandemic has increased Germany’s economic dependency on China in many areas. “We have experienced and had to experience how dependent we have become on China,” Spahn said at an economic conference organised by the Süddeutsche Zeitung daily, pointing to rising imports of face masks and medical precursors from China. “This alone would be worth discussing on an economic summit on its own, the question of how we can at least become a bit less dependent on China again in the 2020s,” Reuters note Spahn added. Hungary reported 10,265 new Covid-19 infections today, its highest daily tally since the end of March, the government said on its official coronavirus website. Reuters note that the daily tally is getting close to the peak of 11,265 reached during the third wave of the pandemic in a country that has hardly any restrictions in place, and where the vaccination rate is below the European Union average. This map gives an indication of caseload rates across Europe, where several countries are seeing their highest level of infection, or close to the highest level, since the pandemic began. Agence France-Presse is reporting that delivery and logistics firm FedEx have announced it is closing its operations base in Hong Kong over the city’s quarantine requirements. “As the global business environment continues to evolve and with the pandemic requirements in Hong Kong, FedEx has made the decision to close its Hong Kong crew base and relocate its pilots,” FedEx said in a statement to Hong Kong’s public broadcaster RTHK. A company memo written by system chief pilot Robin Sebasco said “The decision to close the Hong Kong base reflects this constant evolution and is designed to provide a measure of stability to these team members, as there is no clear timeline when life may return to normal in Hong Kong.” FedEx says it will continue to serve Hong Kong with pilots based in Oakland, California. Hong Kong requires the majority of visitors to quarantine for 14 or 21 days after arrival. Earlier this week, Cathay Pacific told its air crew that when returning to Hong Kong they should avoid unnecessary social contact for 21 days after arrival, and isolate at home for the first three days. The rules do not apply to everyone. A quick snap from Reuters here, that the US has signed contracts worth roughly $1bn to secure the antibody-based Covid-19 treatment Sotrovimab from GSK and Vir Biotechnology. The pharmaceutical companies, while announcing the deal, said supply was expected by 17 December. Britain’s GSK said the deal brought the total number of doses secured of the treatment, branded Xevudy, to more than 750,000 globally, adding that the US would have an option to buy additional doses through March 2022. Seoul has reported a record number of daily coronavirus cases, as a recent surge centred on the South Korean capital strains medical services a fortnight after the country eased social distancing rules as part of its “living with Covid” project. Seoul recorded 1,436 new infections on Wednesday, according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency. At 3,187, the nationwide caseload came close to the record of 3,270 set in late September. While South Korea has experienced relatively few cases and deaths since the start of the pandemic, 21 deaths were reported on Wednesday, the 16th day in a row of double-digit fatalities that included a record 32 on Saturday, the agency said. The number of critically ill Covid-19 patients is at an all-time high of 522, it added. With 76.1% of greater Seoul’s ICU beds for Covid patients occupied, the government is facing criticism that it eased restrictions too soon – including allowing larger social gatherings and longer indoor dining hours – in an attempt to revive the pandemic-hit economy. “Medical workers have been stretched thin as serious cases have risen at a fast pace. It is safe to say that beds for critical cases are fully occupied,” Jeong Hye-min, a professor at Seoul National University hospital, was quoted as saying by the Yonhap news agency. Evidence that serious cases and deaths are rising among older people who were vaccinated early this year has prompted officials to speed up booster shots for people who received their second dose more than six months ago. The gap between the second and third jabs will be reduced from six months to four months for people in their 60s or older, as well as for care home residents and those receiving long-term hospital care. People in their 50s will be eligible for booster shots after five months. South Korea has reported 402,775 cases and 3,158 deaths since the start of the pandemic. A dramatic fall in infections meanwhile is continuing in neighbouring Japan, a trend many experts attribute to its high rate of vaccination – with more than three-quarters of the 125 million population fully jabbed – and widespread mask-wearing. Japan reported 154 cases on Tuesday, compared with more than 25,000 in mid-August. There were 15 in Tokyo – half the capital’s daily total a week ago. Switzerland is having a referendum later this month on whether the public backs the government’s anti-Covid measures. They had been approved earlier in the year, but those opposing the measures have forced a second vote, which will take place on 28 November. Reuters reports a poll this morning from broadcaster SRG that suggests the law will be confirmed with 61% backing it, with 38% opposed and 1% undecided. The law was originally passed in March and expanded financial aid to people hit by Covid and laid the foundation for certificates the government requires for people to enter bars and restaurants and attend certain events. Here’s a recap of the situation in Northern Ireland, where PA Media has been reporting overnight that they have seen a paper from the Department of Health which has informed Executive ministers that positive cases have risen by 23% in a week. The paper says hospital admissions have risen by 19% in the last week, while occupancy is up 10%. The conversion rate of cases to hospital admissions has risen above 2% for the first time since early September, and is now estimated at around 2.8%. The paper says an increase in admissions is inevitable in the coming week and will continue to rise beyond that if cases numbers are not reduced. Officials warn that community transmission is at a “high level and increasing rapidly”. The Health Department experts state that without further intervention “as soon as possible”, modelling suggests hospital capacity may be exceeded in mid-December, if the current trajectory follows a central pathway. The paper states: “Evidence suggests that adherence to guidelines by the public is declining and that there has been very low uptake of Covid certification on a voluntary basis by the hospitality sector.” It states the need for immediate measures to increase adherence to current mitigations – such as face mask use and work-from-home guidance. It says those mitigations will be unlikely to bring the reproduction rate below one unless they are accompanied by “widespread use of Covid certification across higher risk settings”. Robin Swann, Northern Ireland’s health minister, has previously proposed that mandatory Covid-19 passports become enforceable from 13 December. PA says it understands that Swann is proposing that passports are used to gain entry to nightclubs, hospitality premises that serve food and or drink, cinemas, theatres and conferences halls. The passport issue has sharply divided the five-party coalition in Belfast. PA reports that the paper warns that without a significant decline in community transmission in the next three weeks “there is a risk that more severe restrictions will need to be considered from mid-December to avoid hospital capacity from being overwhelmed”. 17 November is usually a day of great celebration in the Czech Republic, as people remember the anniversary of the Velvet Revolution that ended the communist government in Czechoslovakia. However, the day has started with some worrying news. Reuters report that the Czech Republic reported 22,479 new coronavirus cases for Tuesday, the highest tally recorded in the country of 10.7 million since the pandemic started. The seven-day rolling average of case numbers is at 11,313, as opposed to the level of a week ago, when it stood at 7,878. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London, taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. Here’s a reminder of the Covid situation in the UK. According to the government’s own data dashboard, case numbers are up over 14% on the previous week, but deaths were down 10% and hospitalisations were down 4% on the previous week. The UK media round is being handled for the government by international trade secretary Anne-Marie Trevelyan. I’ll bring you any Covid lines that emerge from that, as well as the latest coronavirus developments from around the world. Aucklanders will be allowed to leave the city this summer after months in lockdown, the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has announced, but public health experts warn it could lead to a torrent of Covid-19 spreading into other parts of the country. Our reporter in New Zealand, Eva Corlett, has the full story here. Strict new Covid-19 restrictions come into force for visitors to Beijing on Wednesday. All visitors to the capital must now show a negative Covid test result from the past 48 hours, while flights from higher risk areas within China will be cancelled or limited to one a day at reduced capacity, the AFP reports. The restrictions also reportedly include Covid tests every three days for the more than 30,000 people working with cold-chain imports in the city. “Beijing is the capital and has strong regional and international connections … The virus must not be introduced into Beijing and it must not spread in Beijing,” city spokesman Xu Hejian said at a press conference on Tuesday. With less than 100 days to go to the games in February, China is bracing for a challenge to its zero-Covid strategy when thousands of international athletes descend on Beijing after months of strict border controls. No spectators from outside China will be allowed to attend the Olympics, which will be held from 4 February in a “closed-loop” bubble. And the estimated 2,900 athletes must be fully vaccinated or face 21 days’ quarantine upon arrival. They will also be tested daily. Welcome back to our live Covid news blog this Wednesday. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be with you for the next short while to give you a rundown of all the latest headlines. First up, in a move that may go towards closing the vaccination gap between the world’s wealthiest and poorest nations, US pharmaceutical giant Pfizer has announced a deal to make its antiviral Covid-19 pill available more cheaply in the world’s least-wealthy countries. The company will allow generic manufacturers to supply its Paxlovid pill to 95 low-and middle-income nations covering about 53% of the world’s population, the company said in a statement on Tuesday. Strict new Covid restrictions will also come into force in Beijing from Wednesday for visitors to the Chinese capital, requiring negative tests and dramatically cutting domestic flights, the AFP reports. With less than 100 days to go to the Winter Olympics in February, China is bracing for a challenge to its zero-Covid strategy when thousands of international athletes descend on Beijing after months of strict border controls. Auckland, New Zealand, is set to lift Covid travel restrictions in December. Anthony Fauci, the top infectious diseases public official in the US, said on Tuesday that if America further ramps up vaccination rates and those already immunised take booster shots that it is feasible Covid-19 could be reduced from a pandemic emergency to endemic status next year. Pfizer has announced it is asking US regulators to authorise its experimental antiviral Covid-19 pill, Paxlovid, which has been shown in clinical trials to cut the risk of hospitalisation and death for adults by almost 90%. The Philippines has approved the emergency use of the Novavax Covid-19 vaccine, Reuters reports. India’s daily Covid-19 deaths rose by 301, bring the total death toll to 464,153 the health ministry said. Germany reports another 52,826 confirmed coronavirus cases and 294 death, the Robert Koch Institute reports. Slovakia is planning new restrictions on unvaccinated people in an effort to tame the latest surge of coronavirus infections that has caused a “critical” situation in the country’s hospitals, the prime minister said Tuesday. People in Ireland are being asked to work from home where possible from Friday and bars, restaurants and nightclubs will introduce a midnight closing time on Friday as a raft of new restrictions is agreed by the government in the face of rising hospitalisations. Thousands of restaurant owners in Greece shut their businesses in a nationwide protest against recent measures that fine establishments for serving customers without proper documentation of their vaccination or test status. The UK has recorded another 37,243 Covid cases in the last 24 hours, and a further 214 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. That is compared with 39,705 infections and 47 deaths reported the day before. Scotland’s Covid passport scheme could be extended to cinemas, theatres and bars next week if that helped avoid a harsher lockdown closer to Christmas, Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed. Portugal may bring back some measures to stop the spread of Covid in the run-up to the holiday season as infections soar across Europe, prime minister Antonio Costa said. In Germany, plans are under way for the introduction of tighter restrictions on people who have so far chosen not to be vaccinated. Munich became the first major German city to cancel its upcoming Christmas market, blaming the “dramatic” coronavirus resurgence. Berlin introduced restrictions for those who are unvaccinated on Monday.New Zealanders looking to the sky on Friday night will be treated to an incredibly rare lunar spectacle, not seen in their sky in more than 800 years. The longest partial lunar eclipse visible in New Zealand since the year 1212 is set to start at 8.20pm NZT, when the shadow of the Earth will begin to move across the moon’s face. It will be 97% covered with shadow by 10pm. At that moment, the lunar surface will briefly turn red. The near-total eclipse will finish its three-and-a-half-hour journey just prior to midnight. Rob Davison, an astronomer at Auckland’s Stardome Observatory, said: “When you have a total lunar eclipse, it’s not uncommon to have the entirety of that lasting for three-and-a-half hours, sometimes a bit shorter, sometimes longer. But for a partial eclipse to last this long, it’s just very rare. “Most of the eclipse will be dominated by the shadow moving across the moon, with a brief period where it will appear as a blood micromoon in our night sky.” There are two main reasons this is a rare event, he said, the first being that it is a partial eclipse, but also because of where the moon is positioned in its orbit. “The moon is at apogee, which means it’s at the farthest point from Earth in its orbit. The moon’s orbit around the Earth is not a perfect circle, it’s an ellipse which means as it goes around, it comes a little bit closer and then, as it swings around, it goes a little bit further away,” Davison said. “So when it’s at its closest point, it’s called perigee, and that’s when you get a so-called super moon – about 360,000 kilometres away. When it swings around to the other side, and is in apogee, it’s about 400,000 kilometres away.” The moon moves slower at this point, and this is why there is an ‘“unusually long” partial-eclipse. The eclipse will be visible in other parts of the world, particularly in the western states of the US. But for New Zealanders, this eclipse is made all the more special because it happens at a time of night when stargazers are more likely to be awake, Davison said. New Zealand will have 13 total or near-total lunar eclipses in the next 20 years. But seven of those will be in the early hours of the morning. Four will be visible around midnight. “Only only two of them will be in the evening, including this one,” he said. “So for people aren’t really wanting to stay up late, or if they have families or younger children, this is a really good one to do.” For the curious, or those who cannot catch a glimpse, Nasa will livestream the event.The House of Representatives voted to censure congressman Paul Gosar for tweeting an anime video depicting violence against congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. The self-described “QAnon Shaman” was sentenced to 41 months for his role in storming the US Capitol on 6 January. Biden asked the Federal Trade Commission to investigate oil and gas companies over the skyrocketing prices at the pump. Steve Bannon will plead not guilty to criminal contempt of Congress charges. – Vivian Ho Fox News boss Rupert Murdoch has said Donald Trump should stop focusing “on the past” in a rare public rebuke of the former US president. On Wednesday addressing the annual meeting of stockholders for News Corp Murdoch said: “The current American political debate is profound, whether about education or welfare or economic opportunity. “It is crucial that conservatives play an active, forceful role in that debate, but that will not happen if President Trump stays focused on the past. The past is the past, and the country is now in a contest to define the future.” Murdoch, who is also co-chair of Fox news parent Fox Corporation, has made few public comments about Trump, whose presidency was championed by most of Fox’s biggest commentators. Since his defeat Trump has continued to push unfounded conspiracy theories that the election was “stolen” by Joe Biden, who beat Trump by a margin of more than 7m votes. Until now the 90-year-old media mogul has publicly stayed out of the fray and not commented on the election. But according to Murdoch biographer Michael Wolff in private he has called Trump “a fucking idiot”. Trump has had a testy relationship with Fox claiming, without evidence, that its ratings had “completely collapsed” after the news channel made an early call for Biden’s victory in the last election. He has forged closer ties with Fox’s much smaller rivals OAN and Newsmax but has lost much of his online media presence after being banned by Twitter and Facebook. Some 200 participants of a voting rights rally at the White House were arrested, the protest organizers said. Approximately 800 protestors attended a rally today to push the White House and Congress to pass legislation to protect voting rights being eroded in Republican-led states. Protests led by the League of Women Voters of the United States, People For the American Way, and the Declaration for American Democracy have been urging lawmakers to pass the Freedom to Vote Act and the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act, both of which have been blocked by Republicans in the Senate. Here’s more background on the stalled bills: Sam Levin and Johana Bhuiyan report: The Los Angeles police department pursued a contract with a controversial technology company that could enable police to use fake social media accounts to surveil civilians and claimed its algorithms can identify people who may commit crimes in the future. A cache of internal LAPD documents obtained through public records requests by the Brennan Center for Justice, a non-profit organization, and shared with the Guardian, reveal that LAPD in 2019 trialed social media surveillance software from the analytics company Voyager Labs. Like many companies in this industry, Voyager Labs’ software allows law enforcement to collect and analyze large troves of social media data to investigate crimes or monitor potential threats. But documents reveal the company takes this surveillance a step further. In its sales pitch to LAPD about a potential long-term contract, Voyager said its software could collect data on a suspect’s online network and surveil the accounts of thousands of the suspect’s “friends”. It said its artificial intelligence could discern people’s motives and beliefs and identify social media users who are most “engaged in their hearts” about their ideologies. And it suggested its tools could allow agencies to conduct undercover monitoring using fake social media profiles. The LAPD’s trial with Voyager ended in November 2019. The records show the department continued to access some of the technology after the pilot period, and that the LAPD and Voyager spent more than a year trying to finalize a formal contract. The documents show that the LAPD has had ongoing conversations this year about a continued partnership, but a police spokesperson told the Guardian on Monday that the department was not currently using Voyager. The LAPD declined to respond to detailed and repeated inquiries on its trial with Voyager and its conversations about a potential long-term contract, as well as questions about its use of social media surveillance software. The department has said in the past that social media can be critical for investigations and for “situational awareness” in monitoring major events for potential public safety issues. The city has seen large demonstrations in recent years, as well as clashes between activists over issues such as vaccination requirements. But experts who reviewed the documents for the Guardian say they raise concerns about the LAPD’s pursuit of ethically questionable software. The department’s surveillance technology could be violating civilians’ free speech and privacy rights, the experts say, while facilitating racial profiling. Read more: Just four days after landmark climate talks in Scotland in which Joe Biden vowed the US will “lead by example” in tackling dangerous global heating, the president’s own administration is providing a jarring contradiction – the largest ever sale of oil and gas drilling leases in the Gulf of Mexico. The US federal government is on Wednesday launching an auction of more than 80m acres of the gulf for fossil fuel extraction, a record sell-off that will lock in years, and potentially decades, of planet-heating emissions. The enormous size of the lease sale – covering an area that is twice as large as Florida – is a blunt repudiation of Biden’s previous promise to shut down new drilling on public lands and waters. It has stunned environmentalists who argue the auction punctures the US’s shaky credibility on the climate crisis and will make it harder to avert catastrophic impacts from soaring global heating. Read more: The House of Representatives voted to censure congressman Paul Gosar for tweeting an anime video depicting violence against congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. The self-described “QAnon Shaman” was sentenced to 41 months for his role in storming the US Capitol on 6 January. Biden asked the Federal Trade Commission to investigate oil and gas companies over the skyrocketing prices at the pump. Steve Bannon will plead not guilty to criminal contempt of Congress charges. In a 233 to 207 vote, the House of Representatives voted to censure congressman Paul Gosar for tweeting a video depicting violence against congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. Gosar is the 24th member of the House to be censured in its history. While the vote is still open, it appears that the House has enough votes to pass the resolution to censure congressman Paul Gosar and remove him from his committees. Meanwhile, Canada prime minister Justin Trudeau is in Washington for the North American Leaders’ Summit. He stopped by the US Capitol for a photo op with House Speaker Nancy Pelosi. The House is voting now on the resolution to censure Arizona congressman Paul Gosar and remove him from his committees - oversight and natural resources. Meanwhile, Joe Biden has arrived in Detroit and is now touring General Motors and its Factor ZERO electric vehicle assembly plant. Majority leader Steny Hoyer is on the floor now to deliver us another history lesson: For anyone out there who needs a little history lesson after the remarks from congressman Paul Gosar comparing himself to founding father and subject of the hit musical, Alexander Hamilton: Gosar meant that Hamilton was the first person that the House of Representatives attempted to censure. Very big disclaimer: this is actually not what anime is. Well this has devolved quickly. Here is the full speech from congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, in which she questioned why Republican leadership was unable to condemn incitement of violence against a member of the House. Congressman Paul Gosar is now on the floor. Now congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez is on the floor. Republicans really appear to not want this resolution to pass. We just has House Speaker Nancy Pelosi on the floor, speaking in favor of censure for congressman Paul Gosar. Now we have minority leader Kevin McCarthy, speaking against. Debate has kicked off for the vote on the resolution seeking to censure Arizona congressman Paul Gosar for tweeting a video depicting violence against Democrat congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. Here’s a look at Republicans circling the wagons ahead of the vote on the resolution to censure Arizona congressman Paul Gosar over tweeting a video depicting violence against Democrat congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: Steve Bannon, a longtime ally of former president Donald Trump, is pleading not guilty to his criminal contempt of Congress charges, according to a notice he filed in federal court on Wednesday. Bannon, Trump’s campaign chairman in 2016 and then White House chief strategist in the first year of Trump’s presidency, was indicted on Friday after defying a subpoena from the House committee investigating the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January, by Trump supporters seeking to overturn the election. Bannon faces two counts of criminal contempt: one for refusing to appear for a congressional deposition and the other for refusing to provide documents in response to the committee’s subpoena. Each count carries between 30 days and a year in jail. The indictment is the first for criminal contempt of Congress in nearly four decades. Quick update on the resolution to censure Republican congressman Paul Gosar over the video depicting violence against progressive Democrat Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez: Jacob Chansley, the self-described “QAnon Shaman” who was photographed marching through the US Capitol with a spear and horned helmet during the 6 January attack, was sentenced to 41 months in federal prison for his role in the insurrection. The sentence is 10 months shorter than what prosecutors asked for, but one of the the longest sentences handed out among the hundreds of people who have been criminally charged in connection with the attack. Scott Fairlam, a former mixed martial arts fighter who last week was sentenced to 41 months in federal prison for assaulting a police officer on 6 January. Chansley was among the most high-profile of those criminally charged for storming the US Capitol on 6 January. Chansley pleaded guilty in September of unlawfully obstructing an official proceeding. His attorneys argued that he never intended to harm or injure, and that he has mental health issues. During his sentencing, Chansley addressed the court, calling himself “a good man who broke the law”. Chansley was the defendant that went on a week-long fast when he was not granted all-organic food in jail. The American Petroleum Institute has responded to the letter that Joe Biden sent to the Federal Trade Commission today asking for an investigation into oil and gas companies over prices at the pump. Frank Macchiarola, the senior vice president of policy, economics and regulatory affairs, called the letter “a distraction from the fundamental market shift that is taking place and the ill-advised government decisions that are exacerbating this challenging situation”. The Centers for Disease Control estimated that there were 100,306 drug overdose deaths across the country during a 12-month period ending in April - a 28.5% increase from the same period the year before. In a statement, Joe Biden said that we “cannot overlook this epidemic of loss, which has touched families and communities across the country”. “As we grieve those we’ve lost and honor their memories, my Administration is committed to doing everything in our power to address addiction and end the overdose epidemic,” Biden said. “Through the American Rescue Plan, we’ve delivered nearly $4bn to strengthen and expand services for substance use disorder and mental health. We’re working to make health coverage more accessible and affordable for all Americans, so that more people who need care can get it. We are strengthening prevention, promoting harm reduction, expanding treatment, and supporting people in recovery, as well as reducing the supply of harmful substances in our communities. And we won’t let up.” Read more here: Joe Biden called on the Federal Trade Commission to look into oil and gas companies as prices at the pump continue to skyrocket. In a letter to FTC chairwoman Lina Khan on Wednesday, Biden wrote that there is “mounting evidence of anti-consumer behavior by oil and gas companies”. “This unexplained large gap between the price of unfinished gasoline and the average price at the pump is well above the pre-pandemic average,” the letter reads. Here’s an update on negotiations on the reconciliation bill, AKA the Build Back Better Act: Republican congresswoman Majorie Taylor Greene has racked up $63,000 in fines for refusing to wear a mask on the House floor, the Hill is reporting. Greene, the QAnon-supporting businesswoman who had to issue an apology earlier this year after comparing rules on mask-wearing against Covid-19 to the Holocaust, told the Hill that the fines are deducted directly from her paycheck and proudly volunteered that she was also not vaccinated. “I’m not vaccinated either,” she said. “And I won’t be getting vaccinated. And that’s my own personal choice. I support people that want the vaccine. If anybody wanted one, I would drive them to go get one because I support people’s freedom to make their own decision. But I do not want to get the vaccine myself, and I don’t need to wear a mask. It’s not changing anything,” The House mask mandate was introduced last year, lifted in June then re-applied in July amid Republican protests. First offenses merit a warning, while second offenses levy a $500 fine and subsequent offenses a $2,500 fine. Senator Amy Klobuchar announced Wednesday that her first follow-up exam following her treatment for early-stage breast cancer this year showed that she remains cancer-free. Klobuchar revealed in September that she underwent a lumpectomy and radiation treatment this year following a diagnosis. In August, her doctors determined that her “chances of developing cancer again are no greater than the average person”, Today Joe Biden is flying to Detroit, where he will be visiting General Motors and its Factory ZERO electric vehicle assembly plant to talk about the bipartisan infrastructure deal that he signed into law earlier this week. The president will speak about how the new infrastructure law will expand the green-energy manufacturing industry, with $7.5bn of the new infrastructure law set aside for electric vehicle chargers. Meanwhile, back in Washington, negotiations continue for the reconciliation bill, also known as the Build Back Better Act. In a speech yesterday, Biden said he expected that Congress will pass the legislation by the end of the week. Howdy, live blog readers. Let’s get the party started. The House of Representatives will vote today on a resolution seeking to censure Arizona congressman Paul Gosar and remove him from the House oversight committee. This comes in response to the Republican representative tweeting an edited anime video depicting him striking the New York Democrat Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez with a sword and appearing to threaten Joe Biden. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi called the tweet “an insult to the institution of the House of Representatives”. “We cannot have members joking about murdering each other as well as threatening the president of the United States,” Pelosi told reporters. The resolution appears to have 60 co-sponsors at the moment, as well as widespread support from members of the House. For those watching from home (read: us), this censure vote should prove to be a rare spectacle in the House of Representatives, the last occurrence of which took place more than a decade ago. AOC spoke to Punchbowl News about how Gosar and Republicans “are essentially using a national platform to legitimize threats of violence on lower levels, and on the local levels, to intimidate people from participating in our democracy”. Progressive Ocasio-Cortez has become a conservative bugbear, and she noted that this is not the first time that she’s faced threats at her job. “I believe this is part of a concerted strategy,” Ocasio-Cortez said. “What we do here, our response, helps inform as a precedent for actions on the local levels.”Nearly all remaining Covid-19 restrictions in Victoria will lift for fully vaccinated people across the state from Friday, and they will no longer have to isolate if deemed a close contact of a confirmed case. The premier, Daniel Andrews, made the announcement on Thursday, saying the state was on track to reach its target of 90% of people over 12 years old being fully vaccinated by Saturday or Sunday. When the state’s roadmap to reopening was first announced, this was not projected to occur until 24 November. From Friday there will be no limits on visitors to homes, or density limits for cafes and restaurants. However, access to many venues including cafes, bars and gyms will continue to be restricted to those that have had two Covid vaccine jabs. Masks will only need to be worn in high-risk settings, including for primary school staff and visitors, for students in years 3 to 6, for workers serving the public at hospitality venues, for workers and customers at indoor retail, for visitors and select workers in hospitals or care facilities, and for people using public transport, taxi/rideshare and planes. Customers in retail will no longer need to wear masks after 15 December. “That normality that we have all craved, we are able to deliver that as a result of the amazing work that Victorians have done in getting vaccinated in record time, and in record numbers,” Andrews said. “We will see more cases, but they will become less of relevance because we have so many people vaccinated.” Hospital numbers were also falling, Andrews said, giving the government confidence to further reopen. There were 337 people in hospital and 63 of those were in intensive care. The state recorded 1,007 new cases and 12 deaths overnight. The health minister, Martin Foley, said while Victorians who test positive for Covid-19 will have to isolate, the vast majority of people who come into contact with a confirmed positive case outside of their home won’t have to self-quarantine. These close contacts will still be required to get a standard PCR test and isolate until they get a negative result. But it means exposure in places like offices, restaurants or nightclubs won’t automatically result in quarantine for the patrons or staff, who previously would have been designated primary close contacts at tier one exposure sites. However, the department of health will continue to manage emerging outbreaks of concern and “super-spreader events” and will still impose a quarantine period on contacts on a case-by-case basis. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “We are confident that these measures will both keep us open and keep us safe and keep the economy, the education system, workplaces, social and cultural life, sporting life, ticking along,” Foley said. Positive cases are required to notify their workplace, school or childcare about their positive result. Once informed of the case, workplaces will also have to identify and notify employees and sub-contractors – but not customers – who were exposed to advise them to get tested. Schools and childcare will also identify and inform staff and student contacts. School and workplace contacts presenting for their PCR test will also be offered free rapid antigen tests to use before entering sensitive settings. The changes also effectively mean the end of mandatory deep cleaning. People who test positive are strongly recommended to tell close contacts and encourage them to get tested, but the department of health will no longer trace or manage these contacts. Household contacts who have had more than four hours of contact with a case inside a household, accommodation or care setting must isolate for seven days if fully vaccinated or 14 days if not fully vaccinated, with a PCR test required on day 0 and for release. If children under 12 are household contacts, they will be considered fully vaccinated if everyone else in their household aged over 12 is fully vaccinated. Workers exposed at work, and children who are exposed at school or early childhood centres, will need to show a negative PCR test result to return to work or school. “Victorians upheld their end of the bargain and the government will do the same, whether it is 100,000 people at the MCG on Boxing Day, or a smaller group of people standing up at the local pub having a beer. This is a Covid-normal that every Victorian has wanted … I am not only proud of Victorians but also deeply grateful,” Andrews said.Up until recently, people diagnosed with type 2 diabetes were made to believe there was little they could do about it. That was just not true. The call for change has been led by Aboriginal communities throughout New South Wales. From Bourke to Walgett, Brewarrina to Coonamble, Aboriginal medical services running my program, Too Deadly For Diabetes, have been getting better results than many programs through the major capital cities. If you were to believe the experts, Aboriginal people could not turn this disease around and especially not in regional and remote communities. But they were wrong! Go into any of these communities and you will hear stories of success, from large losses in weight to getting off medications for type 2 diabetes and high blood pressure. These communities have shown the experts how it’s done. Coonamble has a population of 2,700 people, yet in 12 months the patients at the Coonamble Aboriginal Medical service have lost a total of 1,486kg, at an average of 7kg-10kg for each participant. Losing weight is important for people with type 2 diabetes because the rising blood sugars are caused by the storage of fat around the liver and pancreas. Lose that and your blood sugars improve. Aboriginal people are now taking control of their health, achieving results the big clinics in the cities could only dream of. Last month the documentary titled Australia’s Health Revolution I co-hosted with Dr Michael Mosley was launched. It is a three-part series where we discuss the research around reversal of type 2 diabetes, and I put eight Australians through an eight-week program to turn their type 2 diabetes around. In the second episode, which was filmed in December, we asked Diabetes Australia to acknowledge that type 2 diabetes could be placed into remission under certain circumstances. Hours before the first episode went to air, Diabetes Australia released a position statement reporting just that. This was a big change. The regional and remote communities had shown what was possible, but could we replicate it on television? Lucky for us we could! Robert got taken off insulin in a week. Charlie got taken off all diabetes and high blood pressure medications in 12 days, achieving full remission of type 2 diabetes. Rita achieved remission of type 2 diabetes, and Ilana and Marian no longer had pre-diabetes. All others saw significant reductions in blood sugars in just eight weeks. I’m happy to report that 12 months on they are still going well. So, type 2 diabetes doesn’t have to be a lifelong progressive disease. It’s been proven by scientific research, proven by regional and remote communities, and now acknowledged by Diabetes Australia. But where to from here? There needs to be a new standard set on outcomes. It’s no longer a case of whether type 2 diabetes can be reversed, it’s now accepted to be true for some patients. So, any health service that is providing a diabetes program and not seeing a reduction or removal of medication in some of their patients must now evaluate their programs and work toward the outcomes that research shows is possible. Funding bodies need to set a new standard on funding. If a program is not able to show that they can reduce medications in some patients, along with a reduction in HbA1c, they must redirect funding to a program that works better. This will give healthcare providers the motivation to achieve these results. We need to have a good look at what we have been doing and focus on what works. We already have a proven program that is supported by independent research and achieves the results international studies have shown are possible. With the right funding, “Too Deadly for Diabetes” could be in every Aboriginal medical service within weeks. It was designed to be provided in medical centres. We train the staff and they guide the patients through. Patients have access to recipes and exercise through an app, website, or through printed material. It’s financially viable too, with visits over the 12 weeks bringing in over $700 in Medicare rebates for the medical centre. The time for talk is over. • Ray Kelly is a Kamilaroi man with more than 30 years experience in the health industry. He is currently completing a PhD investigating the reversal of type 2 diabetes in Indigenous communities and is involved in nationwide research targeting better outcomes for those with type 2 diabetes. He recently co-hosted Australia’s Health Revolution with Dr Michael Mosley on SBSTraditional owners in Western Australia have requested urgent help from the United Nations after the tabling of the state government’s new draft of the Aboriginal cultural heritage bill. The WA government says the bill will be a “new way” to protect Aboriginal heritage in the wake of the Juukan Gorge disaster. But the Aboriginal Heritage Action Alliance, a coalition of senior Aboriginal people from WA, said the bill didn’t address the “urgent need” to strengthen legal protections for sacred cultural sites. Dr Hannah McGlade, on behalf of the alliance, sent a letter to the UN on Wednesday seeking immediate assistance before the bill is passed in parliament. “There is a long history in Western Australia of mining companies and developers having government support to damage and destroy Aboriginal lands,” she wrote in the letter. “We wanted to ensure that this new law would incorporate best practice in heritage protection, however, we have not been heard by the state.” On 10 September, Aboriginal members of the group lodged an early warning to the UN’s Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination to review a draft of the bill. The request represented the “overwhelmingly unified … strong opposition” to the bill among Aboriginal West Australians, including all land councils in the state and corporate bodies. The draft bill would give the Aboriginal affairs minister the final say over cultural heritage disputes. “This effectively means the minister and state may continue to allow for the lawful destruction of sacred sites,” McGlade wrote. “We have witnessed 50 years of Aboriginal heritage sites, including sacred sites, lawfully destroyed under the ministerial power, and this will be continued under the bill. “It is clearly weighted against Aboriginal rights and in favour of the mining companies and developers. Aboriginal people, unlike the companies and developers … have no right to merits review.” McGlade said the WA government had “refused” to share drafts of the bill with any Indigenous group for comment since May 2020, despite repeated requests. The bill was made public late on Tuesday and introduced to parliament on Wednesday. “[The WA government] implied that the bill would not proceed without significant Aboriginal support,” McGlade wrote. “This is a shocking betrayal to Aboriginal people and exposes the states disrespect of Indigenous peoples.” Last year, Rio Tinto chair Simon Thompson was forced to step down after the company blasted ancient rock shelters at Juukan Gorge in 2020. Rio Tinto’s then chief executive Jean-Sébastien Jacques, head of corporate relations Simone Niven and iron ore boss Chris Salisbury also resigned.The Victorian government’s controversial pandemic bill is in disarray after former minister Adem Somyurek announced he would vote against the legislation in its current form. The legislation was set to narrowly pass parliament this week with the support of three key crossbenchers, but a Victorian government motion to delay the vote for MPs to consider amendments passed 20 votes to 17 in the upper house on Thursday morning. This came after Somyurek, who was forced out of the Labor party over a branch stacking scandal, said he would return to parliament to oppose the bill after belatedly proving his vaccination status on Wednesday. The Coalition voted against the adjournment. In a piece published in the Herald Sun, Somyurek said the bill could lead to a “tyranny to rule by decree” and did not have enough checks and balances to keep the leader of the day accountable. “Had I continued to be a member of the Andrews cabinet, I would have argued this bill is a bad idea because it gives too much power to the government,” he wrote. “Without meaningful parliamentary oversight and independent review mechanisms as Victorians we all risk the prospect of being unjustly governed by a Coalition despot in the future. “I will not support this bill in its current form, and I would encourage the government to go back to the drawing board and consult more broadly.” The Victorian premier Daniel Andrews has been racing to pass the pandemic legislation before the state of emergency is due to lapse on 15 December. Unlike other states – including New South Wales, which has considered a proposal to extend its emergency powers to March 2023 – the Victorian government’s powers are finite. The proposed legislation would transfer the power to declare a pandemic from the chief health officer to the premier, and grant the health minister sweeping powers to enact any pandemic orders believed “reasonably necessary” to protect public health. If the bill fails to pass, the Victorian government may not have the legal framework to enforce and create Covid-19 orders to manage the ongoing pandemic. Andrews said he engaged with “all members” of the legislative council across a “very diverse chamber” and had no message for any member of the upper house in particular. “They will work through this bill line by line and we’ll wait to see what the council give us,” he said. “We don’t have a majority [in the upper house], we will do as we always do engage and I’m confident we’ll get an outcome. “The exact nature of that outcome, we’ll have to wait and see … hours, days, who knows … we’ll work across the board with anyone who in good faith wants to be part of that process.” Somyurek’s intervention would see the bill face a deadlocked vote, meaning it would be effectively defeated and could not pass except by the use of obscure parliamentary mechanisms. Now the vote has been postponed, the government will have to enter critical negotiations with crossbenchers to pass the bill by 15 December. It was expected to be narrowly pushed through the upper house this week with the support of the Reason party’s Fiona Patten, Victorian Greens leader Samantha Ratnam and Animal Justice party MP Andy Meddick after seven amendments were secured on Monday evening. Human rights groups have welcomed the amendments but some legal bodies have raised ongoing concerns over aspects of the bill and called for it to be delayed. The crossbenchers have faced ongoing death threats and abuse in the lead-up to debate over the controversial legislation. Somyurek said the crossbenchers had effectively become a “far-left faction of the Labor government, but with more clout than the two traditional factions combined”. “I have been in three Labor governments and never has the caucus and cabinet been sidelined as much as during this term,” he wrote in the Herald Sun. Victorian health minister Martin Foley said the government had “engaged extensively” in “good faith negotiations” with crossbench MPs since March. Patten agreed to the state of emergency powers on the proviso pandemic-specific legislation would be enacted. “This is the first time I’ve seen Mr Somyurek take any interest in policy,” Patten said. “The fact he now shows interest in … democracy I find somewhat disingenuous.” Upper house crossbench MP Jeff Bournam confirmed he had fielded a late night call from the government trying to win his support to vote in favour of the bill. “I politely declined their request to help them out on this occasion,” he said. Law Institute of Victoria president Tania Wolff wouldn’t comment on the parliamentary process but said “only a limited number” of recommendations she had made to improve the bill had been adopted. “We would encourage members of parliament to use whatever opportunity is now presented to make the bill fit for purpose, not just for now, but the future, for the benefit of all Victorians,” she said. Human Rights Law Centre legal director Daniel Webb said it was clear Victorians needed something in place to support public health measures beyond 15 December. “Overall the new bill offers much greater transparency, oversight and human rights protections than the current law and the law in other parts of the country,” he said. “The sorts of safeguards that ultimately help governments make better decisions and strike the right balance between public health and…other rights and freedoms.” Debate over the pandemic legislation has become increasingly toxic in recent days, with Andrews condemning “potentially criminal” threats against himself and his family and accusing the opposition of fanning the flames of “extremist” protestors outside parliament in Melbourne. There is growing evidence neo-Nazi extremists have infiltrated the demonstrations after a far-right protestor was charged by counter-terror police amid calls of killing Andrews and bringing weapons to the protests, the Age reported today. A group of protestors remain camped out on the steps of parliament house on Thursday.Residents of the central-western town of Forbes began returning to their homes and businesses tried to reopen their doors on Wednesday after officials said floodwaters from the Lachlan River had peaked. Dave Rankine, a spokesperson for the state emergency service, said the floodwaters had reached 10.52 metres and had stayed at that level since 3am. “Whilst we haven’t seen a drop in the river, [that] probably suggests it’s plateaued.” The threat of rising floodwaters remains though, with more rainfall forecast. “We had planned for the worst-case scenario which was 10.65 metres and would have seen water right the way through town – it hasn’t eventuated – whilst it’s been a small inconvenience for local businesses who’ve had to shut for a few days,” Rankine said. More than 300 SES volunteers from across the state travelled to Forbes and 30,000 sandbags were filled and distributed throughout the community, as well as downstream at Bidgerabong. Some businesses in lower-lying Forbes had premises inundated in the early hours of Thursday morning, as Lake Forbes was fed from another tributary and slower to rise than the river. Peter Maher, the owner of a shearing services firm, had to move merchandise and his business will be closed until the floodwaters recede. Sonia, the manager at Nicholson Petroleum, said she received a call at 5.30am that the service station had been flooded. “We’ve had four bowsers out the front; we’ve had to unbolt them all and take them up, had the electrician in to unhook all the electricity, three pumps down the back had to be taken up, and the electricity turned off.” She said she didn’t know when she would be able to get the petrol station running again as more rain was predicted. Shelly Clark, a registered nurse at Grenfell hospital, hasn’t been able to go to work for three days due to rising floodwaters and doesn’t know when she’ll be able to return. “I don’t know. It rose so slowly, I don’t know how long it’s going to take for it to get away. I could get to work but it would take me an hour and 40 minutes and I’d have to cross floodwaters, so it’s not worth the risk.” Clark said it had been “surreal” because the floodwaters had risen so slowly. “You think, is it really going to happen? Is it really happening?” Clark said. “Last night when I went to bed all these roads were still open, then waking up this morning and they’re all gone.” The premier, Dominic Perrottet, the deputy premier Paul Toole and minister for police and emergency services David Elliott visited the flood zone on Thursday. Perrottet thanked the SES volunteers for their work. “That is the spirit that gets our state through these difficult times.” He also commended locals who in the past four years have endured floods, drought, bushfires, a mouse plague and the pandemic, only to be hit with more floods. “They’re a very resilient community here and they are going to get through this difficult time as well,” Perrottet said. Toole said the flooding had caused widespread damage across the state and delivered a cruel blow to farmers who were preparing to harvest a bumper crop. “We won’t know the extent of that damage until the waters have actually receded,” he said. The Forbes mayor, Phyllis Miller, said water began sweeping through town on Wednesday afternoon. “It has come through the town and made its way to the lake system but it’s nothing we can’t handle,” she told Sydney radio 2GB on Thursday. With Australian Associated PressThis is not your common or garden variety burglary. Thieves have uprooted more than 200 citrus trees from an orchard in South Australia’s Riverland. Grower Jeff Knispel, the joint managing director of Nippy’s Group, said sometime after dark on the Friday before last someone snuck in and stole the trees. They had been planted just days before, so they would have been easy to pull out. A small, camping style shovel was left behind. Nippy’s, whose status in SA is on par with Farmers Union, produces juices and flavoured milk. The company bought the new and distinct citrus strain from a research centre, and estimates the trees’ value was around $6,000. Knispel is reluctant to reveal what type they are, in case it helps the thieves flog them off, but agreed to call them “Sid” (not their real name). “If they plan to sell the plants at a growers’ market or a nursery and they don’t know the variety, it won’t help their cause,” he said. “They don’t know if it’s a mandarin … or an orange. Or a Valencia or a navel.” He thinks the robber had been staking the trees out, and probably had an accomplice. “We suspect someone was watching the preparation for several days, casing it out,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “They would have thought ‘OK, we’ll get ourselves prepped, we’ve got to have somewhere to put these so they survive until we find a use for them’. “To remove 200 trees, in as fast a time as possible, more than one person was probably involved.” Someone with a trained eye might notice that Sid’s leaves are a different shape to a run-of-the-mill citrus tree. That could work in Nippy’s favour because the trees are recorded and registered to the company. And the DNA of the distinct variety could be matched to the scene of the crime. “Any of our orchard staff might recognise them if they cropped up somewhere,” Knispel said. “They would be recognisable. “Two hundred trees is not a lot to plant out but if someone (who bought them) was doing some kind of audit, they’d be like ‘here’s a patch of Sid trees, they’re not on my register’.” The ABC reports a police investigation is ongoing. Anyone with information should contact Crime Stoppers. Meanwhile the thieves don’t know if they got a mandarin, an orange – or they may have got themselves a lemon.The North Carolina writer Jason Mott has won the National Book Foundation’s 2021 prize for fiction, for his novel Hell of a Book. The US foundation’s 72nd annual awards, presented online only due to Covid-19, were announced on Wednesday night. The foundation described Mott’s book as a “masterful novel” that broke new ground: “A structurally and conceptually daring examination of art … [which] somehow manages the impossible trick of being playful, insightful, and deeply moving all at the same time.” The novel interweaves the narratives of an author on a book tour (drawing on Mott’s own experiences), and a young black boy nicknamed Soot, who is relentlessly bullied by other children because of the darkness of his skin. Mott said Hell of a Book was also inspired by the spate of black killings at the hands of US police in recent years, and what it means for a black man trying to keep himself safe on the streets of America. “I’d like to dedicate this award to all the other mad kids, to all the outsiders, the weirdos, the bullied, the ones so strange that they had no choice but to be misunderstood by the world and by those around them,” Mott said in his acceptance speech. “[This award is dedicated to] the ones who, in spite of this, refuse to outgrow their imagination, refuse to abandon their dreams and refuse to deny, diminish their identity or their truth or their loves. Unlike so many others.” Mott is best known for his 2013 bestselling debut novel The Returned, about the reappearance of dead residents in a Missouri town, which was later adapted into the US TV series Resurrection. The Harvard University historian Tiya Miles won the National Book award for non-fiction for All That She Carried. For that book, Miles tracked down the provenance of Ashley’s Sack: a piece of cloth from the mid-1800s embroidered with a message about the slave sale of a nine-year-old girl. “My great grandmother Rose, mother of Ashley, gave her this sack when she was sold at age nine, in South Carolina,” the embroidery reads. “It held a tattered dress, three handfuls of pecans, a braid of Rose’s hair. Told her, It be filled with my Love always. She never saw her again. Ashley is my grandmother. Ruth Middleton, 1921.” The sack is now housed in the National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington DC. The National Book award for young people’s literature went to Malinda Lo for Last Night at the Telegraph Club, a novel which tackles the challenges young LGBTQ people face, part of which is written in Chinese. In an impassioned acceptance speech, Lo said the number of young adult books published with LGBTQ characters had grown significantly in the past decade. “But the opposition to our stories has also grown,” she said. “This year, schools across the US are facing significant rightwing pressure to remove books about people of colour and LGBTQ people – especially transgender people – from classrooms and libraries. “I urge every one of you watching to educate yourselves about your school boards and vote in your local elections … we need your support to keep our stories on the shelves. Don’t let them erase us.” The Latino poet Martín Espada won the National Book award for poetry for his collection of poems Floaters. The National Book award for translated literature went to Aneesa Abbas Higgins for her translation of Elisa Shua Dusapin’s Winter in Sokcho, from French into English. Women distinguished for contribution Two lifetime achievement medals were also awarded. Karen Tei Yamashita, the author of the novels I Hotel, Tropic of Orange and Through the Arc of the Rain Forest, was awarded the medal for distinguished contribution to American letters. The Japanese-American writer said politics and resistance were at the heart of Asian American literature. “For our community your recognition tonight is significant, especially this year post-pandemic, having weathered the Twitter of absurdity, corruption and mendacity, the brutality of racial profiling and the provocation of anti-immigrant, anti-refugee, anti-Muslim, anti-Asian hatred,” she said. “In such times, may our writing forge tolerance and care.” A lifetime achievement medal for outstanding services to the literary community was awarded to Nancy Pearl, an author, literary critic and the former executive director of Seattle Public Library’s Washington Center for the Book. Pearl is best known for her bestseller Book Lust: Recommended Reading for Every Mood, Moment and Reason (2003), and as the founder of the One City One Book project that has spread throughout the world. “I’m dedicating this to the librarians who do such essential work for their communities,” she said. “One of the foundational principles of the public library is that it is a truly egalitarian institution, available free to everyone regardless of ethnicity, race, religion, age or economic status. “As such, it is a democratising and unifying force in our society, which is needed now more than ever before.” Announcing Pearl’s award, the Washington Post book critic Ron Charles said Pearl represented the ideal of a librarian. “An activist for the unbridled pleasure of reading, she’s not a guardian of the treasures,” he said. “She’s a farmer of the orchard.”A long-running territorial dispute between Japan and South Korea has burst on to the global stage after their vice foreign ministers failed to attend a press conference in Washington with their US counterpart. South Korean’s first vice-foreign minister, Choi Jong-kun, and Japan’s vice foreign minister, Takeo Mori, had been due to appear alongside the US deputy secretary of state, Wendy Sherman, on Wednesday after the three countries discussed regional tensions, including Chinese military activity in the South China Sea and North Korea’s nuclear weapons programme. However, Sherman took questions from reporters alone after Choi and Mori pulled out of the news conference after a disagreement over the Takeshima/Dokdo islands, which are administered by South Korea but claimed by Japan. Sherman noted “there are some bilateral differences between Japan and the Republic of Korea that are continuing to be resolved”, but said the cancellation of the joint news conference was not related to the earlier trilateral meeting, which she described as “constructive and substantive”. Hours later, Masashi Mizobuchi, a spokesperson at the Japanese embassy in Washington, said Japanese officials had withdrawn from the media appearance in protest at a recent visit to the disputed islands by the chief of the South Korean police. Mizobuchi said Japan had “lodged a strong protest” over the visit. “Under these circumstances, we have decided that it is inappropriate to hold a joint press conference,” he said, according to Reuters. Kim Chang-yong, commissioner-general of South Korea’s national police agency, landed on the rocky islets on Tuesday, media reports said, in the first visit by the country’s police chief for 12 years. “We cannot accept this at all and regard it as extremely unfortunate, considering that [the islands] are clearly an inherent part of Japan’s territory in view of historical facts and international laws,” Japan’s chief cabinet secretary, Hirokazu Matsuno, said. The islands – also known as the Liancourt Rocks after a French whaling ship that was almost wrecked there in 1849 – lie 225km (140 miles) off the east coast of South Korea. The Takeshima/Dokdo dispute is one of several bilateral issues stemming from Japan’s 1910-1945 colonial rule of the Korean peninsula that have soured ties between the US allies, despite their common interest in addressing North Korea’s development of nuclear weapons. In recent years, they have tussled over compensation for Korean forced labourers and Japan’s wartime use of sex slaves, known euphemistically as “comfort women”. The three countries had reaffirmed their “shared commitment” to the “complete denuclearisation of the Korean peninsula”, said Sherman, who repeated Joe Biden’s offer of dialogue with North Korea. “The United States does not harbour hostile intent for the DPRK,” she said, referring to the isolated country by its official name the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. “We believe that diplomacy and dialogue are essential” to ridding the peninsula of nuclear weapons. In a warning to China, Sherman said the US, Japan and South Korea opposed “activities that undermine, destabilise or threaten the rules-based international order” in the Indo-Pacific region and in the Straits of Taiwan.The fashion designer Lisa Gorman will depart the business that bears her surname, after 22 years in business. Known for her colourful prints, artist collaborations and playful, almost childlike cuts, Gorman’s womenswear label has built up a cult following in Australia, with fans trading and reselling popular garments online through dedicated Facebook groups. Founded in 1999, Gorman sold to local conglomerate Factory X – which also owns high street stores Dangerfield, Princess Highway and Jack London – in 2010. Since the sale, the brand has expanded to over 50 bricks and mortar stores, including dedicated children’s boutiques, and also retails online. “The Gorman label has achieved a level of recognition within the Australian fashion landscape that I could not have imagined,” Gorman said in a statement. “I thank those that made it happen. My incredible design team, all my staff, partners and the 114 artists I have had the pleasure of collaborating with over two decades. Most of all I thank my loyal customers who have supported the label from its ‘fishing pants’ beginnings.” Lisa Gorman’s tenure as creative director since the Factory X acquisition has been marked by moments of controversy, largely related to changes in the brand’s manufacturing process. Gorman had always positioned itself as a socially conscious label, however in 2016 the brand’s parent company received a failing score on the annual Baptist World Aid Ethical Fashion Report. This triggered an enormous backlash from the label’s fans. Speaking with Guardian Australia in 2019, Gorman described the grade as “extraordinarily unfair” – the F score was given because Factory X did not collaborate with the report’s researchers, not because of concrete findings of misdeeds. “It was personally kind of harrowing,” Gorman said in 2019. “I knew that we worked with good factories, I knew that we weren’t using children. We were accused of all sorts of things.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In subsequent years, Factory X has worked closely with the report’s researchers, and in the 2021 report, the Gorman label received a B grade. Lisa Gorman is yet to announce her next project, however her departure statement hints that something may be in the works. “This chapter has now closed for me personally, making way for new creative endeavours,” she stated. In a statement, the Factory X managing director, David Heeney, said: “We wish Lisa all the very best for the future and we thank her for her contribution. It has been a great 12 years working with Lisa and she will be sorely missed by myself and the whole team.” Factory X says the Gorman brand will continue to operate under the existing creative team. “For those continuing the label into the future, I wish you all the very best,” Lisa Gorman stated. “I have no doubt you will continue to bring the beauty of colour and print into the world of our customer.’’The family of Wayne Fella Morrison have hailed the passing of legislation to ban the use of spit hoods in South Australia on Thursday as “history making”. The bill was introduced in September by SA Best party MLC Connie Bonaros, ahead of the five-year anniversary of Morrison’s death. Morrison, a 29-year-old Wiradjuri, Kokatha and Wirangu man, had not been convicted of any crime and was being held on remand when he died on 26 September 2016 at the Royal Adelaide hospital after being restrained at Yatala labour prison. In the five years since Morrison’s death, his mother, Caroline Andersen, and his sibling, Latoya Rule, have been fighting to ban the use of spit hoods in South Australian prisons while they await the outcome of a coronial inquest into his death in custody. The inquest has run for three years. The ban passed unanimously with the full support of the Labor opposition and makes the use of spit hoods on both adults and children a criminal offence within the state. South Australia is the first state to officially enact such a ban. Labor MP Lee Odenwalder said the ban was a “long time coming” and apologised to the family for the delay in action. “I want to apologise to Latoya and the family of Wayne Fella Morrison for how long this bill has taken, since the conclusion by all parties it seems earlier this year that this was the right path to go down,” he said. Rule said they were “overjoyed” at the result. “I felt bitter at the lack of action over such a long time. Today, to receive that apology from Lee on behalf of the Labor party. It means so much,” Rule said. “I actually feel like they care and that history has literally been made. Something beautiful can be made out of something devastating.” Bonaros said it was a “travesty” the family was still waiting for the coronial investigation into Morrison’s death to conclude, but the ban marked a “historic” first step towards justice. “The parliament’s done its work today on this very important issue and I couldn’t be more proud,” Bonaros said. “And I’m exceptionally grateful to the Morrison family for entrusting me with the carriage of this through the parliament.” Before the final vote South Australian attorney general, Vickie Chapman, noted spit hoods have not been used in the state’s prisons since September. “This bill puts beyond doubt our commitment to cease the use of spit hoods,” Chapman said. Odenwalder paid tribute to Morrison’s family. “I want to publicly acknowledge and thank and pay tribute to the family of the late Wayne Fella Morrison and in particular Latoya Rule.” “She, it is fair to say, has turned adversity and tragedy into something positive, into advocacy and something that actually changes the world for people like the late Wayne Fella Morrison.” The family say they will continue campaigning for a national ban on the use of the spit hoods in any correctional facility anywhere in the country.As migrants camped out in the woods prepared for another night of sub-zero temperatures, the Estonian foreign minister, Eva-Maria Liimets, on Tuesday revealed to an evening news programme the gist of what Alexander Lukashenko demanded of Angela Merkel in the first call between a European leader and Belarus’s dictator in more than a year. “He wants the sanctions to be halted, [and] to be recognised as head of state so he can continue,” she said he told Merkel. It was never much of a secret what Lukashenko wanted, but indications of an effective quid pro quo proposed to the German leader are nonetheless stunning. Even more surprising are the lengths that Lukashenko had gone to deliver that message. In the last year, the Belarusian leader has gone from something of a nuisance on Europe’s borders to a far greater threat, one who grounds Ryanair flights or engineers migrant crises on Europe’s borders on a whim. And yet, Lukashenko appears to remain convinced that his best way out of trouble is to escalate further, desperate to resume contact with Europe by becoming ever more repellant. To a certain degree, he can claim to have succeeded. Merkel called Lukashenko for a second time on Wednesday. His press service said that the two sides had agreed to hold direct talks with the EU on solving the crisis and that Merkel had passed on a request from the European Commission’s president, Ursula von der Leyen, to allow international organisations to provide aid. This is the kind of attention that Lukashenko, who has been blacklisted since he brutally crushed his opposition in 2020, has craved. (His spokesperson has denied that he brought up sanctions or his recognition as president during the talks.) The talks have riled top officials in the governments of countries that border Lukashenko. Poland’s president, Andrzej Duda, said he would not recognise any deals cut “over our heads”. “No serious leader has spoken with Lukashenko so far,” he said, promising Poland would enforce its sovereignty “ruthlessly”. But fundamentally, Lukashenko’s gambit has appeared a miscalculation. Europe has shown that it is ready to back Poland, despite concern over its extreme border measures, to show Minsk that it cannot be blackmailed. New sanctions have been confirmed that will drive Belarus further into isolation, leaving Putin as Lukashenko’s only real lifeline. And European leaders will not be extorted to recognise a leader whose “gangster-style tactics” have created its worst border crisis in decades. “In our view, it is important that the European Union remains united and exerts its influence on Belarus through action,” said Liimets. The Belarusian leader’s endgame remains opaque. “He is not afraid of deaths at the border,” noted a panel of experts from the European Council on Foreign Relations. “For him, this is about vengeance and is a matter of regime survival – meaning that he is ready to escalate further, and to seek Russia’s backing in the process.” On Wednesday alone, Belarus said it would temporarily need to limit oil supplies to Poland and suspend electricity deliveries to Ukraine. The government has claimed both are due to technical issues. On the other hand, it may be as good a time as any for him to declare victory. On Wednesday, the Kremlin hailed Lukashenko’s talks with Merkel, calling them “very important”. Belarus’s main press agency has crowed about the new talks with Brussels, despite a lack of confirmation from European officials. And in the past day, Belarus has begun housing as many as 1,000 migrants in a transport and logistics facility, allowing state and foreign journalists to film officials delivering asylum-seekers a hot meal delivered by the same government that helped to engineer the crisis. For a Belarusian leader deeper and deeper in disfavour, this may be as good as it gets.Indigenous health workers in the Northern Territory town of Katherine say they fear for vulnerable community members – including many living on the streets or in severely overcrowded homes – as authorities scramble to contain a Covid outbreak. The Northern Territory recorded no new Covid cases on Thursday, but the chief minister, Michael Gunner, says concern remains for “large vulnerable households” in Katherine and the tiny remote community of Robinson River. In Katherine, the local Aboriginal health service, Wurli-Wurlinjang, was closed temporarily this week after being identified as a Covid contact site. Several staff, including homeless outreach workers, were ordered to isolate. The chief executive of Wurli-Wurlinjang, Suzi Berto, said the community had been “pretty overwhelmed” by the situation and the urgent need to protect vulnerable people. “It’s really scary, it’s actually the unknown about what the impact is going to be on our people,” Berto said. “One of the issues … is the fact that there’s no public transport or any type of transport for those exposed clients to be able to come in for testing, then accommodation when they get tested. “As they get tested they’re being told to go home and quarantine. It’s very hard for them to go home and quarantine when they’ve got a house full of people, especially children.” While the outbreaks in Katherine and Robinson River remain limited, the sorts of concerns raised echo those in the NSW town of Wilcannia, where social conditions, including overcrowding and a lack of services, hastened the spread of the virus. Wilcannia was also left vulnerable by a slow vaccine rollout. Wurli-Wurlinjang has been working for months to help get people vaccinated, and four weeks ago the service was given funding for four additional support workers to help the rollout. “There’s been a lot of myths. People saying ‘we don’t want to get that’ or ‘we don’t believe in this because of their faith’. “We’ve had a good success rate in the number of vaccinations that we’ve been providing to clients.” Vaccination rates vary dramatically in rural and remote parts of the territory. Robinson River is relatively well protected – 87% of people have had a single dose and 77% are fully vaccinated. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But about 50 remote communities across the Territory still have vaccination rates below 70%. In some communities in central Australia, rates remain below 10%. Gunner said the rate in Katherine was 71% and that was “a concern”. “I understand the issue may be a mobility one and we’re tasking the local team to provide options today,” he said. “I have asked for on-the-ground advice about how vaccinations are going this morning and have seen a photo of a queue to our clinic. It may be that yesterday people were prioritising testing and this will shift to vaccinations today. “Vaccinations remain one of the five reasons to leave your home in a lockdown. If you have family or a mate who isn’t vaccinated, encourage them to get their first dose today. “We need to see a lift in the vaccination rate in Katherine and have confidence this is lifting in vulnerable pockets.”Gary Jubelin, the retired homicide detective who once led the William Tyrrell case, has defended his previous investigation as the renewed search for the child’s remains continues. The former detective was responding to criticisms from the state’s current police commissioner, Mick Fuller, that the new investigation team had “inherited what was a bit of a mess”. Jubelin investigated the case from five months after the then-three-year-old disappeared in September 2014 until he was removed from the case. He took issue with Fuller’s comments, saying he provided monthly progress reports to his superior officers detailing everything – “what suspects I was targeting, what the future directions were”. Jubelin said he had formed a friendship with William’s foster parents and believed the foster mother to be “a very decent human being”. However, he said he “went hard” when investigating the couple. “I basically ambushed the (foster) parents and then I interrogated the (foster) parents,” he told Sydney radio 2GB on Thursday. Jubelin eliminated them as suspects after a covert operation that included placing a listening device in their car. “At the time I was taken off the investigation … I was certainly of the belief that they were not involved,” he said. He said he had investigated all theories, including that William had died in an accident, but he said any theory had to be backed up with facts. The investigation is now understood to be considering whether William might have died after falling from the balcony of the foster grandmother’s house. His comments came as dozens of police from various units resumed the search effort at two sites in Kendall on the New South Wales mid north coast. They included the former home of William’s late foster grandmother, where he was last seen, and a patch of nearby bushland about a kilometre away. Earth moving machines and a large electric sifter is being used to help forensics experts going through dirt by hand as they look for evidence. At one point, a forensic expert carried a snake on his shovel away from the bush search site, while searchers at the house used ground penetrating radar and 3D cameras to look for anomalies in soil beneath concrete on the garage floor. The concrete was understood to have been laid after William disappeared. On Thursday afternoon, a police media spokesman on site at the dig told Guardian Australia the radar tests indicated “nothing that would indicate any abnormalities of interest to the investigation”. Search teams worked through sunny and dusty conditions but by the afternoon, a cool change swept through with rain predicted. Police vowed to continue searching until the rain becomes “torrential”. Rural Fire Service members also continued clearing trees in the area of bushland on Batar Creek Road. On Wednesday, the search team discovered threads of red fabric that fuelled speculation they could be similar to the Spider-Man costume that William was last seen wearing. There is so far no confirmed link between the thread and the costume, however the sample was sent overnight to a police lab in Sydney for further testing. The patch of land where the fabric was found was covered with protective tarpaulin overnight, and officers, together with specialist soil and grave analysts – including a professor who helped find the remains of missing Queensland boy Daniel Morcombe – resumed sifting through earth in the specific spot. Police had earmarked two further patches of nearby bushland but had yet to begin searching. NSW Police revealed on Wednesday they had seized a car that belonged to the foster grandmother, who has since died. The grey Mazda was taken from a home in Gymea in Sydney’s south under a coronial order last week and is undergoing extensive forensic examination. The findings of a coronial inquest into William’s disappearance, which concluded last year, are yet to be handed down. A $1m reward for information on the case still stands.On the eastern horizon, the distinctive asymmetric shape of Sheeps Tor is a navy blue shadow in front of sunlit Dartmoor. Off Summers Lane, glossy cock pheasants and drab hens forage on the trodden field of yearling bullocks. Rank hedgebanks show off this year’s prolific woody growth, and spangle and silk button galls stud the undersides of oak, in their cycle towards producing tiny wasps. Strands of bryony’s red berries, sparse scarlet haws and the pink of campion brighten dull vegetation; shiny pennywort and hart’s-tongue fern gleam beneath the grey sky. Downhill, the sound of chainsaws has stopped after the felling of ash with dieback. Above Radland’s overgrown market gardens, puddles along the lane reflect a crisscross of bare branches, and downslope, the millstream rushes with water that rises beneath Viverdon Down. Laurel shrouds the ruins of the miller’s house (home of ancestors in the 19th century); the mill itself is now a dwelling, and the little outhouse, with internal niches for straw bee skeps, remains intact. Beneath Nanie Rowe’s Wood, the sunken way is carpeted with orange beech leaves, and the stream is augmented with yet more water from Callington and the mining district of Kit Hill and Hingston Down. The water races beneath the regenerating woodland of former steep strawberry gardens, under Boars Bridge and towards the ruined weir of the National Trust’s Cotehele Mill. The weir washed away last winter during flooding, and now awaits extensive reconstruction before restoration of the hydroelectric generator and historic water wheel. Parallel to the woodland track, strewn with trampled husks of sweet chestnuts, the flow slows as it nears the tidal river. On Cotehele Quay, opposite the burnished oaks of Ward Mine Wood, people stroll and gaze at the silt-washed vegetation of the newly created intertidal habitat. Between mudbanks and bedraggled reedbeds, the shining river meanders past Dung Quay with its shadowy limekilns and trees draped in fluffy clusters of old man’s beard, passing downstream between Braunder Wood and the emerald green of pasture on Boetheric Marsh. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThousands of patients a year are dying because of overcrowding in A&amp;E units in Britain, and more fatalities will follow this winter, emergency care doctors claim. An estimated 4,519 people in England died in 2020-21 as a direct result of people receiving less than ideal care while delayed in A&amp;E waiting to start treatment in the hospital. “To say this figure is shocking is an understatement. Quite simply, crowding kills,” said Dr Adrian Boyle, a vice-president of the Royal College of Emergency Medicine (RCEM). There have also been 709 deaths in Wales and 303 in Scotland so far this year for the same reason, according to a report by the college. Another 566 excess deaths caused by overcrowding occurred in Northern Ireland in 2020-21. The 4,519 in England “may be an underestimate”, it adds. The four figures taken together mean the college has identified at least 6,097 deaths across the four home nations that it believes occurred because overcrowding hampered the person’s treatment. “There’s a lot of human misery behind these figures. It’s uncomfortable and unbearable that people are being put through this. It’s impossible not to feel upset and angry about this,” Boyle said. The RCEM’s findings come days after the Association of Ambulance Chief Executives (AACE) disclosed that patients in England are dying in the back of ambulances, in hospital and also in their homes because there are too few ambulances to answer 999 calls. AACE also found that 160,000 people a year were coming to harm, of whom 12,000 experienced “severe harm”, because so many ambulances were tied up outside hospitals because A&amp;E staff were too busy to accept the patients paramedics were looking after into their care. The RCEM’s report found that: “Crowded emergency departments (EDs) delay and dilute the quality of care and while this may not have an immediate effect on the patient, it increases a patient’s risk of death after they have left the ED.” Referring to the death toll, the report added: “These numbers compare unfavourably with the number of deaths caused in road traffic collisions: 1,827 across the UK in 2019.” Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said: “Overcrowding in emergency departments is not merely inconveniencing patients during their visits to hospital, it’s costing thousands of lives. “This report again shows why healthcare leaders are sounding the alarm, with the health service now under critical and unsustainable pressure.” Boyle demanded immediate action by ministers and NHS leaders to reduce deaths by tackling overcrowding. “The situation is unacceptable, unsustainable and unsafe for patients and staff. Political and health leaders must realise that if performance continues to fall this winter more and more patients will come to avoidable harm in the emergency department.” The RCEM highlights that the government’s Getting It Right First Time programme, which aims to improve quality of care, has found a patient’s risk of dying rises the longer they spend in an A&amp;E. A&amp;E doctors have warned that hospitals are becoming dangerously full because of Covid and their inability to discharge patients who are medically fit to leave, which leads to a severe logjam in A&amp;E. In England in October 7,059 people – the highest number on record – had to spend at least 12 hours on a trolley or chair in a hospital corridor waiting to get a bed after A&amp;E staff decided to admit them.Sir Graham Brady, the chair of the Conservatives’ influential committee of backbenchers, is facing questions over the £800 an hour that he received from a company run by a constituent amid a lack of clarity over the nature of the business. Brady, who held a meeting of the 1922 Committee on Wednesday to discuss Boris Johnson’s plans to crack down on second jobs, declared in his register of interests that he receives £10,000 a year for 12 hours’ work for Snowshill Allied Holdings, a company run by constituent Michael Goldstone. The firm is described by Companies House as “management consultancy activities other than financial management” but has no online presence specifying its activities. Labour said Brady should refer himself to the parliamentary commissioner for guidance on how to declare the nature of the business he was advising on. Goldstone told the Guardian that he paid Brady for informal advice because of their friendship, calling him “a very honourable man”, but said he agreed the rules should make it clearer what business an MP was involved with so there could be no confusion. He said: “He has never brought me in a penny of business and has never intervened on my behalf in politics and he never would.” He said he thought the payments were “fair” for the discussions he had with Brady. Goldstone’s current and former interests as a director include companies providing insurance software advertised as being perfect for off-shoring, it can be revealed. Brady said he had given no advice on the PPI business Brunel Franklin, which was owned by Goldstone’s Flairford Securities Ltd, and sold in 2019. “Declaring an interest related to an entirely opaque company is barely different to not declaring an interest at all,” Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, said. “The public still have no idea whether there might be conflicts of interest, and there is still no transparency about what this company does and how it relates to Mr Brady and his duties to his constituents. “There are clearly questions to answer about whether this satisfies the rules that apply to all MPs.” Brady said Goldstone was “a close personal friend” whom he was paid to advise. “He has retained me to give occasional advice on marketing and communications to Snowshill Holdings for the last few years, initially in relation to Aquarium Software, a business in which Snowshill Holdings no longer has an interest,” he said. “I have always been scrupulous in declaring any interests and following the letter and the spirit of the rules in the code of conduct.” Brady said the company did have a “historic interest” in Brunel Franklin but said he did not have contact with the firm, or advise or act on behalf of the company. Brady also provided advice to Goldstone’s Aquarium Software, which Goldstone resigned from in 2020, which provides insurance claims management solutions. Its sales and marketing director has spoken of the system being the “perfect solution for off-shoring or near-shoring activities” – jobs that can be done from outside the UK. • This article was amended on 18 November 2021. The meeting of the 1922 Committee referred to was not an emergency meeting as an earlier version said.“We’re out of it … again,” said retired yoga teacher Jane Ayers, as she walked out of the railway station concourse on an unseasonably mild Wednesday morning. “As per usual. Bradford is always neglected.” Ayers, 82, was talking about Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR), the plan to transform trans-Pennine services between Liverpool and Leeds, which many fear will now not happen. The government will announce its much anticipated integrated rail plan on Thursday. Reports have suggested it has dropped its commitment to the eastern leg of HS2 to Leeds and may not fully go ahead with NPR, which would go through Bradford. The government has insisted it will be the biggest ever public investment in the rail network, costing £96bn, and will transform journeys across the Midlands and the north. “If we are to see levelling up in action now, we must rapidly transform the services that matter to people most,” the prime minister has said. But local politicians are braced for bad news. “It was never going to happen,” Ayers said. “It is all just a game this shower of a government play all of the time. “I’m not a dyed in the wool Bradfordian. I’ve only been here 55 years … I am just sorry for Bradford.” Bradford is Britain’s seventh biggest city but according to a national data analysis of rail journeys it is the worst connected major city in the UK. The problem is a lack of direct routes and slow trains. Incredibly, campaigners say, it was quicker to travel to places from Bradford on steam trains than it is today. Leeds takes about 20 minutes. That’s two minutes longer, campaigners say, than it took in 1910. The Edwardians could get on a train from Bradford to Wakefield and it would take 30 minutes. Today it’s 48 minutes. Slow trains and bad connections were mentioned time and again by travellers at Bradford’s dated Interchange station. Student Amani Alhajri, 22, gets the train from Leeds to Bradford. “I’m getting used to it,” she said. “It quite often gets cancelled and it is busy most of the time. I have missed lectures because the train has been cancelled, which is awful.” Haleema Usamot, a 17-year-old student, goes the other way and said it was “always packed. The past two weeks have been really bad. It’s been late all the time because of train works at Leeds.” She said the problem was connections. “There’s not many places you can get the train to. If you want to go anywhere you have to take the train to Leeds.” Chris Oakley said it was a problem having two stations in the city. He was travelling from his home in Skipton to his office in Manchester and it involved a train to Forster Square, a walk, and then the hour journey to Manchester. It takes two hours. “The trains are slow but to be honest as long as they are frequent and the trains are decent then I don’t mind. I can do work on the train. All this stuff about speeding things up by 10 minutes is over-rated. It’s frequency and comfort which is more important.” Tracy Shaw, a civil servant who lives in Bradford, said her frustration was short trains. “I got the train to Manchester and there were only two carriages and there were people heading to the football. So it’s 10.30 in the morning and you’ve got people drinking around you.” Paul Shearon, a retired IT manager who lives in Brighouse, said: “It is a city of half a million and it’s got the same service as Halifax. It probably is the worst connected city and I would like to see it brought up to the status of a city this size.” If he wanted to go to Scotland he would always go from Huddersfield. “That’s not even a city. Huddersfield, Leeds and Wakefield are all miles better than here.” Melissa, from Todmorden, who declined to give her surname, uses local train services regularly. “They are a bit crap. There is all this talk about HS2 but they haven’t invested in local networks. What has always irritated me tremendously is that the trains stop really early in the evening. If I want to go to Manchester or Bradford it is really hard to get back on public transport later in the evening.” Taxi driver Mohammed Khan said NPR should happen but wouldn’t. Most people drove rather than relying on trains. “The roads are congested all the time. Any accident on the M62 and it has an effect on everything and everyone. There is too much traffic.” Campaigners argue that NPR would boost the Bradford district economy by £30bn over 10 years, create 27,000 jobs and cut 44,000 daily car journeys between the city and Leeds. Not everyone was gloomy about Bradford’s rail issues. Josie and Steve Brown from Gildersome are retired and have mobility issues and don’t mind how slow the trains are. “I suppose if you’re chasing your arse to work, it matters,” said Steve. “It doesn’t matter to us whether we get to Chester at 12 or 2pm.”In the US, they are calling it the great resignation or (my preference) the big quit. In the UK, the language is less portentous, but the reality is similar: there are more vacancies than jobseekers. Nearly 1.2m jobs were open in the UK in the most recent quarter, with 15 of 18 sectors reporting record numbers. People cite all kinds of reasons for quitting – they want a better work-life balance, they want more challenges, better conditions, more meaning. But what about those left behind? How do you stop your own career getting trampled as your colleagues race out the door? What’s the best way to deal with the void left by your familiar co-workers, not to mention the workload? How do you manage your Fomo and quarry some advantage out of the situation? Rahaf Harfoush is a Paris-based digital anthropologist and the author of Hustle and Float; Marie O’Riordan is an executive coach; Alan Redman is a work and organisational psychologist at the recruitment consultancy Clevry; and David Harris is the managing partner at the employment solicitors DPH Legal. Between them, they have the answers to everything except: “What’s the point of work anyway?” What if people quitting makes you want to quit? What if you don’t hate your job, but you are worried about staleness – about everything returning to normal with nothing learned and nothing gained? Ask yourself, Harfoush says: “Is the work still satisfying or not? You can be sad that colleagues are leaving, but if you’re burned out, unmotivated, depressed, uninspired, identify the root cause. Are you overworked? Or have you realised that there’s something else that excites you? Poll yourself and give your brain the chance to answer. You might not get the answer until a few days later.” Once you have identified the causes of your dissatisfaction, look for practical fixes. But Redman says: “In the end, if those aren’t available, change jobs. Sometimes you’re better off finding somewhere that can offer the sources of motivation you’re looking for; something beyond salary and conditions, something more intrinsic.” Study after study has shown that the most productive people in a workplace aren’t necessarily those with the most hard skills, but those who find the work most enjoyable. You are doing no one any favours if you stay in a role you don’t relish. How do you stop yourself getting landed with extra work from the people who quit? Redman describes the employer’s perspective: “Staff are being poached, especially people with very valuable skills, and this is causing difficulties with remaining employees in terms of how work is distributed. Employers aren’t necessarily in a rush to fill the vacancies, partly because it’s difficult, partly because it’s an opportunity to save costs, partly because they don’t know what the next six months is going to look like.” That is bad news for everyone, however, since overworked employees in a seller’s market can also leave, which creates a feedback loop. The more people resign, the more people are driven to resign. It is similar to the situation post-2008, Harfoush says. After the mass redundancies of the financial crash, the remaining staff found themselves doing what the Wall Street Journal called “super-jobs”, except they weren’t super in the traditional sense of “good” – the workload had just been supersized. Don’t just cope until you can’t. Harfoush recommends a “role scope creep audit”, saying: “Look at your original role. Perhaps you picked up more work over the pandemic as companies went into survival mode. Ask: how far have I crept? How many more projects, how many more responsibilities?” Then spell it out for your employer: “Here’s what I was hired to do; here’s how my time is allocated now. So either we need to reprioritise or we need to reallocate.” How do you compete when you are an old hand and there are suddenly new faces? There are two things going on here: how do you stay fresh when others are fresher; and how do you rebuild a team, particularly if the old team was working well and convivially? O’Riordan advises that you make sure you are at the centre of restructuring efforts, rather than resisting them. “If you do this to your advantage, so you have more junior staff reporting into you, this is a good position to argue for a promotion,” she says. “Take advantage of the void. There will always have been bad habits that were accepted as a team, so now you can get rid of them.” Don’t pine for your departed colleagues, Redman says. “It’s near-impossible to find exact substitutes for people who’ve left. Whatever the composition of the new team, it will be a bunch of different individuals.” A different team is likely to draw out different skills and traits from each of its members. “We are quite flexible,” Redman says. You might find that your stance and your role are changing, but don’t have an identity crisis about it. You are still you. Is it time to ask for a pay rise or a loyalty bonus? Everyone agrees that you have probably never been in a better negotiating position, between the buoyant jobs market and the logic that, if you are still in post after all this upheaval, you are plainly an asset. However, there is consensus, too, on a few fundamentals: Harfoush points to research that shows that “employees are only motivated by money to a certain point. Tap into yourself and say: ‘What would actually improve my quality of life?’” One constraint, Redman says, is that businesses have “a clearly set payroll and a plan, rules on differentials that it’s difficult to deviate from”, so it is better to have salary as part of a suite of demands, of which you might then get some. O’Riordan says: “It’s about seeing your value in broader terms. So, you could ask for flexible hours, working from home, childcare vouchers, gym membership, career development. These things will cost the company money, but they won’t necessarily come off the salary budget. It makes your negotiation look more mature and rounded and it’ll give you a better standard of living anyway.” Is it a good time to renegotiate your role? In a nutshell, it is a good time for everything. “Optimistically speaking, there’s already a slight rebalancing in the power equation between the employer and the worker,” says Redman. But don’t try unthinkingly to beef up your title; this is a good time to ask deeper questions. Is your work flexible enough? Do you have enough time for a life outside it? Are there elements of pandemic life that you want to take into your post-pandemic work? Do you have to go back to the office/carry on working at home? (Delete according to preference) There seems to be an organisational bias towards getting back to business as usual just for the sake of it, which in the first instance means everyone back in the office. Harfoush says: “Workplaces are not making a good enough case to justify their back-to-work policies. The frustrations that some employees feel is that they’ve been forced to re-evaluate how we gather and why we gather – and employers aren’t doing the same.” Remote meetings sometimes created new equality, O’Riordan says. “Voices that would normally be quieter or shyer were suddenly being asked to contribute. People felt empowered and more collaborative, because they were forced to communicate more efficiently.” Others felt that they had more control over their hours, were spared a commute or could winnow out pointless, time-consuming face-to-face encounters. Yet many people at the start of their careers and living in titchy flat-shares desperately miss the office, for space, camaraderie, learning curve and (sometimes) free coffee and sachets of sugar. This is a question for employers: how can they redesign the specification so that people are happier, and so perform at their best? But it is also a question for employees to figure out what they want; power concedes nothing without a demand. What are your legal rights if your workload mushrooms suddenly? “There’s no reason why those employees who are overloaded with excess baggage need to suck it up and get on with it,” says Harris, the employment lawyer, who has experience on both sides of the fence. “Check your terms and conditions. Think about your job spec and whether or not your workload is falling within it. Then raise a complaint, either informally or through a formal grievance. Employers will be more receptive to complaints at the moment – and we have direct experience of that.” If that doesn’t resolve it and you decide to take it to a tribunal, excessive workload would fall under constructive dismissal. “These claims can be technically difficult to win – you’ve got to show that you’re at the end of your tether and that you have no option other than to resign. Only about one in five succeed, but that’s more about spurious claims being issued. It’s not a reason not to bring a claim.” You can seek legal advice from Citizens Advice; lawyers are expensive, but some have no-win, no-fee schemes. “Lots of individuals will have insurance via their home insurance, which is something people may not be aware of,” adds Harris. Is the pandemic a message to retrain as something more useful to society? It is not a bad idea, if there is something you feel excited by. However, if you are just reacting against an employer’s culture, after the scales have fallen from your eyes, that might not be a great place from which to make decisions. Like the pandemic, Redman says, the aftermath has separated the sheep from the goats, corporately speaking. “Some big firms were evil quite quickly, with lockdown layoffs and taking advantage of employees who were furloughed. Others were more progressive.” Organisations are capable of change, even changing their values, and “the rules of talent are really being redrawn”, Harfoush says, citing initiatives at Nike, Bumble and LinkedIn, which all gave employees a week’s paid leave, just to improve their professional experience. It comes back again to psychological equity: you have more power than you once had. Use it before you quit. Or quit, if you like. Your call. How do you harness the goodwill brought about because you have stuck around? “I don’t think you’ll be rewarded just for not leaving,” O’Riordan says. “But there is more awareness now that the contract is a two-way street – the employer has responsibilities as much as the employee does. And younger millennials are creating a very different workplace culture – they’re not prepared to put up with old-fashioned workplace values.” Don’t think of it as “harnessing goodwill” or you will end up with a fruit basket. Think of it as “advocating for yourself”, Harfoush says. Don’t be embarrassed by it. “Nobody else is going to advocate for you.” How can you make an old job feel exciting and new? “Given that everything has been upended a bit, we’re all asking: ‘Is there a way to get more joy and sense of self from my job?’” says Redman. As far as O’Riordan is concerned: “This is absolutely an opportunity to reinvent yourself.” Where vacancies are opening up around you, “instead of just taking on extra duties, you should think about a more creative way of restructuring the work”. When new people are taken on, try to manoeuvre yourself into a mentoring role – or, if they are at the same level as you, “step up to integrate the new cohort into the company’s way of thinking – so you’re carving a role for yourself, but you’re also suggesting yourself as somebody who embraces change and is receptive to new thinking”.Would-be pet owners should blow the whistle on dodgy sellers, the UK’s leading vet has suggested, as figures reveal practices are seeing growing numbers of pets presenting with conditions linked to suspected low welfare breeding. The Covid pandemic has fuelled a boom in pet ownership. However, research from the Kennel Club has suggested one in four pandemic puppy owners might inadvertently have bought their pet from a puppy farm. Asked whether prospective owners should report suspicious adverts to trading standards officials, the UK’s chief veterinary officer agreed. “Even if, for some reason, there isn’t direct action taken in that case, it’s building the intelligence that we have to know what’s going on,” Christine Middlemiss told the Guardian. “And if people don’t tell us … it’s much harder to get a handle on what is going on out there so we can build the case to have more enforcement or further refine the legislation.” Animal charity PDSA said potential buyers seeing a suspicious advert online should report it to the hosting website, alert the RSPCA if there are welfare concerns, and flag disquiet that the breeder may not have a licence – or be failing to live up to its terms – to the local authority. According to a new survey, 88% of 175 members of the British Veterinary Association and British Veterinary Nursing Association reported seeing an increase in pets with problems linked to low welfare breeding conditions. They also felt that many owners were unaware that their pet’s problems might be linked to low welfare breeding practices. Another survey – conducted by Opinion Matters – found of 1,009 UK respondents who have ever bought a cat or dog, just 31% said they would feel very confident they could spot the signs of poor practices. Meanwhile 27% said they noticed a suspicious seller or advert while buying their last pet. Middlemiss said it was important to educate potential buyers about what to look out for, adding there is often an increase in people wanting to buy puppies and kittens around Christmas. As part of such efforts the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has launched a video to warn would-be pet owners about unscrupulous sellers. “Deceitful sellers known as Petfishers use all kinds of tricks to mislead buyers putting lots of money ahead of an animal’s welfare,” says a plummy voiced ginger cat, while a long-haired feline – sitting on a lap that looks like it might well belong to the Bond villain Ernst Blofeld – adds, “and I thought I was evil”. The video, which is part of the government’s Petfished campaign, which is supported by organisations including the RSPCA, Dogs Trust and Cats Protection, follows the introduction of Lucy’s Law in April, which bans third parties from selling puppies and kittens in England and, among other rules, requires breeders to have licence. The campaign urges would-be owners to visit their prospective pet at its home with its mother, check the animals are at least eight weeks old before they are allowed to be taken away, and put the name and phone number of breeders into a search engine to ensure they are not selling lots of animals. “If they’re a good breeder, they will be asking you as many questions as you should be asking them because they should really care about the home that the puppies or kittens are going to,” said Middlemiss. According to the Opinion Matters poll, 12% of pet buyers didn’t do any research at all before visiting their puppy or kitten for the first time. Charities have previously warned potential buyers that they should steel themselves to walk away from pets with suspicious backgrounds. “If you pay money for that puppy then they’re only going to have another litter and want to make more money from them,” said Middlemiss. “So it’s stopping that demand.”Campaigners have urged employers to stop asking job applicants for salary history, saying it discriminates against women, people of colour, people with disabilities and shores up the gender pay gap. A survey by the Fawcett Society to mark Equal Pay Day on Thursday – the date women effectively start to work for free because they are paid less than men on average – found that asking details about previous earnings is also unreliable because four in 10 working adults have lied about their past salary. The Savanta ComRes survey of 2,000 workers found that 58% of women and 54% of men said that disclosing their past earnings meant they were offered a lower wage than they would have got otherwise, while 61% of women said being asked about their salary had damaged their confidence to ask for better pay, compared with 53% of men. Asking people to disclose a previous salary compounds the gender pay gap and particularly discriminates against women who have had time out of the workplace to have children, said the organisation. It can also backfire: according to the survey, 63% of women and 58% of men would think more highly of an employer who did not ask for a previous salary. “Asking about salary history can mean past pay discrimination follows women, people of colour, and people with disabilities throughout their career. It also means new employers replicate pay gaps from other organisations,” said Jemima Olchawski, the Fawcett Society chief executive. “Stopping asking is a simple, evidence-led way for organisations to improve pay equality – it’s good for women, employers and our economy.” Fawcett calculates Equal Pay Day every year using the mean hourly pay gap for full-time workers from the Office of National Statistics. In 2021, that figure stands at 11.9%, up from 10.6% in 2020, although Covid and the impact of furlough data may have affected this year’s data. Over the past 10 years the gap has closed by 4%, progress the organisation describes as “glacial”. At the current rate of progress it will take until 2050 to close the gender pay gap. This year, the ONS reported that the gender pay gap among all employees was 15.4%, up from 14.9% in April 2020 but still down from 17.4% in 2019. The gender pay gap is higher among all employees than full-time employees because more women work in lower-paid part-time jobs – 37% of working women were part-time in August 2021, compared with 13% of men. There are 6.2 million female part-time workers compared with 1.8 million part-time men. Research suggests that hopes for a post-pandemic flexible working revolution are fading. A recent report by the flexible working social enterprise Timewise, found that in 2021 three-quarters of jobs advertised in the UK did not offer any flexible working options, only 8% mentioned home-working and 10% offered part-time work. Flexible hours were offered in 3% of job adverts. The study analysed 5m job adverts between January-April 2021 and 12- April to 31 August 2021. The research found that part-time work and low pay were synonymous – 19% of jobs paying under £19k offered part-time work, with only 3% offering home working and 7% flexible work. For jobs paying more than £80k, only 3% of adverts offered part-time working, 14% offered home working and 10% offered some kind of flexible work. Timewise CEO, Melissa Jamieson, said that many part-time workers wanted to work more hours and build better careers, but struggled to find flexible work to fit around caring responsibilities. “If you really want to start tackling the gender pay gap – flex marks the spot, and part-time work in particular is critical to address,” she said. “In traditional roles many women end up feeling trapped and eventually leave, only to take a job beneath their level of skill and ability, because it’s the only kind of part-time work they can find.”The world as we knew it is coming to an end, and it’s up to us how it ends and what comes after. It’s the end of the age of fossil fuel, but if the fossil-fuel corporations have their way the ending will be delayed as long as possible, with as much carbon burned as possible. If the rest of us prevail, we will radically reduce our use of those fuels by 2030, and almost entirely by 2050. We will meet climate change with real change, and defeat the fossil-fuel industry in the next nine years. If we succeed, those who come after will look back on the age of fossil fuel as an age of corruption and poison. The grandchildren of those who are young now will hear horror stories about how people once burned great mountains of poisonous stuff dug up from deep underground that made children sick and birds die and the air filthy and the planet heat up. We must remake the world, and we can remake it better. The Covid-19 pandemic is proof that if we take a crisis seriously, we can change how we live, almost overnight, dramatically, globally, digging up great piles of money from nowhere, like the $3tn the US initially threw at the pandemic. The climate summit that just concluded in Glasgow didn’t get us there, though many good and even remarkable things happened. Those people who in many cases hardly deserve the term “leader” were pulled forward by what activists and real leaders from climate-vulnerable countries demanded; they were held back by the vested interests and their own attachment to the status quo and the profit to be made from continued destruction. As the ever-acute David Roberts put it: “Whether and how fast India phases out coal has nothing at all to do with what its diplomat says in Glasgow and everything to do with domestic Indian politics, which have their own logic and are only faintly affected by international politics.” Six months ago, the usually cautious International Energy Agency called for a stop to investment in new fossil-fuel projects, declaring: “The world has a viable pathway to building a global energy sector with net-zero emissions in 2050, but it is narrow and requires an unprecedented transformation of how energy is produced, transported and used globally.” Pressure from activists pushed and prodded the IEA to this point, and 20 nations committed at Cop26 to stop subsidies for overseas fossil fuel projects. The emotional toll of the climate crisis has become an urgent crisis of its own. It’s best met, I believe, by both being well grounded in the facts, and working towards achieving a decent future – and by acknowledging there are grounds for fear, anxiety and depression in both the looming possibilities and in institutional inaction. What follows is a set of tools I’ve found useful both for the inward business of attending to my state of mind, and for the outward work of trying to do something about the climate crisis – which are not necessarily separate jobs. * * * 1. Feed your feelings on facts Beware of feelings that aren’t based on facts. I run across a lot of emotional responses to inaccurate analysis of the situation. Sometimes these are responses to nothing more than a vague apprehension that we’re doomed. One of the curious things about the climate crisis is that the uninformed are often more grim and fatalistic than the experts in the field – the scientists, organisers and policymakers who are deep in the data and the politics. Too many people like to spread their despair, saying: “It’s too late” and “There’s nothing we can do”. These are excuses for doing nothing, and erase those doing something. That’s not what the experts say. We still have time to choose the best rather than the worst scenarios, though the longer we wait the harder it gets, and the more dramatic the measures are required. We know what to do, and that knowledge is getting more refined and precise, but also more creative, all the time. The only obstacles are political and imaginative. * * * 2. Pay attention to what’s already happening Another oft-heard complaint is “nobody is doing anything about this”. But this is said by people who are not looking at what so many others are doing so passionately and often effectively. The climate movement has grown in power, sophistication and inclusiveness, and has won many battles. I have been around long enough to remember when the movement against what was then called “global warming” was small and mild-mannered, preaching the gospel of Priuses and compact fluorescent lightbulbs, and mostly being ignored. One of the victories of climate activism – and consequences of dire climate events – is that a lot more people are concerned about climate than they were even a few years years ago, from ordinary citizens to powerful politicians. The climate movement – which is really thousands of movements with thousands of campaigns around the world – has had enormous impact. In the US, where I live, a lot is happening at the local, state and federal levels. Local measures can seem insignificant, but often they scale up. For example, a few years ago the Californian city of Berkeley decided to ban the installation of gas appliances in new buildings. Berkeley is one small city, so it would be easy to dismiss the impact – but now more than 50 California municipalities have followed suit, and all-electric could become standard far beyond the state. In the UK, the group Insulate Britain has staged blockades while demanding that the government improve building insulation standards, which is something I never imagined people would protest about. But insulation is a survival and justice issue in this coming winter of rising fuel costs and scarcity, as well as a climate issue. There are organisations, initiatives and legislation on various scales, and there is a scale that is right for everyone. Sometimes it’s getting your college to divest, or your city to change building regulations, or your state to adopt an aggressive clean-energy plan (as Oregon did this summer) or ban fracking (as New York State did a few years ago) or protect an old-growth forest. If some past victories are hard to see, it’s because there’s nothing left behind to see: the coal-fired plant that was never built, the pipeline that was stopped, the drilling that was banned, the trees that weren’t chopped down. As my friend Daniel Jubelirer of the Sunrise Project advises, if you find the sheer volume of data and issues overwhelming, join up, learn as you go and perhaps pick an area to master. * * * 3. Look beyond the individual and find good people When I ask people what they’re doing about the climate crisis, they often cite virtuous lifestyle choices, such as being vegan or not flying. Those are good things to do. They are also relatively insignificant. The world must change, but it won’t happen because one person does or does not consume something – and I would prefer we not imagine ourselves primarily as consumers. As citizens of the Earth, we have a responsibility to participate. As citizens massed together, we have the power to affect change, and it is only on that scale that enough change can happen. Individual choices can slowly scale up, or sometimes be catalysts, but we’ve run out of time for the slow. It is not the things we refrain from doing, but those things we do passionately, and together, that will count the most. And personal change is not separate from collective change: in a municipality powered by clean energy, for instance, everyone is a clean-energy consumer. If you live on a diet of mainstream news – which focuses on celebrities and elected politicians, and reserves the term “powerful” for high-profile and wealthy individuals – you will be told in a thousand ways that you have no role in the fate of the Earth, beyond your consumer choices. Movements, campaigns, organisations, alliances and networks are how ordinary people become powerful – so powerful that you can see they inspire terror in elites, governments and corporations alike, who devote themselves to trying to stifle and undermine them. But these places are also where you meet dreamers, idealists, altruists – people who believe in living by principle. You meet people who are hopeful, or even more than hopeful: great movements often begin with people fighting for things that seem all but impossible at the outset, whether an end to slavery, votes for women or rights for LGTBQ+ people. Values and emotions are contagious, and that applies whether you’re hanging out with the Zapatistas or the Kardashians. I have often met people who think the time I have spent around progressive movements was pure dutifulness or dues-paying, when in fact it was a reward in itself – because to find idealism amid indifference and cynicism is that good. * * * 4. The future is not yet written People who proclaim with authority what is or is not going to happen just bolster their own sense of self and sabotage your belief in what is possible. There was, according to conventional wisdom, never going to be marriage equality in Ireland or Spain, or a US president honouring trans visibility day, or Canada ceding 20% of its land mass to indigenous self-governance as Nunavut, or an end to Britain running on coal, or Costa Rica coming close to 100% clean energy. The historical record tells us that the unexpected happens regularly – and by unexpected, I mean unexpected to people who thought they knew what was going to happen. In 2015, Christiana Figueres led 192 nations to a successful global climate treaty in Paris. But when she was first asked to take on the job, she blurted out that it was impossible. She took it on anyway, and the night before the treaty was announced, people around me were still saying it was impossible, and preparing for failure. Then it succeeded – not in finishing the job, but in moving it forward. The future is not yet written. We are writing it now. * * * 5. Indirect consequences matter In September, Harvard University announced it would divest from fossil fuel. It took organisers 10 years to make that happen. For more than nine years you could have looked at the campaign as unsuccessful, even though it was part of a global movement that got trillions of dollars out of fossil-fuel investments, recast the fossil-fuel industry as criminal and raised ethical questions for all investors to consider. This month, Bloomberg News reported that the “cost of capital” for fossil fuel and renewable energy projects used to be comparable, but thanks largely to shareholder and divestment activists, the cost for fossil projects is now about 20%, while that for renewables is between 3% and 5%. This affects what gets funded and what is profitable. The campaign against the Keystone XL oil pipeline was, for many years, a jumble of wins and losses and stalls and setbacks – and then finally the pipeline was completely halted when Joe Biden came into office. This was not a gift from Biden; it was a debt being paid to the climate activists who had made it an important goal. Patience counts, and change is not linear. It radiates outward like ripples from a stone thrown into a pond. It matters in ways no one anticipates. Indirect consequences can be some of the most important ones. The Keystone XL campaign was long and hard, and the heroes who fought it did a lot of things besides stop one pipeline. They made the Alberta tar sands – one of the filthiest fossil fuel operations on Earth – far better recognised as an environmental atrocity and a global climate bomb that had to be defused. The organisers built beautiful coalitions between farmers, Native landholders, local communities and an international movement. They taught us why pipelines are a pressure point, and inspired people to fight and win many other pipeline battles. The Keystone XL campaign may have helped inspire the Lakota leaders at Standing Rock who stood up against the Dakota Access pipeline in 2016. That struggle didn’t stop the pipeline but it may yet. It’s not over. And it did so much else. A friend from Standing Rock told me it gave hope to the Native youth there and elsewhere, and a sense of their own agency and value that mattered. It led to many remarkable things, including a huge intertribal gathering and the healing of old wounds – notably when hundreds of former US soldiers got down on their knees to apologise for what the US army did to Native Americans. And it inspired one young woman, who had driven there from New York with her friends, to decide to run for office. You wouldn’t have heard of her then, but you have now: Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. As a congresswoman, she did so much to amplify the need for a Green New Deal. The deal hasn’t passed Congress, but it did change the sense of what is possible, and it undid the old false divide between jobs and the environment. It seems to have shaped the Biden administration’s emphasis on green jobs as part of an energy transition, and as such it’s out there in the world now in the form of the Build Back Better legislation plan. If you follow the ripples from Standing Rock, to a young woman’s decision to run for Congress, and the Sunrise Movement’s espousal of a new framework on climate action, you can see indirect change – which demonstrates that our actions often matter, even when we don’t achieve our primary goal immediately. And even if we do, the impact may be far more complex than we had anticipated. * * * 6. Imagination is a superpower There is a sad failure of imagination at the root of this crisis. An inability to perceive both the terrible and the wonderful. An inability to imagine how all these things are connected, how what we burn in our powerplants and car engines pumps out carbon dioxide that goes up into the sky. Some cannot see that the world, which has been so stable for 10,000 years, is now destabilised, and full of new perils and dangerous feedback loops. Others cannot imagine that we can actually do what is necessary – which is nothing less than building a new and better world. This is one of the remarkable things about this crisis: though the early climate movement emphasised austerity, a lot of what we need to give up is poison, destruction, injustice and devastation. The world could be far richer by many measures if we do what this catastrophe demands of us. If we don’t, catastrophes such as the violent flooding that recently cut off Canada’s largest port and stranded the city of Vancouver are reminders that the cost of addressing the crisis is dwarfed by the cost of not doing so. * * * 7. Check the facts (and watch out for liars) Thinking about the future requires imagination, but also precision. Waves of climate lies have washed over the public for decades. The age of climate denial is largely over, succeeded by more subtle distortions of the facts, and by false solutions from those who seek to benefit from stasis. Oil companies are spending a lot on advertising that features outright lies and the hyping of minor projects or false solutions. These lies seek to prevent what must happen, which is that carbon must stay in the ground, and that everything from food production to transportation must change. There is a lot of fuss about carbon capture technologies – and a very nice old joke that the best carbon capture technology of all is called a tree. The nonexistent technology of large-scale, human-made carbon capture is often brought up to suggest that we can keep producing those emissions. We cannot. Geoengineering is another distraction beloved by technocrats, apparently because they can imagine big, centralised technological innovation, but not the impact of countless small, localised changes. In 2017, Mark Jacobson of Stanford University’s Solutions Project concluded that almost every nation on Earth already has the natural resources it needs to transition to renewable energy. “We have the solutions” read a banner at the huge 2014 New York City climate march, and they have only grown more effective since then. * * * 8. History can guide us The American left, someone once told a friend of mine, is bad at celebrating its victories. (The same may well go for the left in other countries, too.) We have victories. Some of them are very large, and are why your life is the shape it is. The victories are reminders that we are not powerless, and our work is not futile. The future is not yet written, but by reading the past, we see patterns that can help us shape that future. To remember that things were different, and how they were changed, is to be equipped to make change – and to be hopeful, because hope lies in the possibility of things being different. Despair and depression often come from the sense that nothing will change, or that we have no capacity to make that change. Sometimes it helps to understand that this very moment is astonishing. Early in this century, we had no adequate alternative to fossil fuel. Wind and solar were relatively expensive and inefficient, and battery technology was still in its infancy. The most unnoticed revolution of our era is an energy revolution: solar and wind costs have plummeted as new, more efficient designs have been invented, and they are now widely considered to be more than adequate to power our future. The scale of change in the past 50 years is evidence of the power of movements. The nation I was born into 60 years ago had tiny lesbian and gay rights movements, nothing resembling a feminist movement, a Black-led civil rights movement whose victories mostly lay ahead, and a small conservation movement that had not yet morphed into an environmental movement – and few recognised the systemic interdependences at the heart of environmentalism. A lot of assumptions were yet to be dismantled; a lot of alternatives yet to be born. * * * 9. Remember the predecessors We are the first generations to face a catastrophe of the reach, scale and duration of climate change. But we are far from the first to live under some kind of threat, or to fear what is to come. I often think of those who were valiant and principled in the death camps of Nazi Germany. I think of my Latin American neighbours, some of whom braved terrifying migrations, walking across the desert for days to escape death squads, dictatorships and climate catastrophe. I think of the Indigenous people of the Americas, who already lived through the end of their worlds when their lands were stolen, their populations decimated and colonial domination disrupted their lives and cultures in every possible way. What it took to persevere under those conditions is almost unimaginable, and also all around us. Indigenous leadership has mattered tremendously for the climate movement, in specific campaigns and as ongoing testimony that there are other ways to think about time, nature, value, wealth and human roles. A report that came out this summer demonstrated how powerful and crucial Native leadership has been for the climate movement: “Indigenous resistance has stopped or delayed greenhouse gas pollution equivalent to at least one-quarter of annual US and Canadian emissions.” * * * 10. Don’t neglect beauty Climate chaos makes us fear that we will lose what is beautiful in this world. I want to say that in 50 years, and 100 years, the moon will rise, and be beautiful, and shine its silvery light across the sea, even if the coastline isn’t where it used to be. In 50 years, the light on the mountains, and the way every raindrop on a blade of grass refracts light will still be beautiful. Flowers will bloom and they will be beautiful; children will be born, and they, too, will be beautiful. Only when it is over will we truly see the ugliness of this era of fossil fuels and rampant economic inequality. Part of what we are fighting for is beauty, and this means giving your attention to beauty in the present. If you forget what you’re fighting for, you can become miserable, bitter and lost. For a long time we have told horror stories about ice and coral reefs and violent weather events to try to wake people up to the fact that the climate is changing. I have a different fear now – that this chaos will come to seem inevitable, and even normal, as war does to someone who has lived their life in wartime. I believe we now need to tell stories about how beautiful, how rich, how harmonious the Earth we inherited was, how beautiful its patterns were, and in some times and places still are, and how much we can do to restore this and to protect what survives. To take that beauty as a sacred trust, and celebrate the memory of it. Otherwise we might forget why we are fighting. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Nasa has resumed work on the lunar lander needed to return humans to the moon. The space agency voluntarily paused work on the Human Landing System (HLS) for several months after a lawsuit over the spacecraft’s development and manufacture. In April, Nasa awarded the $2.9bn HLS contract solely to Elon Musk’s SpaceX. The Amazon founder Jeff Bezos, whose Blue Origin company also bid for the work, sued Nasa in August because the space agency had originally stated it would award two lander contracts. Budget shortfall, however, forced it to renege on this. Earlier this month, a judge dismissed Blue Origin’s claim and upheld the Nasa decision, and so the agency has gone back to work. At a press conference on 9 November, Nasa’s chief, Bill Nelson, said human landings would not now be possible until 2025 at the earliest. Under the Trump administration, the date set was 2024. The SpaceX HLS, based on its Starship design, is only contracted up to this landing. Nasa is running a new competition for a “sustainable” HLS that could be used for 10 or more further crewed landings. $146m was awarded in September to five companies, including Blue Origin, to study these future landers.Young people are often seen as having a bleak worldview, plugged uncritically into social media and anxious about the climate crisis, among other pressing issues. But a global study commissioned by the UN’s children’s agency, Unicef, appears to turn that received wisdom on its head. It paints a picture of children believing that the world is improving with each generation, even while they report anxiety and impatience for change on global heating. The landmark intergenerational study, conducted for Unicef by Gallup for World Children’s Day, surveyed two age groups in 21 countries – aged 15-24 and 40-plus – sampled from different socioeconomic groups, to compare attitudes. The results suggest the younger generation are more positive and globally minded than their elders, sceptical of what they read on social media (only 17% of young people said they trusted social media platforms “a lot” for information) and more invested in science and the possibility of global cooperation and international institutions. The young people surveyed were also more likely to believe childhood had improved, voting healthcare, education and physical safety as being better for them than it had been for their parents’ generation. “Born into a more digital, interconnected and diverse reality, young people see a world that is largely a better place for children than the one their parents grew up in – a safer and more abundant world that offers children better education, opportunities and hope for the future,” the report concludes. “At the same time, young people are not complacent. They report greater struggles with mental health conditions. Amid a sea of mis- and disinformation, they report low levels of trust in the information sources they use most.” Unicef’s executive director, Henrietta Fore, said: “There is no shortage of reasons for pessimism in the world today: climate change, the pandemic, poverty and inequality, rising distrust and growing nationalism. But here is a reason for optimism: children and young people refuse to see the world through the bleak lens of adults.” Compared with older generations, she said: “The world’s young people remain hopeful, much more globally minded, and determined to make the world a better place. Today’s young people have concerns for the future but see themselves as part of the solution.” Overall, the data suggests young people are products of globalisation – 39% identified most with being part of the world, rather than their own nation or region, compared with 22% of the 40-plus group. With each additional year of age, people were on average about 1% less likely to identify as a global citizen. The survey – conducted during the pandemic – also found young people were generally more trusting of national governments, scientists and international news media as sources of accurate information. Yet they were aware of the problems the world faced: The majority of young people saw serious risks for children online, such as seeing violent or sexually explicit content (78%) or being bullied (79%). While 64% of those in low- and middle-income countries believed children would be better off economically than their parents, young people in high-income countries had little faith in economic progress. There, fewer than a third of young respondents believed children today would grow up to be better off economically than their parents. More than a third of young people reported often feeling nervous or anxious, and nearly one in five said they often felt depressed or had little interest in doing things. On average, 59% of young people said children today faced more pressure to succeed than their parents did. Joe Daly, senior partner at Gallup, said: “We cannot know what is on the minds of young people if we do not ask them. Unicef’s survey reinforces the importance of hearing from the next generation and understanding their perspectives.” The survey found some areas of multi-generational alignment – notably around climate, the importance of education, global collaboration and children’s agency. By contrast, optimism, global mindedness and recognition of historical progress reflected some of the deepest divides. Fore said: “While this research paints a nuanced view of the generational divide, a clear picture emerges: children and young people embody the spirit of the 21st century far more readily than their parents.”Legal action against the attorney general and the Queen’s private lawyers has been initiated over a decision to ban media organisations from a court hearing about the Duke of Edinburgh’s will. The Guardian is seeking permission to argue that the high court’s failure to properly consider whether the press should be allowed to attend the hearing or make representations constitutes such a serious interference with the principle of open justice that the case should be reheard. In September the president of the family division of the high court, Sir Andrew McFarlane, ruled that the will of Prince Philip should be hidden from the public for 90 years, after a secret hearing that media organisations were not told about and were barred from attending. The only parties permitted to attend the court were Philip’s executor, Farrer and Co Trust Corporation, a subsidiary of the Queen’s private solicitors Farrer and Co, and the attorney general, Michael Ellis. Both parties successfully persuaded the judge to exclude the media from the hearing. McFarlane said he “accepted the argument that only the attorney general can speak, as a matter of public law, to the public interest, and that there was, legally, therefore no role for those who might represent the media at a hearing (public or private) in putting forward any contrary view of the public interest”. Under British law, when a person dies any will they have left behind is automatically made public. That is done in order to ensure the will is acted upon, to bring it to the attention of potential beneficiaries, and to prevent fraud against a person’s estate. The Windsor family is exempt from this requirement. Although the monarch’s will is hidden from the public by law, there is no statute passed by parliament requiring the wills of other members of the royal family to be hidden. There is also no established legal definition of who is, and who is not, a member of the royal family. However, about 100 years ago the royal family began making legal applications to have their wills hidden from the public. In the judgment summarising the closed court case relating to Prince Philip’s will, McFarlane identified the first will to be kept secret as that of Prince Francis of Teck, the younger brother of Queen Mary, who died in 1910. Teck’s will was kept secret in order to hush up a sex scandal. Mary persuaded a judge to keep it closed as it is understood to have shown that he had bequeathed prized family jewels to a mistress. McFarlane wrote: “The answer to the question ‘why should there be an exception for senior members of the royal family?’ is, in my view, clear: it is necessary to enhance the protection afforded to the private lives of this unique group of individuals, in order to protect the dignity and standing of the public role of the sovereign and other close members of her family. “While there may be public curiosity as to the private arrangements that a member of the royal family may choose to make in their will, there is no true public interest in the public knowing this wholly private information … The media interest in this respect is commercial.” The practice of sealing the Windsor family’s wills from the public was last considered in 2007 when an accountant, Robert Brown, sought access to the wills of the Queen Mother and Princess Margaret on the basis that he believed they would provide evidence that he was the illegitimate child of Margaret. His application was rejected. However, he successfully argued that the family court had failed to consider matters of public importance relating to the practice of sealing the Windsor family’s wills away from public scrutiny. Brown’s case also successfully uncovered the existence of a secret agreement between the attorney general, the former president of the family court, the royal household and Farrer and Co. The document was later partially disclosed.The Lost Symbol 9pm, Sky Max Ron Howard, director of the Robert Langdon film franchise, co-producies on its 10-part prequel series, The Lost Symbol – which does exactly what it says on the Dan Brown-Da Vinci Code tin (read: cryptology thriller). For those unfamiliar with the books, the show follows Harvard professor Langdon (Ashley Zukerman), who finds himself pulled into a complex mystery when his former mentor is kidnapped. Hollie Richardson Mary Berry: Love to Cook 8pm, BBC Two Grab a notepad because Berry goes like the clappers: within 10 minutes this week, she’s discovered white miso paste and marinated prawns in it, been to Norfolk to try two types of tofu, then come home again to pickle some leftover veg and make Norwegian seed bread. She leaves plenty of time to hit Brixton for some Nigerian scran. Jack Seale Nadiya’s Fast Flavours 8.30pm, BBC Two The beloved Bake Off star’s new series continues to bring some excitement into the kitchen after endless pandemic cooking. This week’s recipes include a reworking of a classic Louisiana sandwich and a dish of sweet-and-sour prawns. The food looks good but, be honest, it’s Hussain’s stories and easy manner we’re here for. Henry Wong Sort Of 9pm, Sky Comedy After the confident opener of Bilal Baig’s new comedy, it continues with a double bill. Dreams of moving to Berlin are very much on hold for Sabi, who is committed to trying to keep Bessy’s family together while she’s in hospital – but playing Mary Poppins is never an easy task. HR Cheltenham Literature Festival 2021 Highlights 10.30pm, Sky Arts Bookworms, gather round: here’s the first of a four-part highlights reel from this year’s outing for the world’s oldest literary festival. Tonight: Booker prize winner Bernardine Evaristo charts her career, Anita Rani and novelist Nikesh Shukla discuss race relations, and Ruth Ozeki reflects on teenage turbulence. HR Unapologetic 11.05pm, Channel 4 The first full-series commission from Channel 4’s pioneering Black to Front initiative strides forward confidentlyIn its second week, the late-night talkshow offers nuanced debates on sex and relationships, with topics from consent to dating apps. Hannah J Davies Film choice Charulata (Satyajit Ray, 1964), 3am, Channel 4 Based on a novel by Rabindranath Tagore, Satyajit Ray’s moving 1964 drama is one of the great Indian writer-director’s most effective explorations of tangled romantic relationships. In Kolkata in the late 19th century, bored young wife Charulata (Madhabi Mukherjee) finds her intellect and creativity stimulated when her husband, political newspaper editor Bhupati (Shailen Mukherjee), invites his would-be poet cousin Amal (Ray favourite Soumitra Chatterjee) to stay and entertain her. As their friendship deepens, she finds herself falling for the handsome, soulful Amal. Simon WardellThousands of tonnes of pesticides that seriously harm bees are being exported from the EU despite a ban on their outdoor use within the bloc. Data obtained by Unearthed, the investigative arm of Greenpeace, and Swiss NGO Public Eye shows that 3,900 tonnes of banned neonicotinoid pesticides were destined to leave the EU and UK for low- and middle-income nations with weaker environmental regulations in the three months after the ban came into force. The insecticides, which contain the active ingredients thiamethoxam, imidacloprid or clothianidin, were mostly destined for Brazil (which was due to receive almost half of the exports), Russia, Ukraine, Argentina, Iran, South Africa, Indonesia, Ghana, Mali and Singapore. The EU ban came into force on 1 September 2020. Neonicotinoid pesticides have been described by the International Union for Conservation of Nature as “a worldwide threat to biodiversity, ecosystems and ecosystem services”, but some EU countries continue to use them under emergency authorisations. Eight EU countries are likely to have exported banned neonicotinoid pesticides since the ban – Belgium, France, Germany, Spain, Greece, Austria, Denmark and Hungary – plus the UK. The World Health Organization and the Food and Agriculture Organization welcomed the ban and said it was evidence of a growing consensus on the need to severely restrict the pesticides’ use owing to the “large-scale adverse effects on bees and other beneficial insects”. Claire Nasike, of Greenpeace Africa, said: “This is the highest form of double standards, exhibited by these EU countries. They are prioritising profits at the expense of the people and the planet. It is time for low- and middle-income countries to pass laws that protect their people and environment from these toxic chemical imports.” A European Commission health and food safety official said: “Neonicotinoids are particularly toxic for bees and contribute significantly to the decline in pollinator populations. We would not find it acceptable that the production of food for import into the EU leads to or poses a threat of serious adverse effects on pollinator populations.” Most of the exports were notified by subsidiaries of Syngenta, the Swiss-headquartered, Chinese-owned pesticide multinational, and its German counterpart Bayer. A Bayer spokesperson said neonicotinoids were an important tool for farmers as they helped to control pests and safeguard harvests. “The mere fact that a plant protection product is not authorised or banned in the EU says nothing about its safety,” they said. A Syngenta spokesperson said: “We fully stand by the safety and effectiveness of thiamethoxam. The many emergency authorisations granted by various EU countries show that farmers need this technology to protect their crops.” Neonics were set to be used in England this year under an emergency authorisation, despite a government pledge to keep the restrictions post-Brexit to protect “pollinator populations at risk … unless the evidence base changes”. But the plan was ditched after cold weather killed off virus-transmitting aphids. A report from the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services said: “Recent research focusing on neonicotinoid insecticides shows evidence of lethal and sublethal effects on bees.” A European Commission source said countries could decide whether they wanted to import certain pesticides. “A ban of exports from the EU may, however, not automatically lead third countries to stop using such pesticides if they may import them from elsewhere,” they said.The former Labor MP for Dobell and trade union leader Craig Thomson has been granted bail in Gosford local court but has surrendered his passport and agreed not to approach any witnesses involved in a complex visa scheme. Wearing a white open-neck shirt, Thomson appeared by video link from Gosford police station and was represented in court by another Labor figure, the former New South Wales secretary of the ALP, Jamie Clements. Thomson has been charged with allegedly facilitating more than 130 fraudulent visa applications – focusing on the food service and regional farmworker industries – over four years, resulting in more than $2m allegedly being gained from this activity. The multi-agency investigation, led by the AFP and comprising the Australian Border Force (ABF), Austrac, the taxation office and Department of Home Affairs – allegedly found evidence of a scheme intended to defraud legitimate visa programs. Chelsea Brain, for the commonwealth director of public prosecutions, opposed bail, saying Thomson was an “unacceptable flight risk” because he had significant contacts in India and there was evidence he had been attempting to access his superannuation. She also told the court the AFP had evidence that after his first interview with police in July 2021 he had attempted to tamper with evidence. She said the commonwealth would allege Thomson was “a facilitator” of the visa scheme and though he had not lodged the fraudulent applications himself, he was the “common thread” between the more than 130 applications that are the subject of the case. She said if found guilty he faced a lengthy custodial sentence. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Clements told the court his client would plead not guilty and needed bail to prepare for what was likely to be a lengthy and complex case. “Mr Thomson denies wrongdoing and will defend the charges vigorously,” he said. He said his client did not pose a flight risk because of his deep ties to the community and his three young children. Clements said Thomson had recently separated from his partner. “He is a family man and his children are what he has left. Why would he flee the jurisdiction never to return and never to see his children?” Clements said his client had no assets and that any property was in his wife’s name. He said he was not able to offer a substantial surety. He also argued that while Thomson agreed not to run his labour hire company, he should be allowed to continue to run his fruit and vegetable export business to India. Magistrate J Price granted bail, subject to conditions including that Thomson surrender his passport, not approach an international airport or port, and not approach a long list of people who are either witnesses or co-accused. Thomson will also have to report daily to Terrigal police station and cannot travel outside greater Sydney or Newcastle area. He is permitted one mobile phone, which he must register with police, and he is not to download any encrypted apps.This blog reporting on the ongoing flood emergency in British Columbia is closing down now. You can read our latest report here. Thank you for reading. A late night evacuation train carrying about 200 people stranded for days by British Columbia’s mudslides and floods has left Hope for Vancouver, CBC news reports. Jonathan Abecassis, a spokesperson for Canadian National, said the emergency evacuation train was expected to arrive in Vancouver at about 10:30pm PT Wednesday. Most of the people on board the train had been in Hope, located about 150km east of Vancouver, since Sunday. Abecassis says the evacuation train is the result of efforts between Emergency Management BC, Via Rail and CN. British Columbia premier John Horgan has credited the climate crisis with increasingly the likelihood of intense storms such as the one that struck his province. Horgan referenced an earlier comment from Environment Canada, the government body that described the floods as a “one in 100 year event”. “While Environment Canada called this a 1-in-100 year event, we know the increased likelihood of intense storms is due to the climate crisis,” he said. “We need to keep doing more to mitigate its impacts and build the cleaner future people and our planet need. Canadian Armed Forces members are on the ground in British Columbia to assist with the floods relief effort. Additional members of the Royal Canadian Airforce are also reportedly en route from Edmonton, the force said. “Canadian Armed Forces members are on the ground in British Columbia helping out and we are sending more members to assist the communities that are most impacted, and support repair and mitigation efforts,” Anita Anand, Canada’s Minister of National Defence, said. “We will be there for British Columbians to keep them safe and to recover from this tragedy.” The Royal Canadian Airforce said 408 tactical helicopter squadrons were on their way to “deploy reconnaissance and coordination elements” to BC. The Government of Canada has approved a request for federal assistance from the province of British Columbia to help with their response to extreme flooding in the region. Bill Blair, Canada’s minister of emergency preparedness, confirmed the news earlier on Wednesday. “In response to extreme flooding across Southern BC, we have approved the deployment of Canadian Forces air support personnel to assist with evacuation efforts, support supply chain routes, and protect residents against floods and landslides,” Blair said in a statement. The Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) is expected to provide both air assets and a land component to assist with the relief effort, according to a press release issued by Public Safety Canada. Air support will assist evacuations, provide assistance to those who are vulnerable and stranded and also provide logistical support for provincial supply chains. The CAF will also assist with the protection of critical infrastructure, access roads, and properties. An Immediate Response Unit reconnaissance team is expected to be deployed today. Castle Fun Park’s mini golf attraction was pictured by CBC news photojournalist Ben Nelms as submerged in floodwaters in Abbotsford, BC, on Wednesday. It’s just another one of the more dramatic pictures to emerge in the aftermath of torrential rains. Flood warnings in the affected areas of Fraser Valley and Fraser Canyon has been downgraded, according to the British Columbia River Forecast Centre. The current Flood Watch warning for the Fraser Valley and Fraser Canyon, including tributaries near the district of Hope in BC, has been downgraded to a High Streamflow Advisory, the agency said in an update on Wednesday evening. A High Streamflow Advisory indicates that river levels are rising or expected to rise rapidly, but that no major flooding is expected. Minor flooding in low-lying areas is possible. British Columbia premier John Horgan has urged residents to refrain from hoarding during the crisis. “Respect the fact you do not need 48 eggs,” Horgan said during a Wednesday press conference, adding “a dozen will do”. “Remember that your neighbour in line behind you needs the same supplies you do. “We’re confident we can restore our supply chains in a quick and orderly manner, and the state of emergency will now help us do that.” The city of Chilliwack in Abbotsford has downgraded its evacuation order for Yarrow and Majuba Hill to an evacuation alert. The city in a statement on Wednesday evening that the evacuation order was rescinded after the water in the Nooksack River dropped considerably, which will diminish flow into Abbotsford. The Fraser River also continues to drop and officials estimate that by tomorrow they should be able to open the flood gates, which will further reduce water levels. The pumps are also working at Abbotsford’s Barrowtown pump station. Officials believe that should the worst case situation occur and the pumps stop working, the water will rise very slowly, first in Abbotsford, giving Yarrow residents an opportunity to leave the area safely. The current evacuation alert means that residents who return should be prepared to leave at a moment’s notice. Aerial footage shows the extent of catastrophic floods in mountain areas of Canada’s British Columbia province. The Fraser Valley, south-east of Vancouver, showed swaths of the land, including highways, underwater. Watch the footage below. The Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) are prepared to send 4,000 troops to hard-hit regions to help with evacuation efforts. Princeton in BC issued an evacuation alert over lack of clean water and natural gas. The small US city of Sumas in Washington, on the Canadian border, has been described as half flooded. Flooding there has hit an estimated three quarters of homes and there have been around about 500 rescues and evacuations reported. Sumas Mayor Kevin Christensen told The Seattle Times: “Half is on dry ground, half has water.” British Columbia premier John Horgan declares ‘state of emergency,’ and says death tolls expected to rise in coming days. Travel restrictions are also set to be imposed with supply chains expected to be impacted by the downpour. Horgan described the disaster as a once-in-500-year event. BC agriculture minister aid “thousands of animals have perished” in the flooding so far. Building trades union and road builders association are reportedly standing at the ready to rebuild. People have been evacuating from the Sumas Prairie area near Abbotsford, 80 miles inland from Vancouver, in fear for their lives as the region has been inundated with the devastating flooding. About 180 people were rescued Tuesday night during intense flooding in Abbotsford. Criticism grows over the failure of the BC Government’s Alert Ready emergency system to send out evacuation updates about intense flooding and weather in the BC region. Thousands of cattle feared stranded as farmers told to save themselves. Fast-rising water levels from a Sumas River in Washington state overwhelmed rescuers in Abbotsford on Tuesday. The Abbotsford mayor issued an evacuation warning with 1,100 homes evacuated so far. Canada prime minister Justin Trudeau called the intense flooding in British Columbia a “terrifically bad situation”. The weather phenomenon ha been linked to the global climate crisis. Authorities have confirmed the death of a woman from a mudslide on Monday and anticipate the death toll to rise. Canada’s Minister of emergency preparedness, Bill Blair, said in a TV interview that the Canadian Armed Forces are prepared to mobilize as many as 4,000 members to help with evacuation and other efforts on the ground in BC. The Canadian Armed Forces received a request for assistance last night, Blair said. “And I am advised that they are already moving assets forward into British Columbia to the affected areas”, Blair said. Initially, 300 personnel will be sent but they are prepared to move more. The BC government asked for heavy and medium air support in order to provide evacuation, critical medicine and food, he said. Princeton in BC issued an evacuation alert over lack of clean water and natural gas. All those living in properties within the boundary of the town are being asked to prepare to evacuate. No hotel accommodations will be provided, but the town has asked residents to gather their belongings, put livestock in safe places and arrange places for them and their families to stay. The town comprising 3,000 residents has been in a state of emergency for days with little to no access to heat or potable water as relentless rain caused extreme flooding, according to the CBC. A gas line that supplies the natural gas needed to heat local homes broke on Monday and the water system stopped working on Tuesday. New images show the damage the Malahat highway, which drivers compared to a river just two days ago, has endured. Only essential travel will be permitted on the highway until the repairs are done. To accommodate those who need alternate routes, the BC Ferry is offering a new route starting tomorrow to get around the Malahat highway. City officials of Abbotsford are pleading with people kayaking or swimming in the flood waters to stay out of the polluted waters, according to CBC News. The officials say some kayakers have actually made it hard for rescuers who are trying to save stranded people and livestock. They also warn that the water is extremely polluted and has likely swept up toxic chemicals as well as the decaying bodies of animals that succumbed to the flood. “I think I saw a few cows that seemed to be floating yesterday from the helicopter ... I saw barns that looked half full of water. I can’t imagine there are any birds left alive,” Abbotsford Mayor Henry Braun told CBC News. “For those reasons, we don’t want people in the water.” As waters rose throughout the Canadian province, harrowing visuals and reports have surfaced of people desperately trying to vacate their neighborhoods and save their livestock. In a video posted to Twitter by the Weather Channel in Canada, farmers in Abbotsford, BC can be seen rescuing their neighbors’ cattle from fields that have flooded due to the extreme weather conditions. A Vancouver meteorologist says the warning signs of extreme flooding in BC were evident more than a week ago. On 9 November the forecast showed that an atmospheric river that originated in the Hawaiian Islands and produces torrential rain was approaching. The phenomenon known as a “pineapple express” would work its way from British Columbia to California. Then on 11 November, The Weather Channel’s computer model indicated that 200 millimeters of rain were headed for Fraser Valley in BC. “It started just as an ordinary rainstorm, but by Sunday, [Nov. 14], things quickly escalated. Highway 1 became impassable. The flow forecast models by then indicated we could not escape a major flood event,” said Tyler Hamilton, the meteorolgist for The Weather Channel who initially noticed the potential for disaster. Read more about the flooding and Hamilton’s observations in this article from The Weather Channel. More images from photojournalists in Sumas, Washington. How poor forestry fuels floods and fires in western Canada A devastating string of floods and landslides have shocked residents in British Columbia, a west Canadian province increasingly forced to grapple with the effects of the climate crisis. As images of the devastation circulate on social media, experts warn that management of the province’s forests will be critical to blunting the effects of future storms. “It’s just this awful feeling of being right – and not wanting to be right. This is exactly what the best available science has predicted for years,” said Peter Wood, author of a recent report on the link between clearcut logging and community safety from the Sierra Club BC. “We know the outcome when you log steep slopes … You reach sort of a tipping point, where the forest is no longer able to provide that moderating service of controlling flow of water.” In the small US city of Sumas in Washington, on the Canadian border, residents have been assessing the damage. Flooding there has hit an estimated three quarters of homes and there have been around about 500 rescues and evacuations reported. “We’re looking at going door-to-door, as waters go down in different parts of town,” Sumas Mayor Kevin Christensen told The Seattle Times. “Half is on dry ground, half has water.” The situation has reminded people of western Washington’s record, severe flooding in November 1990 when two people died and there were more than 2,000 evacuations. On Facebook, the City of Sumas said Wednesday that water levels were continuing to drop and it looked like the community wouldn’t be affected by additional potential flooding in Abbotsford. It said crews were working hard to clear roads and return power to some parts of town. “These families and businesses need our prayers and support as we start the process of cleanup and rebuilding over the next few days,” the city said in another Facebook post. ‘Once-in-500-years event’ At the news conference, BC Premier John Horgan described the calamity as a once-in-500-year event. Some of the towns impacted are in remote mountain areas with limited access and freezing temperatures. “These are extraordinary events not measured before, not contemplated before,” Horgan said at the news conference. From Reuters: In Tulameen, a town to the northeast of Vancouver, up to 400 people are trapped, many without power, said Erick Thompson, a spokesman for the area’s emergency operations. “(We) did a helicopter flight recently, dropped off food,” he told the Canadian Broadcasting Corp. In Hope, 100 miles (160 km) east of Vancouver, food was starting to run low. Pastor Jeff Kuhn said a quarter of the town’s 6,000 residents were seeking shelter. About 100 volunteers at the Dukh Nivaran Sahib Gurdwara Sikh Temple in Surrey spent all night Tuesday preparing about 3,000 meals and then hired helicopters to deliver the food to Hope, said President Narinder Singh Walia. BC premier John Horgan said the building trades union and road builders association were standing at the ready to rebuild: We’re living through an extraordinary historic time with respect to the pandemic and now with respect to an inundation that is unprecedented in our history. We’re putting in place measures to ensure that we can accelerate contracts and tenders so that we can get the work done ... I’m very confident that the people who built British Columbia will be able to rebuild it as quickly as is safe to do so.” Later in the briefing, he said, “I’m confident we can withstand this. Our economy is strong ... but it is early days.” He also said that BC needed to start preparing for a future where events like this will be more frequent. Officials at the BC press briefing are facing numerous questions about concerns with the BC government’s Alert Ready emergency system. Officials have repeatedly responded that the disaster was “unprecedented”, and have also said that Alert Ready is used when local authorities request it. BC deputy premier Mike Farnworth said the Alert Ready system is not a “silver bullet”, and in some areas, the system would not be useful and there were concerns about the alerts causing panic: More: More details on the “state of emergency” declaration from the BC premier: John Horgan says the order will preserve access to services and supplies, establish travel restrictions, and ensure essential goods can be transported, CBC British Columbia reported. Officials also expect to confirm more deaths due to flooding in the coming days. The BC premier also urged the public not to hoard items and not to travel unless it’s essential. Lana Popham, BC’s minister of agriculture, has just given an update about the crisis at farms, saying that “thousands of animals have perished”. More from her update: “There will have to be euthanizations,” she said, adding that there were also animals who have survived and will need food in the next 24 hours. Disaster relief funding will be made available for farmers. The agricultural health lab in the Fraser Valley was flooded, compromising infrastructure that is used for disease testing for animals, and also for milk testing. Alberta and Saskatchewan are stepping up to provide testing. “Farmers are desperately trying to find a safe, dry spot for their animals,” she said noting that many farmers who attempted rescues had to abandon their animals: “They are not in good shape by the time they get there ... The roads were disappearing beneath them. We’re developing routes so that veterinarians can access farms.” Amid flooding in British Columbia, the British Columbia premier has declared a state of emergency and says death tolls are expected to rise in the coming days. The premier has also said travel restrictions will be imposed and that officials are confident that supply chains impacted by the downpour and mudslides can be restored quickly. More details coming shortly. The Guardian’s Hannah Devlin explains more about what an atmospheric river is after British Columbia and parts of Washington state experience record rainfall and flooding. Massive flooding across the region has caused mudslides, cut off several towns from key supplies such as food and fuel, and killed one person as several were reported missing. Atmospheric rivers are long, narrow bands of water vapour in the atmosphere that extend from the tropics to higher latitudes, acting like a pipe in the sky. These columns of vapour, typically between 250 and 375 miles wide, move with the weather and can transport up to 15 times the volume of the Mississippi River. When atmospheric rivers make landfall, they release moisture in the form of rain or snow – and this is often a crucial contribution to water supplies. Precipitation from atmospheric rivers is thought to contribute about 20% of the Earth’s total water flow. In some regions, particularly the east and west coast of North America, south-east Asia and New Zealand, this can be more than 50%. Read the full report here. Officials in British Columbia providence could declare a “state of emergency” due to flooding in the region that has cut off access to the country’s largest port and left thousands stranded, reports Reuters. “What we’re seeing is a natural disaster,” said provincial Public Safety Minister Mike Farnworth in a briefing late Tuesday. “A province-wide state of emergency is very much on the table.” Several towns are currently cut off due to flooding and mudslides, with at least one town struggling with limited access to food. In Hope, a town of about 6,000 that is located around 100 miles east of Vancouver, many say that food supplies are limited as flooding has halted any attempts at restocking grocery stores. “There is not much left in the grocery stores. They just can’t restock, there is no way to get through,” said Jeff Kuhn, a pastor in Hope, to the Canadian Broadcasting Corp. Kuhn said that while food is being airlifted in, only about a day’s worth of food remains. Canada prime minister Justin Trudeau calls intense flooding in British Columbia a “terrifically bad situation” as Canada moves to deploy its air force to help with aid efforts, with more rain expected, reports Reuters. While on a trip to Washington, Trudeau said the Canadian government will help regions recover from the flooding, which has killed one person. Bill Blair, Federal Emergency Preparedness minister, said today that air force personnel will be delivering food, fuel, feed and water to communities currently cut off and running low on supplies due to flooding, telling the Canadian Broadcasting Corp that hundreds of soldiers will be deployed. Additionally, those deployed will be helping with sandbagging to mitigate flooding. The Guardian’s Chris Watson, Finbarr Sheehy and Pete Guest provided more information behind what caused intense flooding in the Pacific north-west region months after record-breaking heatwaves. These weather phenomenons taking place in areas like Abbotsford yesterday are also linked to the global climate crisis, explained further in the report with accompanying visuals. Scientists who analysed the regional heatwave found that human-caused climate change made the extreme weather at least 150 times more likely. Referring to both the heatwave and the storms, Joe Boomgard-Zagrodnik, an agricultural meteorologist at Washington State University, told NBC this week: “We were super hot and dry in the summer, and the switch flips. It definitely matches what the climate models show for the future around here – hotter, dryer summers and wetter winters.” As the climate warms scientists expect atmospheric rivers to form in more rapid succession, grow more intense, and become longer, wetter and wider. According to Environment Canada, there have been five atmospheric rivers already this season, which is highly unusual. The way in which the summer fires exacerbated the winter flooding is an example of a compound climate disaster. Read the full report here. More information has come out about a large fire in the Abbotsford area as flooding presents an additional obstacle to putting out the flames. Authorities are still working to extinguish the large fire that took place at an RV dealership earlier this morning, with around 100 RVs packed tightly together on fire. There are reportedly about 40 firefighters battling the flames. Authorities have also said that the fire is under high-voltage power lines, creating additional obstacles and danger. While officials are still working to determine what cause the large fire, officials have encouraged residents in the surrounding areas to remain indoors as the blaze has created a plume of smoke that could be potentially toxic. New aerial images of flooding in the Abbotsford area demonstrate the severe impact yesterday’s weather had. The Abbotsford Police Department tweeted out new pictures taken this morning via helicopter of the Sumas Prairie area. “RCMP’s Air 1 Helicopter has provided a photo of the Sumas Prairie taken this morning. This is an example of the current conditions,” tweeted the police department. Search and rescue crews plucking people from the devastating flooding in the Abbotsford area have been describing the harrowing time residents have endured. One rescue team leader working throughout yesterday and into Wednesday said: “We’re evacuating people by air during the worst time of their life. The majority of people had elderly parents with them that were unable to walk, suffered from dementia. You’re trying to assist them into a helicopter at night, bringing only a very small amount of stuff. It was a very tough situation.” Mike Danks was having a quick word with the media between rescue flights, an outlet reported in Agassiz, a town about 50 miles north-east of Abbotsford on the other side of the flooded Fraser River that runs through the region and down to Vancouver at the Pacific coast. Danks said search crews are heading back out and air-lift rescues will continue today. Meanwhile, thousands of farm animals are trapped and people are having trouble rescuing them, often being told by authorities to leave them behind in order to save themselves. The cross-border area between Vancouver, British Columbia, and Bellingham, Washington state, has suffered flooding, too, and there are some dramatic pictures and video clips, including by satellite. It includes Whatcom county. And just north, back near Abbotsford, an RV dealership is on fire and spewing smoke. People have been evacuating from the Sumas Prairie area near Abbotsford, 80 miles inland from Vancouver, in fear for their lives as the region has been inundated with the devastating flooding. The prairie was formed by a post-ice-age lake being drained almost a century ago and one local outlet has explained all about this and the recent history’s relevance to what is happening now. Flooding in British Columbia, just north of the US-Canada border and a little to the east of Vancouver, has prompted this short video clip of the Coquihalla Highway road artery “snapped in two”. And here’s the front page of the Vancouver Sun. Abbotsford mayor Henry Braun warned that the city could not handle another major weather event in light of intense flooding last night in the Abbotsford area, reported Vernon Morning Star. “If we had another weather event like we just went through… we are in deep doo doo,” said Braun during a press conference providing updates to ongoing flooding in the region. Braun also confirmed that the Barrowtown Pump Station is operating at full capacity, but said that the situation remains “critical.” “Pump station is operating at our full capacity… but it was never designed to take on water from another country,” said Braun. According to Braun, city officials are hoping that the water drops by another metre, which would allow the city to open the flood gates at Barrowtown. The flood gates can let seven times more water through than the four pumps the city is currently relying on. About 180 people were rescued last night during intense flooding in Abbotsford, said city officials during a press conference. During a press conference on updates concerning ongoing flooding in the area, Abbotsford fire chief Darren Lee said that 180 people were rescued last night via air and water rescue. Officials said that three helicopters were used overnight to get people who were unable to evacuate on their own and at least 11 rescue teams used boats. Lee also confirmed that officials receive around 100 rescue calls from residents who were east of the flooding, but did not say how many of those calls were completed, reported CityNews Vancouver. Amid massive flooding and the potential failure of the Barrowtown Pump Station last night, hundreds gathered to fill sandbags, reports CityNews Vancouver. Abbotsford Mayor Henry Braun thanked the almost 300 volunteers who gathered to help with the pump situation and for “buying” the city more time to address the flooding, but emphasized that the issue is not fully resolved. Following Braun’s announcement yesterday that the pump station could potentially fail and plea for those in the Sumas Prairie area to evacuate, many community members went to the station to volunteer. “At about 12 a.m. sandbagging started and there was probably 250 people,” said Erik, who volunteered with a friend after seeing a post on Facebook, to CityNews. “We formed three lines and spent just over three hours building a wall. Heavy equipment worked on (the) more accessible north end of the station and continued to do so overnight.” Firefighters at the pump station also helped organize volunteers who were on-site. Later on, police asked residents not to come to the pump station, tweeting in an announcement that community members were “hampering emergency operations” in the area despite good intentions. Whether you live or work in the area, or are helping with search and rescue efforts with the emergency services, we would like to hear from you. You can get in touch by filling in the form here or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. Criticism grows over the failure of the BC Government’s Alert Ready emergency system to send out evacuation updates about intense flooding and weather in the BC region. While the emergency alert system is enabled to send mobile alerts and broadcast evacuation updates on radios and TVs, it sat silent during major flooding last night, with most government evacuation orders being delivered via social media. Rob Shaw of Daily Hive Vancouver reports: The BC Government’s Alert Ready emergency system — which could have sent out a mobile alert to every cell phone in the region, as well as cut into radio and TV broadcasts with the evacuation alert — sat silent. The government only uses it for tsunamis, so this “catastrophic” event did not qualify. It was up to the City of Abbotsford to get the word out by itself, with its mayor and local emergency officials holding an impromptu press briefing late Tuesday night on the city’s YouTube channel — the makeshift event a far cry from the enormous reach of the provincial government’s largely quiet communications apparatus... BC promised to expand the Alert Ready system after the summer’s heat dome killed 595 people, and the government found itself under fire for not doing enough to reach out to people before the emergency started to warn them to seek help in cooling centres. But then the weekend flooding started, and instead of the broadcast system being ready for prime time it was scheduled to undergo a simple “test” message Wednesday (which was later cancelled after the real emergency started). The province issued a statement late Tuesday night claiming it was “ready and available to issue a broadcast intrusive alert through the Alert Ready system” but that the “City of Abbotsford has indicated that it does not want to issue an alert at this time.” Read the full report here. As residents in Sumas Prairie were told to evacuate their homes amid intense flooding and weather in the area, more images have emerged of farmers attempting to rescue stranded farm animals. Visual journalist Jesse Winter captured video of farmers and community members in Abbotsford using boats, jet skis, and other water crafts to rescue dozens of cattle caught in the flooding. Another image by photographer Jennifer Gauthier similarly shows one resident attempting to rescue a stranded cow using a jet ski. Canadian meteorologist Tyler Hamilton has tweeted his shock at the level of rainfall hitting western Canada: The heat dome earlier this year and the current flooding are linked, as the Guardian’s George Monbiot points out: One of the issues facing the areas affected by flooding is how to deal with the aftermath of the catastrophic deluge. With highways damaged by flood waters, railways unusable and ports cut off from the rest of Canada, it could take weeks and even months for things to get back to normal. Terry Glavin, at the National Post, has a dispatch on the sheer scale of the unfolding disaster in British Columbia: At some point in the coming days the penny will drop, and we’ll all be seized of the implications attending to the ongoing disaster on Canada’s west coast. First the rain, then the wind, and soon, everything will be freezing. For starters, if you think the Canadian economy is beset by global “supply chain” bottlenecks now, you just wait. The Port of Vancouver, North Fraser, Fraser-Surrey Docks and Deltaport are now cut off from the rest of Canada, by road and by rail. Both CN Rail and CP Rail are assessing the extent of the damage to their rail lines in the Fraser Valley and Fraser Canyon districts. Neither company knows when the trains will be moving again. The worst rail disruptions may last only a few days, but the Coquihalla Highway — the main road route connecting Metro Vancouver with British Columbia’s southern interior and points east, with roughly three-quarters of a million commercial truck transits every year — is gone. Deputy British Columbia Premier Mike Farnsworth says it may take “several weeks or months” to re-open the highway. These are some of the images emerging of the situation in Abbotsford, where flooding has left thousands of farm animals stranded. There have been reports of dairy farmers struggling to get their animals to safety after being stranded by the floods. Darcy Matheson, from the Daily Hive in Vancouver, tweeted: The Daily Hive reports: Abbotsford, in the heart of BC’s Fraser Valley, is a major hub for agriculture in the province, with many large scale dairy, livestock and poultry operations. Those operations can contain thousands of animals — one single chicken farm can house more than 15,000 birds, for instance — and many are in the Sumas Prairie, which is largely submerged after an “atmospheric river” resulted in widespread flooding. Since then, the Abbotsford mayor has reportedly asked farmers to leave their cattle behind and save themselves. Mike Lindblom has been covering the Pacific north-west floods for the Seattle Times and summed up what it had been like in the north of Washington state up against the Canadian border like this: An estimated 75% of homes in Sumas sustained water damage, a dozen train cars derailed, and electric power stopped in what officials from the border town of 1,300 people called a devastating event. City Hall is full of water. Highway 9 and its Canadian border crossing remained closed. But he did have some reasonably good news for the weather outlook for later in the week, which will be a relief to residents and first responders. Mostly clear skies are predicted for the next several days, said National Weather Service meteorologist Mike McFarland. A possible quarter-inch of rain could fall late Thursday, but that’s hydrologically insignificant after the region endured two “atmospheric rivers” of rain, he said. There remain some warnings in place – the Skagit flood warning stays in effect until Thursday. “Bad things can still happen,” McFarland said. “It’s too early to relax if you’re anywhere around the Skagit and the Nooksack rivers.” Our community team are keen to hear your stories if you have been affected by the Pacific north-west storm and resultant floods. They would like to hear from you whether you live or work in the area, or are helping with search and rescue efforts with the emergency services. The details of how to get in touch are here: Tell us – how have you been affected by the Pacific north-west storm? The downpour on the western seaboard of Canada and Washington state was caused by what is know as an “atmospheric river”. This carries a large amount of water from the sea, and usually releases it as rain or snow when it reaches land. However, there are factors that have made this particular incident so severe. Over at Canada’s Globe and Mail, their environment specialists spoke to experts who explained it like this: Much of the affected area had experienced drought just months earlier, accompanied by wildfire in some cases. Armel Castellan at Environment Canada said this reduced vegetation and primed soils for structural failure. “I’m not surprised to see the releases of landslides and mudslides and debris flows in the Fraser Valley, the Coquihalla and the Lytton corridor and so on,” he said. Castellan added that many affected areas previously had snowfall, including at mid-elevations on mountainsides. “When you dump a lot of rain on that snow, it melts very quickly,” he said. Compounding matters, much of British Columbia has already experienced a particularly wet autumn. “The soil was already saturated when this rainfall event came,” said Jeremy Venditti, a professor of environmental science at Simon Fraser University’s Centre for Natural Hazards Research. “And so the water had nowhere to go but run off into rivers, ditches and creeks.” Leyland Cecco in Toronoto wrote a piece for us yesterday which has been widely shared on social media, explaining some of the human-made factors that have also gone into causing this disaster. Read Leyland Cecco’s piece here: ‘A tipping point’: how poor forestry fuels floods and fires in western Canada One of the issues that authorities face in trying to evacuate people during a weather emergency like this is a fear of looting, one that has been expressed by some residents in Merritt, British Columbia. Penny Daflos reports for CTV News Vancouver that a Merritt resident called Darsell Poittris told her “More than half the town’s gone, it seems like an open door for come take what you want. Every accommodation we called was sold out so where do you go? I’d rather be in my house having these issues than in my car with my animals and my kids.” Public Safety Minister Mike Farnworth has attempted to reassure residents, saying that “The Royal Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) are on patrol, they are in the communities that they are protecting so they are very much alive to the concerns and situations of residents. People should have every confidence the RCMP are there in their communities protecting life and protection property.” Snowfall in the area has exacerbated the difficult conditions, and civic officials have warned that a failed sewage treatment plant has contaminated the waters. There’s also been at least one bridge collapse as a result of the floodwater. Here is how local news station CTV News Vancouver has been reporting the situation in Abbotsford after the mayor issued an evacuation warning, citing the risk of Barrowtown Pump Station failing. They wrote: First responders believe there are many people who remain in the evacuated area, including an unconfirmed number who require water rescue due to previous flooding from the intense storm that bombarded the province on Sunday and Monday. The city described the Barrowtown Pump Station as a “critical piece of infrastructure” preventing Sumas Lake from reforming, and said the failure of even one of its four pumps would result in quickly rising water levels in the Sumas Prairie, which has been under an evacuation order since Tuesday morning. Abbotsford Mayor Henry Braun said Abbotsford’s engineering team is working hard to keep the pump station operational, but that there’s no telling how long they will be able to sustain it. “If there is an overflow into the pump station – that water level is now about a metre below – this situation will become critical very quickly,” the mayor said. “Even at four pumps running full bore, that water has continued to rise.” The Sumas Prairie was created in the early twentieth century when the low-lying freshwater Lake Sumas was drained. The latest Associated Press despatch from the affected area reports that fast-rising water levels from a Sumas River in Washington state overwhelmed rescuers in Abbotsford, British Columbia, on Tuesday, where 1,100 homes were evacuated. Those residents joined thousands of others in the province who were forced from their homes by floods or landslides starting Sunday night. Abbotsford Mayor Henry Braun said that impassable highways were creating havoc as authorities tried to get people to evacuation sites. “It breaks my heart to see what’s going on in our city,” he said. Southwest of Sumas, Washington, a 59-year-old man from Everson identified by police as Jose Garcia remained missing after his truck was swept into a flooded field and he had been clinging to a tree. On the US side crews partially reopened the West Coast’s main north-south highway, Interstate 5, near Bellingham, Washington, following its complete closure overnight because of mudslide debris. The northbound lanes remained closed Tuesday evening as crews continued working. You can get a glimpse of the impact of the flooding from this satellite image of the greater Vancouver area in British Columbia that has been released by the European Union’s Earth Observation Programme, taken by the Copernicus Sentinel-2 satellites. Hello, and welcome to our coverage of the ongoing flooding situation in western Canada and Washington state in the US, where severe rainstorms have left at least one person dead, and there are reports of more missing. Residents in the Sumas Prairie neighborhood in Abbotsford, British Columbia have been told to evacuate because of fears that the Barrowtown Pump Station will fail and let in excess water from the Fraser River enter the already flooded area. Other areas were told to evacuate on Monday evening. Two motorways connecting Vancouver have been closed, and British Columbia’s minister of transportation, Rob Fleming, has told a news conference it was the “worst weather storm in a century”.Labor frontbencher Ed Husic has accused the prime minister of trying to establish “some sort of moral equivalency like what we saw with Donald Trump at Charlottesville”. His comments come after Morrison told reporters he had “no tolerance” for violent, anti-government protests when asked about sustained civil unrest in Victoria. But the prime minister said it was now time for “Australians to take their lives back” and for governments to wind down pandemic management. Husic told the ABC he was “stunned” and “alarmed” by Morrison empathising with community frustration at a time when rising extremism “represents a threat to democracy – where people will cross the line beyond protests to violence and … threaten parliamentarians in the conduct of their duty”. The Labor frontbencher said when protests involved people wielding nooses it was not a time for “political messaging to be woven in”. “I just think it’s wrong and it’s something I have been concerned about … for a couple of years now and have been saying post-Christchurch – this is something we need to take on,” Husic said. “The minute an Australian’s life is threatened … you deal with this strongly, firstly, in terms of force of law, and secondly, you need to do the patient work behind the scenes in terms of de-radicalisation and working out how to defuse this”. A pandemic management bill introduced by Victoria’s Andrews government has triggered significant and sustained protests in Melbourne. Demonstrators have compared the Victorian premier to Hitler and one demonstration included a gallows prop, protesters posing with nooses, and chants of “Hang Dan Andrews”. The Age has reported that counter-terrorism officials have charged a Victorian man who encouraged anti-lockdown protesters to bring firearms to parliament and kill Andrews, and are continuing to investigate other alleged extremists involved in the protests. Speaking to reporters in Sydney on Thursday, Morrison said Australia was “a civil, peaceful society” where disagreements were not handled with violence. He said disputes needed to be ventilated respectfully “no matter how frustrated people might be”. Morrison said he did not support state Liberals endorsing the protests or associating themselves with extremist messaging. But Morrison also declared it was time for the governments of Australia to allow people to make their own choices. The prime minister said Australians had “done an amazing job” during the coronavirus pandemic “but now it’s time for governments to step back and for Australians to take their lives back.” “Over the last couple of years, governments have been telling Australians what to do,” Morrison said. “Now there has been a need for that as we have gone through the pandemic, but the time is now to start rolling all of that back.” “We now have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world, we have one of the strongest economies to come through the pandemic and we have one of the lowest fatality rates from Covid in the world.” Morrison on Thursday dissociated his government from measures such as vaccine mandates, even though the commonwealth sought a vaccination mandate for aged care workers. The prime minister said apart from very limited circumstances, “We aren’t in favour of mandatory vaccines imposed by the government.” “Businesses can make their own choices on the law but we aren’t about telling Australians what to do,” the prime minister said. “Vaccines only are mandatory in cases where you’ve got health workers that are working with vulnerable people.” Morrison said as the proportion of Australians being vaccinated headed for 80%, “Australians can have their lives back” “They should be able to go to get a cup of coffee in Brisbane, when you’re over 80%, regardless of whether you’ve had the vaccines or not.” The contentious Victorian legislation is intended to replace the state of emergency legislation underpinning the state’s public health response. But the disgraced former Labor powerbroker Adem Somyurek has revealed he intends to torpedo the proposal. The NSW government this week also considered a proposal for some emergency powers to be extended – but that extension was delayed after a party room backlash.Top story: Outside work limit goes to standards committee Good morning, I’m Warren Murray working away at my one and only paid job. Fewer than 10 MPs are likely to be affected by Boris Johnson’s proposed rule changes on keeping second jobs within “reasonable limits”, analysis of the register of interests suggests. On Wednesday MPs voted for it 297 to nil. Final details are to be drawn up by the cross-party committee on standards. But analysis of what is known suggests the impact on the 99 MPs with second jobs could be severely limited. The cabinet minister Anne-Marie Trevelyan suggested the changes could mean a restriction on paid outside work limiting it to, for example, fewer than 20 hours a week. That would only cover Geoffrey Cox, and theoretically let him cut back his hours and retain his main outside work for the British Virgin Islands, worth £400,000 a year for 40 hours a month. Many MPs earn high wages for a small number of hours, so would also be out of reach of the proposed changes. Sir Graham Brady, the chair of the Conservative’s committee of backbenchers, has faced questions over £800 an hour he received from a company run by a constituent amid a lack of clarity over the nature of the business. Brady has declared that he receives £10,000 a year for 12 hours’ work for Snowshill Allied Holdings, run by Michael Goldstone and described by Companies House as providing “management consultancy activities”. Brady said Goldstone was “a close personal friend” whom he was paid to advise. “He has retained me to give occasional advice on marketing and communications to Snowshill Holdings for the last few years, initially in relation to Aquarium Software, a business in which Snowshill Holdings no longer has an interest … I have always been scrupulous in declaring any interests and following the letter and the spirit of the rules in the code of conduct.” Goldstone told the Guardian that he paid Brady for informal advice because of their friendship and considered the rate fair. He said that Brady had never brought him any business or intervened politically on his behalf and never would. Brady called an emergency meeting of the Tory backbenchers’ committee on Wednesday to discuss the plans to crack down on second jobs. * * * ‘Shower of a government’ – The government is due today to announce its much-anticipated integrated rail plan. Reports have suggested it has dropped its commitment to the eastern leg of HS2 to Leeds and may not fully go ahead with Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR), which would go through Bradford. Bradford is Britain’s seventh-biggest city but according to a national data analysis of rail journeys it is the worst-connected major city in the UK. Campaigners argue that NPR would boost the Bradford district economy by £30bn over 10 years, create 27,000 jobs and cut 44,000 daily car journeys between the city and Leeds. But local politicians are braced for bad news. “It was never going to happen,” said retired yoga teacher Jane Ayers, as she walked out of the railway station concourse. “It is all just a game this shower of a government play all of the time.” * * * Masks work well – Mask-wearing is the single most effective public health measure at tackling Covid, reducing incidence by 53%, the first global study of its kind shows. The virus is still killing thousands of people a day, as well as infecting 50 million people worldwide every 90 days due to the highly transmissible Delta variant. Researchers reported in the BMJ their findings that mask-wearing, social distancing and handwashing are all effective at curbing cases, with mask-wearing the most effective. The researchers say further work is needed to assess other measures – including quarantine and isolation, universal lockdowns, and closures of borders, schools, and workplaces – because reconciling the data from different studies is difficult. Continued public health measures remain important because vaccines, while safe and effective, do not confer 100% protection and most countries have not vaccinated everyone. * * * Murdoch to Trump: move on – Rupert Murdoch has said Donald Trump should stop focusing “on the past” in a rare public rebuke of the former US president. Addressing the News Corp annual meeting, Murdoch said: “The current American political debate is profound, whether about education or welfare or economic opportunity. It is crucial that conservatives play an active, forceful role in that debate, but that will not happen if President Trump stays focused on the past. The past is the past, and the country is now in a contest to define the future.” Murdoch has made few public comments about Trump, whose presidency was championed by most of the biggest commentators on Fox News. According to the biographer Michael Wolff, in private Murdoch has called Trump “a fucking idiot”. * * * New injections control HIV – People living with HIV in Britain are to be offered treatment by injection every two months. Trials of the antiretroviral drugs cabotegravir with rilpivirine showed they work as effectively as the daily tablets currently used. HIV attacks the immune system and is still incurable but researchers found patients who had the new treatment could reach a point where the virus particles in their blood were so low they could not be detected or transmitted between people. The treatment is the first long-acting, injectable treatment for adults with HIV. * * * ‘They should really care’ – Would-be pet owners should blow the whistle on dodgy sellers, the UK’s leading vet has suggested. After the Covid pandemic fuelled a boom in pet ownership, research from the Kennel Club has suggested one in four pandemic puppy owners might have bought from a puppy farm. “If they’re a good breeder, they will be asking you as many questions as you should be asking them because they should really care about the home that the puppies or kittens are going to,” said Christine Middlemiss, the UK’s chief veterinary officer. The Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs has launched a video to warn would-be pet owners about unscrupulous sellers. Its campaign urges would-be owners to, among other things, visit their prospective pet at its home with its mother, check animals are at least eight weeks old before they are allowed to be taken away, and search the name and phone number of breeders online to ensure they are not selling lots of animals. Today in Focus podcast: Humanity on the line How the humanitarian crisis playing out on the border of Poland and Belarus became the latest front in the battle between President Lukashenko and the European Union. Lunchtime read: ‘Annoying snobs was part of the fun’ As the TV series Get Back recasts the Fab Four’s final days in a more positive light, the ex-Beatle Paul McCartney remembers the responses to their historic gig above the streets of London. Sport The head of the Women’s Tennis Association (WTA) has expressed increased concern for the welfare of Peng Shuai after a letter presented as being from the Chinese player – but widely doubted to be genuine – appeared on state media. Tom Harrison faces the prospect of a county rebellion and possible calls to resign amid growing anger over the England and Wales Cricket Board’s handling of the Yorkshire racism scandal. The BBC has postponed the return of Radio 5 Live’s Tuffers and Vaughan Cricket Show amid ongoing turmoil in the corporation over how best to deal with a racism allegation against the expert summariser Michael Vaughan. The former England cricketer Ebony Rainford-Brent has been subjected to horrific abuse in the form of a racist hate letter, telling her to “leave our country”. Rassie Erasmus’s reputation has been shredded after World Rugby threw the book at the South Africa director of rugby for his outburst during the Lions tour and found him guilty of making threats to a referee. Online sleuths have this week turned their attentions to an unusual new case: the mystery of the Manchester City “decentralised finance trading analysis” partnership. Amateur detectives have been scouring the internet to find the digital footprint of a company called 3Key, who last week were announced by City as a new official regional partner. Business Asian shares have mostly declined after stock indexes shuffled lower on Wall Street. Australia’s S&amp;P/ASX 200 edged up 0.2% in early trading. Recent government data have shown the coronavirus pandemic continues to hurt the Japanese economy. A supply crunch in chips and other parts needed to produce autos, a mainstay of the world’s third-largest economy, is one reason. This morning in London, going by futures trading the FTSE looks like being flat to a few points lower. The pound is worth $1.348 and €1.191 at time of writing. The papers Our print edition of the Guardian leads today with “Social care cap could expose poorer homeowners to ‘catastrophic’ costs”. The move will save the government hundreds of millions of pounds but leave many poorer pensioner homeowners having to sell up as they face paying the same for their old age care as wealthier people. Boris Johnson is being warned that MPs in the so-called red wall could revolt when the changes are put to a vote. Also on the front: the Pacific north-west floods that have cut off Vancouver and plunged the Canadian province of British Columbia into a state of emergency. “Someone’s blown me up” – that’s what David Perry said, according to the Mirror, after staggering alive from his exploded taxi in Liverpool. “£2,000 cost of living shock” – the Daily Mail, whose editor has just been ousted, says this is what Britons are facing as “inflation soars, tax hikes kick in and interest rates rise”. “PM under siege from own party” says the i of the sleaze saga. “Boris – it’s been a ‘car crash’ on sleaze” – that’s the Express. The Telegraph and the Times pick up the “crashed the car” theme on their fronts too, while the latter’s lead story is “Migrants to be held in Albania” – the Home Office is reportedly seeking a deal with Albania to house people while their asylum claims are processed. The thinking is that it might deter people from crossing the Channel in small boats. The Metro has “InCELLate Britain” as Insulate Britain protesters are sent to jail for Christmas. “Amazon to stop taking Visa credit cards as battle intensifies over fees” – that’s the Financial Times’ front-page take on this story. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendTelevision has long had a fixation with the high school years, from teen soaps (Gossip Girl, Riverdale, One Tree Hill) to campy romps (Glee) to dramas that are essentially prestige teen soaps (Euphoria). But for the countless portrayals of American high school life, very few series have attempted to capture the subsequent four years at university. That’s in part because college remains a much less universal experience than high school; less than a third of Americans have an undergraduate degree. And it’s in part because there are fewer common templates for a college story; ABC Family’s Greek (2007-2011) “cracked the college TV show in a way no series had before or has since”. wrote Alison Herman in a retrospective for the Ringer on the 10th anniversary of its finale earlier this year, by focusing on the heightened emotions and inflated self-importance amid the fraught and often ridiculous subset of sororities and fraternities. HBO Max’s The Sex Lives of College Girls, the latest production from Mindy Kaling, similarly aims for universal feelings of the transition years through a narrow and ego-inflated slice of college, with middling, uneven results. The 10-part series, co-created by Kaling and Justin Noble (writing alum of Brooklyn 99 and Never Have I Ever, Kaling’s debut high school series for Netflix) gestures toward the general – the idiosyncratic, messy, confusing, headstrong, incipient sex lives of young women who are no longer teenagers but very much not adults – yet depicts a highly rarefied college experience. Fictional Essex College, all gothic buildings, autumn-flecked quads and preppy sweaters in Vermont, is clearly modeled on Kaling’s alma mater, Dartmouth, the small Ivy League college in New Hampshire; the four college girls of the title, random freshmen roommates and oil-and-water friends, are loose sketches of private school admissions checkboxes. There’s Leighton (Reneé Rapp), a New York legacy student and mashup of Blair Waldorf and Regina George (who Rapp played in the Broadway adaptation of Mean Girls) with the twist of closeted sexual identity. Leighton’s older brother Nico (Gavin Leatherwood), senior frat bro and debonair French tutor, catches the eye of the awkward, earnest Kimberly (Pauline Chalamet, sister of Timotheé), a strait-laced valedictorian from small-town Arizona on financial aid and a work-study plan. Soccer star Whitney (Alyah Chanelle Scott), the daughter of a US senator, struggles to escape her mother’s influence, fit in to an overwhelmingly white environment, and juggle an affair with her assistant coach. Bela (Amrit Kaur), a comedy diehard who tells her conservative, Indian immigrant parents that she’s studying neurobiology, reads as reflection of Kaling’s youth – sexually inexperienced and hungry, for boys and for entry into an elite humor magazine. The girls are initially skeptical of each other, particularly Leighton, whose bitchy and entitled shield is so thick it takes several episodes to crack. Yet they all have sex on their mind – the sex they crave but aren’t having (Bela), are waiting for (Kimberly), are hiding (Leighton), are getting burned by (Whitney); the sex they’re talking about at frat parties and dining hall debriefs, and the sexism that barricades the social spaces and comedy clubs. The four leads have spoken about their work with an intimacy coordinator, now thankfully becoming standard in productions, and it shows; direction by Kabir Akhtar, Zoe Cassavetes, and David Gordon Green includes oblique nudity – bare backs, side boobs, butts – that never feels exploitative or undue. The Sex Lives of College Girls shares several qualities with Never Have I Ever, for better or for worse: its tone skitters and jolts in the first episodes, trying to force horniness and deliver punchlines with jokes that belie its creators’ age (the pilot includes a bit on Ben Affleck’s Phoenix tattoo; one character is obsessed with Seth Meyers). The obligatory heartthrob looks years older than the girls. The actors are winning but struggle to overcome overdrawn quirks that begin to soften midway through the season, as their friendships begin to bloom (six of the 10 half-hour episodes were available for review). And like the Netflix series, The Sex Lives of College Girls is defined and buffered by self-absorption, from Leighton and Bela’s bullheadedness to its exclusive setting. The Ivy League-ness of the Essex College experience makes the whole enterprise feel a bit like a narcissism project, one that tries to reframe its creators origin story for Gen Z yet feels more like a parody of shticks for a limited audience. Full disclosure: I went to one of these schools, yet even as the micro-target demo, I’d much rather see the messiness, pressures and revelations of sex filtered through frat houses, or game days, or the weight of anonymity (and debt) that characterizes college life for the bulk of American undergraduates. Maybe that’s for another show – if The Sex Lives of College Girls knows one thing, it’s that young women have a near bottomless and underfed appetite for material that captures their desires, as spiky and self-defeating and euphoric as they can be. Like college, the series can be a bumpy ride, but offers enough promise to transcend its freshman offering. The Sex Lives of College Girls starts on HBO Max on 18 November with a UK date to be announcedEnvironment groups, the NSW opposition and an independent MP have lashed the Perrottet government for proposed changes to laws governing the state’s national parks. The bill, introduced by the environment minister Matt Kean late on Wednesday, would give the minister greater powers to approve activities within parks – such as new visitor infrastructure – that are otherwise inconsistent with park management plans. It would also establish a nonprofit entity to accept donations for conservation and management of parks. Further reforms would allow management actions within national parks to generate biodiversity credits that could be sold under the state’s offsets scheme to compensate for habitat destruction caused by development elsewhere. “It’s potentially turning our protected area network into an opportunity for massive, statewide greenwashing,” National Parks Association executive officer Gary Dunnett said. The association described the bill as the most expansive changes proposed to the state’s national parks system in at least 15 years. “This is absolutely groundbreaking and one of the shocking things about this is that changes of such consequence have been presented in a bill without any prior consultation with key conservation or other stakeholders,” Dunnett said. “This is something we have just not seen in the parks act before. This goes way beyond anything any other environment minister has had at their beck and call.” The proposed reforms were introduced as part of a larger bill that would make necessary changes to legislation to expand the Gardens of Stone national park. The association welcomed the expansion of the park and other smaller changes that would improve ecological monitoring and protection of environmentally sensitive areas across the parks system. But Dunnett said several other proposed reforms had caused major concern. They include: Reducing the public consultation period for plans of management for parks and reserves from 90 days to 28. Giving the minister power to approve conservation actions and visitor infrastructure that are not consistent with the plan of management in certain circumstances. Allowing the minister to create and sell carbon credits and biodiversity offset credits in parks and reserves. Labor and the independent MLC Justin Field said while they were supportive of the expansion of the Gardens of Stone, they would oppose the bill in its current form, noting the changes were introduced without consultation. They were especially concerned by a provision that would allow work in national parks to generate biodiversity offset credits. The government says credits could only be generated for activities that are considered to be over and above the standard management work already undertaken in national parks and reserves to deliver the additional environmental benefit required under offset policies. That could include restoring land that had been degraded by past uses such as forestry or more intensive work in areas of national parks where standard management was not enough to restore biodiversity. It also says any offsets on parks would be legally enforceable and scrutinised through mandatory annual reporting to ensure actions proposed as offsets were actually delivered. But Field said any environmental management within protected areas was the core business of the national parks service and should not be claimed as offsets for habitat destruction. “I just can’t conceive how you can claim additionality here,” he said. “I don’t think they’ve taken into account, or they don’t care, that this will either deliver no net benefit or it will deliver a net loss across the landscape.” Another proposal to set up a not-for-profit entity for donations to parks should only be put towards acquiring new land, not day-to-day operations that were the responsibility of government, he said. Matt Kean told Guardian Australia the government wants to “improve the visitor experience for everyone, including those people living with a disability. “This bill is about carefully modernising how we manage our national parks making them more accessible and vastly improving conservation outcomes to ensure zero extinctions and increased biodiversity for future generations,” he said “We are committed to working with all stakeholders to make our national parks a great drawcard for everyone who cares about the environment, conservation and biodiversity.” Field and Labor said they were also concerned the plan to generate biodiversity credits had been proposed at a time when the offsets scheme was subject to several reviews, including by integrity bodies, an upper house inquiry, and multiple internal inquiries. Kean told a budget estimates hearing last month the government intended to reform the scheme after a Guardian Australia investigation revealed “appalling practices”. “Given the serious problems with the biodiversity offsetting scheme and that it is subject to review and investigation, we are wary about allowing this to be included in such a far-reaching bill,” Labor’s environment spokesperson Penny Sharpe said. “We support the creation of the Gardens of Stone state conservation area but it should not be used as a Trojan horse to fundamentally change the way that national park plans of management are created and modified.” Chris Gambian, the chief executive of the Nature Conservation Council, said nature conservation was an essential service that taxpayers expected governments to provide. “Pushing that off budget is unacceptable and unsustainable,” he said.Ten people were found dead in the lower deck of a severely overcrowded wooden boat off the coast of Libya, Doctors Without Borders (MSF) has reported. According to survivors, those who died on Tuesday suffocated after 13 hours on the cramped lower deck, where there had been a strong smell of fuel. In a difficult operation, less than 30 nautical miles from Libyan shores, the MSF team onboard the charity’s chartered search and rescue vessel Geo Barents reached the boat carrying more than 100 asylum seekers attempting to reach Europe. Survivors told rescuers that there were people crammed on the lower deck who were unresponsive. After 99 people, all showing signs of acute stress and trauma, were brought on board the Geo Barents, the rescue team found 10 dead bodies at the bottom of the boat. “It took us almost two hours to retrieve them and to bring them on board, so they can have a dignified burial once arrived onshore,” said Fulvia Conte, MSF deputy search and rescue team leader on the Geo Barents. “It was horrific and infuriating at the same time. This is another tragedy at sea that could have been avoided.” Abdoulaye, one of the last survivors to leave the boat, barely had the time to understand what had happened to his fellow travellers before the MSF rescuers took his arm and helped him into the rescue lifeboat. “Let me see their bodies,” he told the team. “These are my brothers. We come from the same place, we went through Libya together. I need to tell their families they are dead. Please let me see them.” Some had to identify the body of a younger brother or friend who had died in front of them a few hours earlier. The volunteer-run Mediterranean rescue hotline Alarm Phone accused the European authorities of ignoring the distress call: “We had raised the alarm, several hours before, but no one answered. We are fed up with the announcements of these deaths that could be avoided.” Caroline Willemen, MSF project coordinator on the Geo Barents, said: “We are once more witnessing Europe’s unwillingness to provide the much needed dedicated and proactive search and rescue capacity in the central Mediterranean.” In less than 24 hours, Geo Barents performed three rescues in the Maltese and Libyan search and rescue zones, bringing 186 people safely on board, including the survivors from the boat where 10 died. Those rescued were from Guinea, Nigeria, Ivory Coast, Somalia and Syria, and included several children, the youngest only 10 months old. With the attention of the European authorities focused on the humanitarian crisis on the Polish-Belarusian border, Geo Barents, with nearly 200 asylum seekers and 10 dead bodies, must urgently find a place of safety to disembark. An estimated 1,225 people have died or gone missing while attempting to cross the central Mediterranean so far this year. Since 2014, 22,825 people have gone missing or died on this route. “It has become the deadliest migration route, and it is shameful,” Willemen said.A steep rise in Covid-19 cases in Europe should serve as a warning that the US could also see significant increases in coronavirus cases this winter, particularly in the nation’s colder regions, scientists say. However, there is more cause for optimism as America enters its second pandemic winter, even in the face of likely rises in cases. Evidence shows vaccine-conferred protection against hospitalization and death remains high several months after inoculation, vaccines for children older than five can reduce Covid transmission, and new antiviral medications hold the promise of making Covid-19 a treatable disease. “I do expect to see cases increasing – we’ve started to see this in the last week or so,” said Dr David Dowdy, an associate professor of epidemiology at Johns Hopkins University. “I don’t think what we’re seeing in Europe means we’re in for a huge surge of serious illness and death as we [saw] here in the US,” last winter. In the last three weeks, new cases have increased in several cold weather states across New England and the midwest. However, vaccines remain roughly 85% effective at preventing hospitalization and death. “Even if cases go up this winter, we’re very unlikely to see the overcrowded [intensive care units] and morgues of a year ago,” said Dowdy. Vaccine-conferred immunity against infection may allow cases to rise, he said, but far fewer people will need hospitalization. The vast majority of people who were hospitalized or died from Covid-19 this summer, more than 90% in one CDC study, were not fully vaccinated. “People can still get Covid, there can still be breakthrough infections, but the great news is if you have been vaccinated you are very much less likely to be hospitalized or have severe infection,” said Rupali Limaye, an associate scientist at Johns Hopkins University and an expert in vaccine communication. Nevertheless, vaccine distribution is highly uneven across the US. Just 58.6% of the nation is vaccinated, lower than vaccination rates in some European nations now struggling with an increase in Covid-19 cases, such as in Germany and France. “I’ve been predicting a pretty bad winter wave again, and it looks like it’s starting to happen,” said Dr Peter Hotez, dean of the National School of Tropical Medicine at Baylor College of Medicine and co-director of the Texas Children’s hospital’s center for vaccine development. “There’s just too many unvaccinated and too many partially vaccinated [people]” to stop the “aggressive” Delta variant, Hotez said. What’s more, even if the impacts of Covid-19 are dampened this winter, there still could be a devastating loss of life. A prediction from among the most respected long-term Covid-19 forecasters in the country found an additional 100,000 people may die between November 2021 and March 2022. “We see increasing evidence in the northern hemisphere that the expected winter surge has started to unfold,” said Dr Christopher JL Murray, lead modeler at the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) at the University of Washington, as he introduced a new forecast. “Reductions in cases and new infections and hospitalizations have stopped in the US and started to turn around.” IHME’s projection, which Murray described as “optimistic”, forecast 863,000 cumulative deaths from the pandemic by March 2022. Already, more than 765,000 people in the US have died from Covid-19. IHME’s worst-case scenario predicts hundreds of thousands more deaths, for more than 1m pandemic deaths by March 2022. “Many countries in western Europe are even farther ahead of us in the sense that the numbers are going up quite quickly in the places like the Netherlands and Denmark, but also in Germany now and a number of other countries,” said Murray. Nearly two-thirds of the 1.9m new infections globally are on the European continent, the World Health Organization said. Further, there are few calls and little appetite to reinstate social restrictions. The promise of vaccines that could reduce transmission of Covid-19 prompted local governments around the country to drop social distancing and mask restrictions. That trend has held even as an emerging body of evidence showed the vaccine’s ability to prevent infection with Covid-19 waned over time, and the focus of vaccine efficacy shifted to the steady protection conferred against hospitalization and death. The risk of a “fifth wave” and waning immunity has now prompted a call for “booster” shots, or third vaccine doses, for everyone who received mRNA vaccines, those developed by Pfizer or Moderna. The Food and Drug Administration has already authorized booster doses for people older than 65 or who work in high-risk settings. Everyone older than 18 who received the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine is eligible for a second dose, as evidence shows its effectiveness against serious disease may wane over time. Booster doses are effective at increasing antibody levels, but are not the most effective way to curb transmission of Covid-19. The best way to curb transmission, experts have said repeatedly, is to get new people vaccinated. Experts now widely believe Covid-19 will be endemic and circulate for decades to come, though the severity of infection may wane over many years. The Covid-19 pandemic may never be “over”, as many conceived early in the pandemic, Dowdy said. “The point is – when can we get this to a point where it’s tolerable to us as a society? And I think we may be closer to that point than we imagine. “Zero-Covid is not going to happen.”COAST Hats off to Harry’s in Portstewart With views of the Causeway Coast, the weathered, wood-panelled Harry’s Shack, overlooking Portstewart Strand beach, in Co Derry, serves seafood caught by local fishing boats, locally brewed beer (hello Lacada) and some lip-smacking cocktails. In summer, walk-ins are welcomed, DJs spin real records, the barbecue is sometimes fired up and there’s always a good gaggle of customers hanging around on the huge terrace just above the sand. It’s not new, new, perhaps, but Harry’s has become part of the local landscape during lockdown. Seafood scran in Portstewart Out of work and spurred on by local fisherman Peter Boston, who supplied them with a catch of lobster, Stevie and Rebekah McCarry put a message out on social media in lockdown that they were starting out as fishmongers, and within the hour they had sold the entire catch. They were the talk of the town. From there it’s been a whirlwind. Soon they were selling lobster rolls, monkfish ceviche and other dishes as Native Seafood &amp; Scran. Rebekah says: “We changed the menu up every day, depending on what the boats brought in, which made for a stressful, sometimes hilarious scramble as we shot off around the area to get the ingredients needed for each dish every morning.” There are now plans to open a proper sit-down restaurant in the old yacht club in September. Until then, you can buy seafood from the pod in front, where there are often queues round the corner. Beer for all in Portrush Opened in 2015, the beer from the community-owned Lacada Brewery in the seaside resort of Portrush, County Antrim, is not your standard fare. There are both the raspberry and the mango “smoothie” IPAs, for starters, plus a new line in sour beers, which can be found in many local pubs and shops. The brewery decided to press on with plans to upgrade and improve through lockdown, producing 26 new beers in a year. Stormont red tape doesn’t make it easy for microbreweries in the north, so there is no tap room at present, but as soon as it is feasible they will be running brewery tours again. Chocs away in Castlerock In January 2020 Geri Martin moved her bespoke chocolate business, the Chocolate Manor, to the coastal village of Castlerock, Co Derry, with a view to running chocolate experiences. “We were weeks away from our official opening when we closed due to Covid,” Geri says. “My team and I went home to home-school, and I didn’t know if we’d ever reopen.” But reopen they did, turning the premises into a chocolate shop and artisan food emporium supporting other businesses that are part of the Taste Causeway collective. Chocolate experiences – from alcohol and food pairings (whiskey and chocolate anyone?) to making your own box of chocolates – are also now up and running for private groups, and prices start at £25pp. Flying off the shellfish in Dundrum Though there is also a restaurant in Belfast, it’s the Mourne Seafood Bar in Dundrum, Newcastle, where you can try fresh shellfish in a pebble throw from the Co Down coast, that really suits the fresh-from-the-sea dishes. This year, as well as the restaurant, the company has also launched a hot food bar called Squid Shack a short walk away, where you can try classic fish and chips and favourites like salt’n’chilli boxes with a choice of squid or prawns. Perfect for customers who want to grab something and cross the road for dinner with views of Dundrum Bay. Paddle and baking in Strangford Lough If you like to work a little for your supper then these foodie adventures with Mobile Team Adventure, in which you do some coastal canoeing before landing ashore, learn how to make soda bread and then fill up on lashings of tea and homemade cake sound pretty perfect. Guests head out from Ballymorran Bay by canoe to Strangford Lough, a marine nature reserve where harbour seals, herons, occasional otters and even the odd surprise whale can be spotted, before popping to an island or two. Tracey is a local tour guide who runs cookery classes from her very own Farmhouse Kitchen. Three-hour canoe/cookery courses cost £65pp. CITY Hatch a plan in Belfast What began as a pop-up in February 2021 in the Cathedral Quarter’s Hill Street Hatch – a space that gives up-and-coming culinary talent the chance to test ideas without exorbitant costs – the Toast Office is here to stay. It was either that or Belfast would have had an angry mob of cheese toastie fans on its hands. These fully-loaded grilled cheese sandwiches use locally sourced, high-quality ingredients and have proved incredibly popular – the slow-cooked ham hock with Coolattin Irish cheddar certainly lives up to its “fancy ham and cheese” name. Now based in a permanent kiosk by the nearby Dark Horse pub, you can sit down and enjoy a pint with your sandwich or eat it as you tour some of Belfast’s famous sights. Food for your soul in south Belfast Set up in the summer of 2020 as an artist-run cafe and social space in a suburban neighbourhood of south Belfast, Fruit Shop is forging deep-rooted relationships with local producers and growers, while creating a place where the whole community can feel at ease. The cafe sells good coffee and has a mood-lifting brunch menu with excellent vegan options. The doughnuts have some of the most outlandish pastry and filling combos ever, and events such as last autumn’s Feast of Saxifrage, an art and food-sharing project as part of the Outburst Queer Arts festival, bring the residents of Galwally together through the age-old tradition of breaking bread. Cocktails and small plates in Derry In late 2019, David Lafferty finally realised a long-held dream to buy his own restaurant – the Castle Street Social – and then, well, we all know what happened. David just about made it through the first lockdown, but he then shrewdly prepared for the next one by launching a baked goods service through the restaurant, offering homemade bread and cakes to take away. Now people are allowed inside again, the restaurant, which sometimes collaborates with other food and drink producers, is building up a good reputation for its small plates, which use local produce, and fabulous cocktails – the strawberry and raspberry G and Tea, for instance, is inspired. In-off-the-streets food in Derry Derry’s food revolution may be slower than that of other cities, but street food here is finally catching [itself] on. Pyke ‘N’ Pommes is a case in point. Over the past eight or so years it’s gradually grown in status from selling food from an adapted van in an old car park to running out of a converted shipping container by the River Foyle with a doubledecker bus and DJ, to a proper, grown-up restaurant on the Strand Road in 2020. Don’t worry, the more rustic POD isn’t going anywhere, but now customers can also enjoy a restaurant environment as they tuck into wagyu beef burgers cooked from scratch (with meat from local breeder Joe McGinnis) without worrying about the weather. COUNTRY Cooking as therapy in Co Derry For several years former nurse Bronagh Duffin has been helping people “heal” through her cookery lessons in the countryside by recreating the warmth and love of her granny’s kitchen, with a griddle over an open fire, good food and plenty of craic. “It takes me back to those feelings of being safe by my granny’s side as she cooked,” she says, “and I want to transport my guests to a place that conjures up similar feelings for them.” Though lockdown forced many of the lessons on to the dreaded Zoom, now her Bakehouse classes such as “digging for gin”, in which guests forage for berries, and “family day out”, in which you’re encouraged to cook your meal of choice together, are to take place in person again, which sounds like good therapy to us. Coffee and s’mores in the Mountains of Mourne In the foothills of the Mountains of Mourne, hillwalkers have found this vintage horsebox a welcome sight over the past few months. The Hen and Cock Coffee Dock (named after nearby hills), run by couple Ally and Jamie, only set up shop in January this year but is doing a roaring trade selling coffee, cakes and milkshakes as more and more locals take to the hills. It’s a place particularly popular with families as Hen Mountain is a beginner’s mountain – “Take the path into the bog, it’s a dander walk, which is calm and peaceful” Ally says. And don’t forget to stop off on your way back – on Thursday evenings they do s’mores, which should be enough of a bribe for the kids. More than an apple a day in Co Armagh County Armagh is renowned for its Bramley apples and at Wee Buns Cookery School, just outside Moy in Dungannon (near the border with Tyrone), founder Mary Anne Mackle is hoping to connect visitors and the local community with the traditional recipes she grew up with after they’ve taken a tour of the orchard. As well as tasting some of the produce from the orchard – apple cider vinegar, chutney and apple jelly – you will also learn how to make a little-known (outside Armagh, anyway) recipe of potato apple bread (like apple tart but with potato bread in place of pastry). In harvest time guests can also come and help with apple picking. Half-day orchard and apple-baking tours are £70pp. High steaks at Hillyard in Co Down At the newly restored boutique guest house of Hillyard House, on the edge of the Castlewellan Forest Park, you can enjoy craft beers in the bar, or sit down for a locally sourced lunch or dinner in The Yard restaurant. Dundrum mussels and Portavogie prawns appeal on the menu, but it’s the meat really that takes centre stage here – ethically raised beef (farm to fork) hung for optimum time on the restaurant’s Himalayan salt seat ager before being cooked on the broiler makes for a really good steak. Whiskey (and gin) galore in Co Down Before craft beer and cider tours, Ireland is known for its whiskey, and if you’d like an alternative to touristy Bushmills then try the craft Hinch Distillery in the beautiful setting of Killaney Estate in Co Down. The county was once home to seven whiskey distilleries and this one hopes to be part of a revival of whiskey-making in Ireland, using traditional techniques but modern ambition. Water for the grain-to-glass whiskey comes from the Mourne mountains – the triple distillation process is adhered to, and you can taste the results on a tour. As expected, the distillery also makes gin, and on its gin tour you get to make your own, which you can take home with you. Whiskey tours from £18, gin experience £45.The incoming mayor of New York City thinks cryptocurrency and blockchain technology are the future. Eric Adams has advocated to reshape the city into a crypto hotspot, with crypto being taught in schools. He also plans to take his first three paychecks in bitcoin payment. Adams said in an interview that bitcoin was the “new way of paying for goods and services throughout the entire globe” and that schools “must” teach the technology behind it, as well as “this new way of thinking”. He’s not alone in America. The mayor of Miami announced in February that the city plans to accept tax payments in bitcoin and let employees draw their salary in the cryptocurrency. Crypto conferences like Bitcoin 2021 – billed as the biggest bitcoin event in history – have chosen Miami as their host city because the area has rolled out the red carpet for this industry. But not everyone is onboard with the crypto giddiness being expressed by America’s political class. Mining cryptocurrency is notoriously environmentally unfriendly, and in an era of rapid climate crisis, increasing the use of the technology could be hazardous. According to Digiconomist, a single bitcoin transaction uses the same amount of power that the average American household consumes in a month – which equals roughly a million times more in carbon emissions than a single credit card transaction. And globally, the carbon footprint of bitcoin mining is greater than that of the United Arab Emirates and falls just below the Netherlands’. People should be concerned about the environmental and climate impacts of “proof-of-work” cryptocurrency mining such as bitcoin, said Benjamin A Jones, an economist at the University of New Mexico. Such currencies require miners to compete to validate transactions on their blockchains, and that takes enormous, power-hungry servers. Bitcoin mining uses energy predominantly generated from fossil fuels, which creates air pollution and carbon emissions, said Jones. “These pollution emissions are harmful to human health outcomes and the carbon emissions lead to climate damages,” he added. Jones recently co-authored a paper that estimated that in 2018 each $1 of bitcoin value created was associated with $0.49 in health and climate damages in the US – meaning that the negative human health costs and climate impacts of bitcoin mining in the US were roughly half as large as the per-coin value. “This is a tremendous negative externality of bitcoin mining that is imposing significant societal costs on all of us,” he said, “even on those who do not use bitcoin or cryptocurrencies.” Since mining crypto requires so much power, it is often situated near the cheapest, least-regulated sources of energy. The damages Jones and his colleagues pinpointed arise from increased pollutants generated from the burning of fossil fuels used to produce energy. Exposure to pollutants such as fine particulate matter has been linked to increased risk of premature death. Last month, a group of 70 climate, economic and racial justice groups wrote a letter to Congress urging leaders to address the climate implications of cryptocurrency. The letter cites the extreme levels of carbon emissions, energy consumption and electronic waste generated by cryptocurrency usage, production and mining, especially the deeply energy-intensive proof of work process used by the two largest cryptocurrencies, bitcoin and ethereum. Crypto-related mining already has an impact on local communities such as Seneca Lake, New York, and Limestone and Jonesborough in Tennessee, through environmental destruction, noise pollution and plummeting property value, the letter says. Residents say that Seneca Lake has heated up so much due to the increased power demand that the lake feels like a hot tub. The power plant there is already increasing its carbon emissions, up almost tenfold in 2020. Texas has a problem too. After China’s crackdown on bitcoin mining, many miners moved to Texas, where the electrical grid is deregulated. Environmental groups say the extra pressure on Texas’s grid could cause more blackouts of the sort that happened in February, when households were plunged into dark and freezing circumstances. Other places around the country are restarting coal-fired plants to power bitcoin mining. “Cryptocurrency’s destructive impact on the environment is just another example of how corporations in a financialized economy will stop at nothing to create profits for investors, and how communities of color will ultimately pay the price,” Erika Thi Patterson of the Action Center on Race and the Economy wrote in the letter. “Cryptocurrencies and their miners rely on harmful fuels like coal that produce toxic emissions linked to asthma, cancer, acid rain, and climate change. In doing so, cryptocurrency is exacerbating decades of environmental racism and fueling climate chaos.” The deputy legislative director of the Sierra Club, Patrick Drupp, said: “It is beyond absurd that, as we speak and as the climate crisis only deepens, fossil fuel power plants are having their lives extended and even reopened in order to virtually ‘mine’ cryptocurrency. At a time when financial regulators ought to be doing everything possible to help tackle the climate crisis, it’s clear that the status quo of letting bitcoin and other cryptocurrency miners pollute our climate and communities at an exponential rate is unsustainable, unwise and in need of urgent action.” Embracing cryptocurrencies means that America’s political leaders and policymakers must confront the environmental and climate damages generated through mining operations, says Jones. “For bitcoin in particular, one cannot embrace the coin without also acknowledging its impacts on the environment.”I run an independent pharmacy and was approached by Covid PCR testing firm, Rightangled, to sell its fit-to-fly tests. It is on the government-approved list of providers, so I paid for the tests upfront to sell on. Two customers bought five tests between them and didn’t receive the results on time, causing them to miss their flight. Rightangled refuses to refund them. I have therefore had to reimburse both £600 of my own money to protect my business reputation. VS, London Rightangled has earned itself free publicity in this column before by dint of its disappointing service, and refusal to engage with customers it has let down. It has never yet responded to my requests for a comment, but an automated email sent to customers who complain blames an “inundation” of orders. Nevertheless, the website is still selling PCR travel tests at £120 a pop and still reassuring customers that “we know speed is important”, while stating in its terms and conditions that it operates a strict “no refund policy” if results are delayed. What is extraordinary is that it remains on the government list of private PCR providers. While the UK Health and Security Agency (UKHSA), the government body which replaced Public Health England, insists it does not endorse or approve listed firms, its consumer guidance suggests otherwise. Those needing to book a private PCR test before, or after, travel, are told to ensure that the firm they choose is on the official list, “which means it will have been assessed against the government’s minimum standards by the UK Accreditation Service (UKAS)”. Listed providers will, says the website, either be accredited or in the process of becoming so. Except many are not, and never will be. UKAS told me that it only accredits companies who actually carry out the tests, not agents like Rightangled that subcontract to labs. UKAS, therefore, has no powers to investigate or sanction Rightangled. So how do firms get on to this all-important list? Simply by filling out a form declaring that it will meet minimum standards. Rightangled’s website assures customers it is registered with the Care Quality Commission (CQC). That’s not strictly true, either. The CQC regulates its other healthcare services. But, in December last year, its oversight of eligible PCR testing firms was transferred to UKAS. Rightangled, as I said, is not an eligible testing firm. The government website claims that firms will be removed from the list if found to be in breach of minimum standards. You contacted the Department of Health and Social Care in August about Rightangled, as did I, but nothing has been done. When I put this to the UKHSA it merely regurgitated, word for word, the information on its website about UKAS accreditation for listed firms, and the removal of those who breach minimum standards. UKHSA says: “We take all complaints about private testing providers very seriously. We would encourage anyone who has an issue to raise it directly with the company, and escalate their complaint to NHS test and trace and Citizens Advice if it isn’t resolved.” You are now making a claim through a county court. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsTroops have been deployed in British Columbia to help stranded residents and search areas hit by landslides and floods after a powerful storm dumped a month’s worth of rain in two days across a swath of western Canada and the US Pacific north-west. The Canadian government approved a request for federal assistance from the embattled province on Wednesday, the minister of emergency preparedness, Bill Blair, confirmed. Military personnel will assist with evacuation efforts, support supply chains and protect residents against floods and landslides. Some members of the armed forces were already on the ground and additional troops were expected to arrive shortly, the defence minister, Anita Anand, said. It comes after British Columbia’s premier issued a state of emergency, warning that the death toll is expected to rise. “The last few days have been incredibly difficult for British Columbians,” said John Horgan. “Heavy rains, strong winds, flooding has devastated entire communities of our province.” “While Environment Canada called this a 1-in-100 year event, we know the increased likelihood of intense storms is due to the climate crisis,” Horgan added. He said the province will impose travel restrictions to ensure critical goods can be brought to communities. Officials also warned of a looming animal welfare crisis with the agriculture minister, Lana Popham, noting “thousands of animals have perished” in the flooding so far. South of the border in Washington state, water levels showed signs of dropping on Wednesday after floods damaged three-quarters of the homes in the border town of Sumas, leaving 1,600 residents without power and forcing hundreds to flee. But in Canada, with at least one woman confirmed dead in a landslide , communities cut off from the rest of the province saw little sign of respite. Vancouver remained isolated from the rest of the country by road and the two largest rail companies, Canadian National and Canadian Pacific, have said damage to their tracks has halted freight service. In the city of Abbotsford, emergency crews using helicopters and boats rescued 184, as the mayor warned “catastrophic” flooding could occur if its pump station failed. “Nothing is worth your life,” Henry Braun told residents in an emergency news conference. “I implore anyone who is listening to this to please heed the evacuation order and leave. Tomorrow morning may be too late.” Much of the area lies on the former site of Sumas Lake, a vast body of water which was drained in the last century. City officials feared that pumps, which divert water from the basin at a rate of half a million gallons a minute, were on the verge of failing – meaning even more water would inundate parts of the city. Hundreds of locals joined efforts to stack sandbags around the pumping station, and on Wednesday morning, Braun said the river levels were dropping – and it appeared the pumps would hold. Trina Enns told CBC News said she and a neighbouring family slept inside a McDonald’s in Abbotsford after evacuating their homes nearby. “Lots of people slept in their cars overnight,” she said. With the surrounding area underwater, the manager arranged a boat to bring people to the restaurant. Officials in the town of Merritt also pleaded with residents who had defied a mandatory evacuation to leave their homes, as a bridge in the British Columbia community collapsed into the swollen Nicola river. The local water treatment facility was overwhelmed by flood waters earlier in the week, so the water flowing through the city is now mixed with sewage and is undrinkable. Snow fell on the flooded town overnight, but dozens of locals, fearing their homes could be looted, have refused to leave, instead sharing tips on finding food on social media. Residents of Sumas Prairie, a vast area of agricultural land to the north-east of Abbotsford, have spent the last two days desperately trying to move farm animals to safety, with some taking to jet skis to herd cattle through the floods. Chloe Devito was devastated to learn that her 21-month-old dog Rio was had drowned when the floods overwhelmed a kennel facility in Sumas Prairie. “We were told it all happened so quickly. The water came in through the house and and the power was out. The owner said she was like up to her neck in water, freezing cold, muddy, black water, trying to pull the dogs out of the house,” she told the Guardian. “We just don’t know how it happened so quickly, we don’t understand.” Evacuation alerts have been rescinded in the city of Chilliwack in Abbotsford as well as the Eagle Mountain Areas, Ten Oaks, Straiton Areas and Matsqui Village. Flood warnings in the affected areas of Fraser Valley and Fraser Canyon have also been downgraded, according to the British Columbia River Forecast Centre. As British Columbia officials started to tally the damage, angry residents asked why the provincial government failed to use its mobile phone alert system even as record rains fell, highways were destroyed and bridges collapsed. The alert network was rolled out nationally three years ago, but British Columbia has never sent out a message, not even in July when a deadly “heat dome” overwhelmed south-western parts of the province, killing nearly 600 people. “It is one tool,” said the province’s public safety minister, Mike Farnworth, on Monday. “It is not a silver bullet.” On Tuesday, acknowledging “an absolutely unprecedented, torrential deluge like we’ve never seen before”, Farnworth said his government would assess how the system could be improved in the future. Kim Johansson, 38, a mother of two who lives on a low-lying island suburb of Vancouver, said she only found out that roads were closed when she tried to reach her children’s school on Monday morning. “There were neither road nor flood warnings,” she said, adding: “It seems nobody expected the storm to be so devastating. The rain was just incessant for 24 hours.” For those in areas cut off by flood waters, the coming days will prove to be a challenge. “The roads into our community are washed out,” said Andy Harrington, who lives near the city of Chilliwack, 100km (62 miles) east of Vancouver. “Most of the city is dry at the moment but it’s completely cut off. We’re surrounded by water.” He said the rain fell so hard “it felt like being in a bathroom shower for 24 hours”. Harrington said there was a strong sense of community spirit, with neighbours checking in on each other and clearing debris. “But longer term, there’s just no way to get supplies into Chilliwack at the moment and we don’t know how long that’s going to be. There’s no roads.” Harrington, who works in global humanitarian relief and frequently travels to areas with crumbling infrastructure, said he remained in shock at the devastation. “Things that we just thought would always be there – like highway bridges that were built 30 years ago that were part of our life – were absolutely destroyed. “Mountainsides just collapsed on to roads. The level of destruction is really difficult to comprehend.” • The headline of this article was amended on 18 November 2021 to be more accurate about the area affected by these events. An earlier headline made reference to the Pacific north-west, which generally refers just to the US.Another big rain event is heading eastwards, with the potential to soak saturated and already flooded parts of New South Wales and cause Sydney’s main reservoir to resume spilling. A low-pressure trough will develop into a low, bringing widespread falls and thunderstorms, with the heaviest rain to arrive from Sunday into Monday. For the flood-hit Lachlan catchment in central NSW, the system will drop another 30-50mm of rain, Ben Domensino, a senior forecaster at Weatherzone, said. “It’s likely to cause some renewed flooding, particularly in the central west of NSW,” he said. Sydney will also cop a drenching, with the Bureau of Meteorology forecasting 30-50mm for Sunday, “with heavy falls possible in the west” of the city. The track the low takes will make a big difference to local rainfall tallies. One weather model has the system tracking further north, reaching the coast near Newcastle. “Further north, there’s more moisture for it to tap into,” Domensino said, adding that path could result in Sydney collecting as much as 100mm on Sunday into Monday. A second model has a more southerly course for the low, with regions south of Wollongong likely to receive the 100mm or so totals, he said. NSW’s regional dams are 92% full, with some at or above capacity. Burrendong in central NSW is at 129% capacity, making use of its flood zone. Sydney’s reservoirs are at 96.3% capacity, with Warragamba – which holds about 80% of the city’s water – at about 100%. “Warragamba is not spilling but is in drawdown operations to reduce the storage from the full supply level,” a WaterNSW spokesman said. “The storage is kept at one metre below full supply level, however that target is unlikely to be reached before the weekend,” he said. Warragamba is currently receiving about 7.5 gigalitres of inflow a day and about 9GL a day is being released to create “airspace” to accommodate some of the expected falls. The bureau’s forecast for Warragamba is currently at 25-50mm of rain on Sunday. More rain will follow within days as another low-pressure trough stretching from Queensland to Victoria moves eastwards. That system, though, is unlikely to develop into a low, Domensino said. Rainfall will be widespread and, with catchments already saturated, more flooding could follow. With conditions in the Pacific close to La Niña levels, these events are “the taste of what we will see this summer”, he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning During La Niña events, easterly blowing equatorial winds strengthen, shifting rainfall westwards towards Australia. Such events increase the odds for a more active than usual cyclone season for the region. The Bureau of Meteorology may declare a La Niña event as soon as next Tuesday. Six of the seven models used by the bureau forecast a La Niña will last until January.At 57, the novelist Ann Patchett is already preparing for death. She isn’t terminally ill, and her decision isn’t as morbid as it sounds at first. She intends from now on to travel light, to empty her house in Nashville of the residues of adulthood: the boxes of clothes and dishes and jewellery that she has accumulated over five decades of living, things that she now believes prevented her from “thinking about what was coming and the beauty that was here now”. Call it a pandemic house clearance, if you will, for she first had the idea of sorting out her drawers and closets following the death of a friend’s father last year. It took Patchett’s friend the entire summer to tidy up her father’s house for an estate sale: one man living alone had left behind too much. Patchett thought about the boxes in her own basement, all the gifts and possessions she had forgotten about over the years. “I wonder if we could just pretend to move,” she asked her husband: “I could have said: ‘I wonder if we could just pretend to die?’” Delve deeper into the essays in These Precious Days and you will find that death is more than a pretence. A typical Patchett piece is a eulogy, suitably warm and affectionate, respectful to those who have died, or are about to die. There is her policeman father, who could do a hundred pull-ups in his 70s, but succumbed to Parkinson’s in under two years. There is her nurse mother, who looked so young that people assumed she was Patchett’s sister (and towards the end, Patchett would insist that she was). There is Tom Hanks’s deceased assistant, Sooki Raphael, protagonist of the title essay that went viral a few months ago when it was published by Harper’s, who had gone to Nashville for her chemotherapy and ended up staying with Patchett during the lockdown. Each time Patchett begins a new novel, she says she is overcome by the fear of dying before finishing the book. But it is in her nonfiction that she has more visibly reckoned with loss, whether it is Truth and Beauty, her memoir of her friendship with the late poet Lucy Grealy, or the pieces in her 2013 essay collection, This Is the Story of a Happy Marriage, about being a caregiver to her grandmother. Why speak of the dead? For Patchett, it’s a tool for living, a salutary reminder of that “beauty that was here now”. You can seldom intuit conflict or ambivalence in her sentences, regardless of the subject; instead they convey a well-adjusted curiosity, mostly about her friends and family. What Patchett lacks in obsession and poetic depth, she makes up for with her raconteuring energy. In the best of these essays – Flight Plan, about her husband’s passion for flying airplanes, and How to Practice, the one about cleaning out her closets – uncomfortable truths are papered over with disarming wit. About her husband she asserts at one point that he is “honest about everything – which should not be confused with being thoughtful about everything”. The story of becoming a writer is another recurring theme. Patchett’s father would read early drafts of her novels, give her notes, carefully save her publicity materials and reviews. But well after she had been published, he still believed writing was her hobby and not her job: “Having someone who believed in my failure more than my success kept me alert.” Patchett has good advice for younger writers on attitude (“give up on the idea of approval”), on writing v editing (“if you try to do both things at the same time, nothing will be done”), on publishing a book (“never hesitate to rewrite jacket copy or ask to see ad layouts”), and even on the distribution and sale of the printed book, since she is famously the co-owner of an indie bookstore in Nashville. When she was 30, a male author told her that to become “a real writer” one must have children. “I told him I didn’t have children,” Patchett writes. “What I didn’t tell him was that I would never have children, and that I had known this for a very long time.”In an essay on the American writer Eudora Welty, Patchett says that the usually anthologised favourites “fall short of representing the darkness and depth of her work”. I wondered about the remark as I read Patchett’s own essays. Were the decisions on which ones to keep and which to leave out pondered over enough? There are the inevitable repetitions, as with any corpus of pieces originally written for newspapers and magazines; but sometimes the padding conceals the pearls. A more careful selection, for instance, might have let Flight Plan alone sum up Patchett’s rapport with her husband, and left the two other essays on their relationship out. There are plenty of cringey moments. By buying a stove for a homeless man, Patchett’s friend is apparently sweeping “down the walls of oppression”. She can’t help but talk up her acquaintances on the page – a “bombshell best friend” here, a “force of nature, force of life” there. And does Patchett honestly expect us to believe that Snoopy, the dog from the Peanuts comic strip, was her only role model as a writer? Yet I found myself ignoring the missteps, the saccharine detours, because they stem from the same impulse that enables the more engaging passages: the wish to let the heart “remain open to everyone, everyone, all the time”. • These Precious Days is published by Bloomsbury (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.It is tempting to suggest that the Covid deniers, the hoaxers, the hucksters, the anti-vaxxers, the flat earthers, the merchants of disinformation and the crackpot conspiracy theorists be strapped into a chair and force fed The First Wave, a harrowing documentary about the early toll of the coronavirus pandemic. Covid-19 has never been a “media-friendly” story: death and suffering happen in intimate spaces behind closed doors, where few cameras or reporters are permitted. It is therefore less spectacular news than the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, even though the current loss of life is still equivalent to a 9/11 every three days. This relative invisibility was surely a factor in allowing disinformation to thrive in Donald Trump’s White House and rightwing media and social media. But The First Wave offers the kind of vivid, visceral, gut-wrenching account of tragedy up close that is as undeniable as a plane crash. Inside Long Island Jewish medical center, one of New York’s hardest-hit hospitals during the first four months of the pandemic, director Matthew Heineman shows doctors and nurses striving to save lives (“Can you feel a pulse?”), desperately ill patients video chatting with family members, and moments of sorrow too deep for tears. Early on, for example, the heroic, resilient, vulnerable Dr Nathalie Dougé is seen on the phone, calling a family to say: “I’m sorry to tell you this but we’ve tried multiple rounds of CPR and we were unable to bring him back.” The unearthly cacophony of wailing and screaming unleashed at the other end of the line will be hard for any viewer of this film to forget. “One of the greatest tragedies of Covid is that we as a general public were so shielded from the realities of what was happening,” Heineman, a multiple Emmy award winner, says by phone from New York. “If it was easier for journalists and film-makers to get inside hospitals and to show the public how this was all actually going down, how people were dying and the horror of what was happening, I think it would have changed the narrative. “It saddens me that this issue that could have brought our country together further divided us, that truth and science became politicised. Part of that narrative is the fact that we weren’t able to see what was happening and that’s a big reason why I felt such huge responsibility and need to make this film.” The First Wave, released in cinemas by National Geographic on Friday, won the David Carr award at the Montclair film festival, which honours a film exemplifying a commitment to “truth-telling in reporting”. At a time in early 2020 when other journalists were being turned away, how did Heineman, 38, get such incredible access? “I woke up in an early March and, along with my team, saw this tsunami that was about to come towards the US and, as the days went by and as the reality became clearer, like with most of my films I wanted to try to take this issue – plastered across headlines and filled with stats and, frankly, misinformation – and try to humanise it, try to put a human face to it.” Heineman made contact with hospital systems across America with little success but finally got access in his own backyard, New York, the biggest hotspot. “I think Long Island Jewish hospital in Queens, and the larger system Northwell Health, felt that this was an incredibly important historic thing to document and so, through a number of conversations, we began filming.” The practical challenges were formidable. The crew often consisted of just a camera operator, sometimes accompanied by a field producer, to have as small a footprint and be as unobtrusive as possible. They were given one N95 mask a person for two weeks; none became infected with the virus. Heineman, whose previous subjects have included Islamic State-controlled Syria and Mexican drug cartels, admits: “It was obviously a terrifying endeavour. Having made films in conflict zones around the world, you can sort of turn off your brain a bit when you come home detached, although these stories never leave you. But with the first wave we were documenting the same thing that we were living so it was really a 24/7 full-on experience. “At that point, especially in March, we knew so little about the disease, how it’s transmitted. Obviously the science around it all was very murky and so we did the best we could with the limited information we had. We were in a war and did our best to find supplies, although that was pretty much impossible in the beginning.” It is a reminder how frighteningly novel and unfamiliar Covid-19 was in those early months. Dougé, a first-generation Haitian American who is a central protagonist in the film, comments at one point: “It’s new. That is the worst thing in medicine. We are taught pattern recognition and as of right now there’s no clear pattern.” Another doctor tells his staff: “Every day we look death right in its eye and the scary part is it looks right back at you. It’s a storm that nobody’s ever been in before. There’s no playbook for this, there are no directions.” Heineman comments: “People who’ve been trained their entire lives to try to understand and fix the human body – everything they’ve learned was thrown out the window? They had no tools at their disposal to help people and so imagine training your entire life for something and then being presented with this foreign virus and having nothing you can do. “That was the reality for especially those first four months. It was devastating and we’re still living with the long-term effects in terms of the healthcare role. I think we’re going to see a lot of burnout and dropout over the next couple of months, as we already have with our workforce.” The film-makers also had to steel themselves to witness distressing scenes. A medical team, wearing face shields and masks, gathers for a minute of silence around a patient who just succumbed despite their efforts. A pregnant woman gravely ill with the virus is forced to have an emergency caesarian section before being put on a ventilator. Heineman found it an extremely difficult film to make. “It was a rollercoaster of emotions every single day. It’s such an isolating experience for everyone, for those who weren’t affected, for those who were affected, for those in a hospital. People were living and dying and making life and death decisions remotely through iPads and iPhones. Yeah. It was a really difficult thing to witness. “But the overwhelming feeling that we had, that I had, every day was the incredible tenacity, courage, fortitude, love and humanity that we saw and witnessed despite all the horror. I didn’t necessarily go to bed at night feeling depressed about the state of the world. I honestly went to bed feeling inspired and I think that’s what drove us to continue to make this film day in, day out for many months.” New York, America’s biggest city, became a “ghost town” during this time, the director recalls, but that changed in May with the police murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis, sparking a mass uprising against racial injustice. In another remarkable scene, Dougé is seen cautioning a young African American man not to put himself at risk by provoking the police, repeatedly urging: “Your family cares about you.” The man walks away but eventually turns to embrace her. She cries: “I’m so tired!” Heineman says: “That was a part of the story that we thought it was incredibly important to include. This disease very vividly disproportionally impacts people of colour and one of our main subjects, Dr Dougé, helped lead us into that aspect of the story. She also led us out on to the streets. These two pandemics of systemic racism and Covid are intricately tied together.” The First Wave joins documentaries such as Nanfu Wang’s In the Same Breath and John Hoffman and Janet Tobias’s Fauci and artworks including Rafael Lozano-Hemmer’s ephemeral memorial A Crack in the Hourglass as outriders in a collective struggle to comprehend a once-in-a-century pandemic that has killed more than 5 million people to date. Heineman concludes: “There’s no question that we’ve all been changed forever. The fabric of society, the way we communicate, all of us as individuals, and so I hope that the film creates a space to allow us to reflect on what we’ve been through and take stock of where we are and hopefully learn as we move forward into the future. “But the film is about many things. It’s about life and death and birth and the power of the human connection. The overwhelming feeling that I have when I look back on the experience and I look at the film is that it’s really about how human beings came together in the face of crisis. And that was deeply inspiring to witness.” The First Wave is in US cinemas from 19 November and UK cinemas from 26 NovemberInflation has hit its highest level in a decade. For most people, prices are rising faster than wages. Energy bills are soaring. The Bank of England is poised to raise interest rates next month. Personal taxes are going up in the spring. A tough winter looms. It’s not hard to see why Boris Johnson has hit the panic button with his plan to ban MPs from holding consultancy jobs. On its own, the government could perhaps ride out a sleaze scandal on the grounds that voters think (wrongly) that politicians are all as bad as each other. But sleaze plus a struggling economy is a potentially toxic mixture, especially since a long period of one-party rule makes voters susceptible to that most powerful of political messages: time for a change. Objectively, things could hardly look more promising for Labour. A government that will spend the next year trying to explain away falling living standards and record NHS waiting lists should present the easiest of targets. Yet the opposition doesn’t give the impression that it expects to win the next election – instead, it displays a lack of self-confidence that is both irrational and potentially self-fulfilling. Sure, there are reasons not to get carried away. Labour is neck and neck in the polls with the Conservatives, but was streets ahead in the 1990s when Tony Blair was leader of the opposition. Unlike then, focus groups say they don’t really know what Labour stands for under Keir Starmer. If the prime minister was able to survive the mishandling of the pandemic, then why should he not be able to survive a mid-term sleaze scandal? All that is obviously true. But enough of such pessimism. There is a more optimistic case to be made. For a start, the public mood is shifting after a period in which voters cut the Conservatives an excessive amount of slack. Britain had one of the world’s worst per capita death rates from Covid-19 but – in large part due to the emergency economic support package put in place by the Treasury – Johnson avoided being blamed. After spending hundreds of billions of pounds preventing mass unemployment, chancellor Rishi Sunak is now providing less help. The furlough has already come to an end, as has the stamp duty holiday for homebuyers and the £20 a week uplift to universal credit. Some limited support for the working poor was announced in last month’s budget but, in general, measures brought in during the early months of the crisis in 2020 have either already gone or are being phased out. The economy is still making up the ground lost during the lockdowns but during the course of the next few months will once again be recognisable as the low-growth, low-productivity, low-unemployment model that existed pre-pandemic. Yet there’s one key difference: this time Britain will face an annual inflation rate of 5% or more. It is, of course, possible that workers will meekly accept a cut in their standard of living, and there are those who say that culture-war issues matter more in shaping voting patterns these days. But traditionally, governments become less popular when real (inflation-adjusted) incomes are falling, and there’s no reason to imagine this pattern has changed. Sunak’s response to the latest cost-of-living figures was to boast about the £4bn he’s spending to mitigate the impact of rising prices on households. This too is telling because it demonstrates how the Conservatives have filched ideas from the left for their economic strategy. Ed Balls, when shadow chancellor in 2011, said austerity would be a disaster – and now Johnson agrees with him. The trade unions played a crucial role in developing the furlough scheme, which effectively nationalised a large chunk of the workforce. Surviving the pandemic and meeting manifesto commitments to level up have forced the Tories to become a party of big government, and the pressures to spend more look certain to grow. The crisis of confidence on the left is not new and it is not confined to Britain: since the collapse of the Berlin Wall social democratic parties have been struggling to redefine themselves. But it should not be that hard: for a start, the right has been going through its own existential crisis since the financial crash. The heyday of unfettered free markets came to an end with the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008. The view that globalisation or capitalism are unstoppable forces has to be resisted, because that is clearly not the case. In areas such as tackling climate change or cracking down on tax avoidance by multinational corporations, a more interventionist approach is now widely accepted – and the ideas for reform are coming from the left, not the right. That said, Labour still has to convince voters that it has answers to the issues that concern them: paying the bills, job security and decent public services among them. Starmer and his shadow Treasury team are rightly making this a priority. Finally, the left needs to remember its own history. Labour’s big victories have come not when it tells people how bad things are, but when it shows how much better they could be. The spike in inflation will give the party a chance to be heard: it must show it has a vision for the future that people can believe in. Larry Elliott is the Guardian’s economics editorWhen asked if he’s looking forward to the World Cup, Mohamed, an Indian salesman, grins as he casts his fishing line off the promenade in the heart of Qatar’s capital, Doha. “Very much,” he says. “I love cricket!” With a year to go until the football World Cup kicks off, Mohamed’s response may have the event’s organisers worried. After all, about 70% of Qatar’s population are from the cricket-loving subcontinent. But on a Friday evening in Aspire Park, filled with families enjoying picnics and children playing football, another Mohamed has a different take. “We’re all excited and supporting the World Cup. The stadiums are amazing,” says the Egyptian chemistry teacher. “All Arabs are proud. It’s already a triumph!” The two Mohameds reflect the diversity and divisions – of nationality, culture and sport – in this tiny Gulf state of 2.6 million, where 95% of the working population are foreigners. For Qataris and Arabic speakers, the overwhelming emotions appear to be pride and excitement to be hosting the first World Cup in the region. But for the low-wage workers the Guardian has interviewed, mostly from south Asia, the response is ambivalent: a mixture of a lack of interest, a focus on earning money and the knowledge that even if they wanted to watch a match, they could never afford a ticket. Qatar’s diminutive size – organisers have called it the “most compact World Cup ever” – is evident on the final approach to Doha from the air. In just a few minutes you glide past Al Bayt Stadium, then the Lusail Stadium comes into view, like a giant wicker basket, and as the landing gear is lowered you pass by Ras Abu Aboud, a stadium made partly of shipping containers, which will be dismantled after the event. The view from above also reveals Qatar’s monumental ambition and wealth: seven stadiums, a new airport, roads, a metro system and hundreds of hotels. In 2017, Qatar’s finance minister said the country was spending $500m a week on World Cup-related construction. The furthest stadium from Doha – just a 30-minute drive away – is Al Bayt, a graceful structure designed like a nomadic tent. The only other building in sight is a McDonald’s, built in the same style as the stadium. Touchy guards stand in the shade and shout at you if you try to take a photo. One says he has no interest in the World Cup, he is just here to make money. “I can be standing guard here beside the stadium or over in that town, it doesn’t make any difference to me,” he says. “I’ll leave before the World Cup. During the event we’ll have far too much work.” Sitting in a park in Doha, a group of south Asian community activists who have all worked in Qatar for more than a decade are similarly ambivalent. “When I came to Qatar there was nothing here. We built this country but they are not thinking about us workers,” says one. “How can we afford World Cup tickets on our salaries?” adds another. While ticket prices have not yet been announced, Fifa is already selling hospitality packages that start at £705 for a first-round match and rise to £845,000 for a 10-match package in a private suite. The only group of low-wage workers who appear excited about the tournament are Kenyans, steeped in years of Premier League coverage. “I love football. I would love to see the players in real life. I would tell my children about it when I am old,” says one, a guard at a top-end hotel. The shadow of abusive labour practices and workers’ deaths hangs over the tournament despite new laws to introduce a minimum wage and give workers the right to change jobs. Concern for workers’ rights has prompted protests by the Norwegian, German, Danish and Dutch national teams during the qualifying rounds. Those concerns are shared by some workers. “We hear news of people losing their lives, so I don’t think the World Cup should be coming to Qatar. I don’t think they have apologised yet, at least to the families of those guys. They should have done something to avoid this,” says a Kenyan barista. The mood among Qataris and other Arabic speakers in the country is far more upbeat. There is a sense that the country is punching above its weight, an eagerness to showcase the best of the region and satisfaction at overcoming a series of controversies that have dogged Qatar since it won the right to host the event in 2010: allegations of corruption at the bidding stage, criticism of the abusive conditions endured by migrant workers, an economic blockade led by its neighbours Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates and then the coronavirus pandemic. “The World Cup will be amazing!” says Mustafa, an Egyptian Liverpool and Mohamed Salah fan who manages a store in one of Qatar’s upmarket shopping centres. “Lots of tourists will come. They will experience a new culture. It’s a chance for different people to come together.” Sitting nearby is Jamal, a Qatari citizen and retired IT worker, who says the World Cup is important for the region. “We’re the first Arab country to host it. It’s a big achievement,” he says. “The World Cup means a lot to Qatar. We’ve done better than other countries which are bigger than us.” In the “VIP wing” of another mall, Abdulrahman and his friends are drinking coffee served out of a vintage delivery van. Nearby, young Asian men who want to gawp at the top-end designer stores inside are turned away at the entrance. Abdulrahman, a Qatari who works for the interior ministry, tells me about the training he is doing with his counterparts from the UK and the US to ensure the World Cup is “safe and secure”. “The Qatari people are very eager for the World Cup. We are a country of openness; we want to excel at everything and we welcome everyone,” he says. When I ask him who will win the World Cup, he replies with a smile: “Qatar!”Omari Douglas is a natural performer in the truest sense. We meet in the rehearsal space, where he’s preparing for a new production of Cabaret alongside Jessie Buckley and Eddie Redmayne at the Kit Kat Club, inside London’s Playhouse theatre. Although we’re cutting into his lunch break, the 27-year-old actor – and current favourite to be the next star of Doctor Who – gesticulates enthusiastically as if he’s used to being permanently on stage. “I’ve always admired how television and film can bring audiences together,” he beams. The Playhouse’s Cabaret is the latest in a long line: the 1966 musical by John Kander and Fred Ebb was inspired by John Van Druten’s classic 1951 play I Am a Camera, which was itself an adaptation of Christopher Isherwood’s 1939 novel Goodbye to Berlin. These facts are relayed to me by Douglas at breakneck speed; the actor has seen Cabaret three or four times. He is now stepping into the leading role of Clifford Bradshaw, a lost American novelist who arrives at Berlin’s seedy Kit Kat Club. “I’d never envisioned myself as a Cliff,” he says. “But we’re being given the space to find something new.” Director Rebecca Frecknall has opted to portray Cliff, usually written as bisexual, as queer-identifying. As a Black actor taking on the role – also a rarity – Douglas is not nervous about such changes. “We’ve had those conversations about what nuances I as a Black actor will bring to the role, but it doesn’t feel like I’m having to work too hard to make it make sense,” he says. “Cliff is from Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, which was and still is a predominantly African American community; it doesn’t take a rocket scientist to understand that there could have been a Black man who has come from America to Berlin to find himself and his identity.” Douglas’s enthusiasm makes sense when tracing his roots as a performer. Although theatre is where he got his start, appearing in Jesus Christ Superstar and Annie Get Your Gun, most viewers might recognise Douglas from Channel 4’s It’s a Sin, playing the spirited Roscoe Babatunde in Russell T Davies’s drama. He followed that up by appearing alongside Russell Tovey in a gender-swapped production of Constellations. After we speak, it emerges he has become the bookies’ favourite to be cast as the next Doctor (not bad for someone whose TV debut was in January). Douglas is officially a rising star, a fact he humbly laughs off. Part of his appeal may be his willingness to take on roles that deal with race and sexuality. It’s not necessarily intentional, he says, but he is pleased with the conversations his characters have opened. “It kind of feels like a happy byproduct. I’m really grateful that me being in these pieces allows things to come to light in a different way. If the opportunities are there then I won’t say no, because it changes the game for people.” Douglas is of Jamaican heritage and grew up in Wolverhampton with his mother, his father being based in the US. Although he was an only child, he was brought up with numerous older cousins who lived nearby. Much of his childhood was spent “trying to entertain them”, watching soaps and going to the cinema with his extended family, a tradition that endures. He caught the performing bug before he could understand what the stage was: “I’ve seen a video of me in a nativity as one of the wise men. I remember my family finding it hilarious because I’m literally conducting the others!” Another early performance was a rendition of Britney Spears’ … Baby One More Time at a primary school talent show. “Quite a traumatic memory,” he says, “but I always loved performing.” He did well academically but his mother had always supported his love for performing. She also encouraged conversations about his sexuality and identity. “After It’s a Sin came out, I’ve realised that I was always supported for who I was. Growing up Black, gay, and knowing so young, there is always this stigma of ‘Does this work in my world?’ And actually, it did: the support had always been there.” He found himself split at A-level between applying for university and drama school, but chose the latter after being encouraged by his performing arts teachers. Ambitions of an acting career had gone full throttle in his mid-teens; a landmark moment was being “consciously moved” after seeing a production of Once on This Island when he was 14. “Sharon D Clarke was in it and there’s a predominantly Black-led cast,” he says. “I remember going to the stage door afterwards and meeting some of the actors. At the time, I didn’t necessarily have the language to articulate what visibility meant in that moment. But, looking back, it’s how I felt. I wanted to be there because what I saw made the possibilities seem more tangible, and accessible.”Although he enjoyed his time at drama school, he often felt typecast. “‘Oh, you’re in musical theatre, and you’re Black. So you’re gonna be in The Lion King,’” he says. “And it’s like: well, yeah, maybe, but I can also do everything else that everyone else is doing.” It made him acutely aware of the differences for Black and queer actors in the media world, and he talks passionately of the need to mix up traditions in casting and production that keep underrepresented groups off our stages. “Marianne Jean-Baptiste is renowned as being one of our greats – she should be side by side with her white female contemporaries here. But she’s someone who went to America and I observed that trajectory,” he says. “Someone could be equally as talented as someone else but not necessarily held in the same regard in the UK, because this person’s white and that person’s Black.” “[We need] more producers who don’t consider queer or predominantly Black stories as ‘risky’. Because time and time again, we prove that they’re not risks. It’s a Sin was considered a risk by a lot of gatekeepers. That people were still unsure of how a show by Russell T Davies would be received is remarkable. But still, time and time again, there are so many people up there who are not broad-minded enough.” He hopes for “less of the same old” and is eager to see not just changes in how works are adapted but what is adapted: “They’re great, but there’s also lots of other people that we can be adapting from.” And in his own future? For what might be the first time today, the actor takes a lengthy pause. “I just love my job. I always want to be better,” he says. “I’ve never seen myself as being the best. I want to be good at what I do. And having a platform to do it is a bonus, and a great thing.” Cabaret at the Kit Kat Club is at the Playhouse theatre, London, to 14 May.Well, we’ve done it: we’ve successfully navigated the goth autumnal chicane of Halloween and Bonfire Night, and now, crackling distantly in the air, can you hear it – a jingling of the bells? Christmas looms, and though in traditional years even mentioning the C-word at this point in November might instigate a round of groans (and, in shop workers, an electric jolt of Mariah Carey-shaped PTSD), there has been a notable loosening of the law: Christmas trees have already gone up, lights adorn the exteriors of houses, mince pies have been consumed. Is this normal? No. Has anything about the past 20 months been normal? Also no. These two things are connected. I do not know if you recall last Christmas, or if it’s just been balled up into the brown plasticine wad that is remembering the last almost two years your life, but it was, historically, one of the most underwhelming Christmases on modern record. Boris Johnson announced an inter-tier travel ban in England about 100 hours before Christmas Day itself, leading to a mass of people rushing to train stations to desperately travel to the home counties before the ominous midnight gong forbade them from doing so. This had the necessary effect of ruining a lot of people’s Christmases, as well as putting the whole country back in hyper-vigilance mode, so the Christmas holidays became a hastily rearranged grey few days of Zoom calls, lonely roasts, and waving to nans through double-glazed windows. You might have had a fine enough time – I did! I just sat in a really centrally heated house and chained a near-infinite supply of bottled lager – but it wasn’t a real Christmas, was it? It was a Christmas we will look back on one day, shellshocked, and tell children who don’t remember it how amazing it was that we had to live through that. “We got a Mrs Brown’s Boys special, sure, but it wasn’t even recorded in front of a studio audience. So frankly what was the point?” Well, sorry to say this, but I’ve visited the caves and read the ominous runes and also “remembered last year”, and all signs point to us having something more of the same. Christmas … Christmas may not be Proper Christmas. Not this year. First, shortages, which we’re not allowed to blame on Brexit in case it hurts the feelings of Brexit voters, so let’s blame coronavirus and deeply worrying global supply chain issues instead (these are reasons, too: it’s just that, on top of those reasons, Brexit really doesn’t help). The headlines started a month or so ago – Christmas turkey shortage likely, farmers warn; Get booster jabs and wear masks to save Christmas, urges Javid; UK faces Christmas champagne shortage due to HGV driver crisis, poor harvests and high demand; Why Christmas could be stuck in a shipping container; The foods you can freeze NOW to get ready for Christmas – but they continue: as The Times reported last week, Christmas comes early to high streets amid fear of shortages. And in recent days, the grimly inevitable: Boris says he CAN’T rule out Xmas lockdown. Then there’s the whisper network of people who have mates who have mates who know things, the nurses and the drivers and the civil servants, all of whom also solemnly warn of further Covid restrictions. Add to this the gaps on supermarket shelves and the cardboard asparagus, and it’s enough to start triggering the flashbacks. It haunts me in dreams. Me, wearing two enormous gap-year backpacks, trying to navigate St Pancras station before the police arrest me for being “too in the spirit of Yule”. So what is there to do about Christmas? Realistically, the answer is, “get over it”. It is only Christmas, and we are still technically in a pandemic. I know Christmas is special – believe me, there’s nothing I like to do more than watch Shrek and all the Shrek sequels while slowly absorbing Baileys as if on an IV drip; also seeing family is alright, I guess, as well – but last year the onus on seeing loved ones after a long hard year of not doing that felt more vital, disproportionately special. If Christmas isn’t very good this year because there aren’t enough turkeys and it’s suddenly illegal to leave our postcode: OK, not the end of the word. It’s unideal but we’ve done it before. However, I would argue that the sheer act of entertaining the idea that Christmas will be crap this year is, in itself, a failure of government. Does anyone left in this country really fully trust Boris Johnson to deliver an un-ruined Christmas? If they do, do they remember the last time he tried it? It is not healthy to live in this primed state of “anticipating government failure”, but it is becoming increasingly normal after almost 20 consecutive months of it. The petrol queue crisis of a short lifetime ago was the perfect event to drip-feed us the idea of shortages, of patience, of spending most of a Saturday and a little bit of a Sunday trying to buy an item that is normally abundantly available. It was ultimately all to prepare our fight-or-flight skills for a December trip to M&amp;S. So, it is deeply unlikely Christmas will be normal and that’s more or less OK – the real fear is that we soon remember this rubbish Christmas as a rare high before a 2022-long low. Ho ho ho! Joel Golby is a writer for the Guardian and Vice, and the author of Brilliant, Brilliant, Brilliant Brilliant Brilliant1) On this day in 1985, Allyson Felix, quintuple Olympic champion and the USA’s most decorated Olympic athlete, was born. Enjoy all her Olympic medal races, while here she is breaking down running scenes from movies – including Forrest Gump – and here she is on Jimmy Kimmel. 2) This weekend, Leeds visit Tottenham – which is more than enough reason to revisit this FA Cup classic between the sides from 1999. The game was settled by sensational goals from Darren Anderton and David Ginola, the latter also hitting the woodwork with two similarly stupendous efforts – the first of which George Graham, Spurs’ manager at the time, was certain went in. Otherwise, here’s a league match between the sides from the 1970-71 season featuring some vintage Barry Davies, and an FA Cup quarter-final from 1972. 3) On Saturday night, the Scottish mixed martial artist Joanne Calderwood returns to the octagon, where she will meet Taila Santos. Here she is on the Ultimate Fighter, sharing one of the great staredowns with Rose Namajunas, while here’s a clip of her talking about her struggles, and here she is beating Jessica Eye. 4) And while we’re here, take a look at this fight-of-the-year contender from last weekend’s UFC activity: Max Holloway v Yair Rodríguez, while Dana White, the UFC president, extols the men involved. 5) In May 1991, Manchester United Under-20s played a friendly against Trinidad and Tobago Under-20s and lost 3-1 thanks to a hat-trick scored by some kid called Dwight Yorke. 6) On this day in 1987, Andre Dawson of the Chicago Cubs became the first person from a last-placed team to be named MVP. This little feature explains how good he was, here’s a longer documentary, while here he recalls a sad tale of racial profiling, and in this clip he talks about working as a mortician during a pandemic. Our favourites from below the line last week 1) Nothing stirs the soul like a great own goal. Here’s another old favourite, from Marco Materazzi in 2005-06. 2) A showreel of Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s best goal at each age, from 19 to 40. 3) Nighttime is the right time for rallycross: the adrenaline rush of supercars at night. 4) Great goal celebrations of our time, from 10-pin bowling mimes to running straight into fences. 5) A look into why Mexico isn’t the footballing powerhouse it should be. Spotters’ badges: germit, whobroughtoranges. Guardian YouTube football channel Do subscribe, if you fancy. Guardian YouTube sport channel Likewise.When a normal person ascends to the firmament of fame, their sense of identity is split in two. The self-perception they’ve developed over their life up to that point – the “true” self, allowed to emerge in intimate moments – must contend with an outward-facing image over which they can exert unsettlingly minimal control. The more canny-minded celebrities seize the reins of their own PR by cultivating a persona they can get out in front of, caricaturing themselves before someone else gets the chance. Charlie Chaplin, perhaps the first A-lister to contend with this existential quandary of exposure, went one step further by inventing a character he could plaster over himself. The Real Charlie Chaplin, a new documentary in cinemas this week, posits his Little Tramp alter ego as a shield and veil. If audiences were looking at the bowler hat, toothbrush moustache, and rubbery cane, they’d never see the man wearing them. “I remember, even as a child, having an image of Charlie Chaplin in my head,” co-director James Spinney tells the Guardian. “Like most people, the costume was known to me. We saw these films with lots of preconceptions; he’s emblematic of an early, cartoonish style of cinema comedy, slapstick, films played at the wrong speed. As an adult revisiting these, I was struck by how modern they felt, how subversive, how there’s no sense of the antiquated whatsoever. Everyone has an idea about Charlie Chaplin. But people who knew him best felt that he was hard to create a connection with, that they didn’t really know him, that he was always performing.” The top-to-bottom bio-doc examines Chaplin as a once-in-a-generation funnyman, while recognizing that as only one of the many roles he played in his eventful life: the Dickensian child laborer, the innovative vaudevillian, the big-hearted humanist, the vindictive lover, the Tinseltown captain of industry, the witch-hunted commie, the reclusive Swiss expat. In what Spinney describes as “one of the greatest rags-to-riches stories ever told”, the only connecting thread through the many ups and downs is the tension between Chaplin’s private and public lives. He prized his hordes of fans and loathed interviews, subsisting on the admiration while contending with the anxiety of being known and yet not-known. For Spinney and co-director Peter Middleton, the prospect of gaining fresh insight into the aspects of himself Chaplin took pains to conceal was too intriguing to pass up. “One thing we knew very early on was that there was no single, solid, stable version of Charlie Chaplin,” Spinney says. “We’re not trying to link them all up, because there are too many of them, and they don’t always add up. He was chameleonic in the way he reflected back to people what they wanted.” Their producer, Ben Limberg, had negotiated with Chaplin’s estate and the British Film Institute for a master list of materials they’d be permitted to access, the most obscure of which caught the directors’ eyes. In particular, they fixated on an “enigmatic” tape containing raw audio from a three-day profile sit-down for Life Magazine, conducted by Richard Meryman in 1966 at Chaplin’s twilight-years home on Lake Geneva. “We realized that we’d arrived at an opportune moment in history, where an archival source such as that can be restored,” Middleton says. “We started breaking that down and though it feels like there are 700 books written about Chaplin, we thought that could be our way in to something new.” Secured after one full year of negotiations, the soundbites provide a condensed memoir with a candid running commentary as Chaplin recalled his early days of tribulation and hardship. His parents’ severe debts resulted in him being sent to Lambeth Workhouse at the tender age of seven, a plight he escaped through his natural inclination for the stage. From dance troupes and small plays to a breakout gig under vaudeville mainstay Fred Karno, an undeniable showmanship carried him out of abject poverty and across the Atlantic for a shot in the nascent movie business. It was there that he debuted the Little Tramp, whose penniless misfortunes mirrored his own background at the Central London District school for paupers. “This character of the Tramp, who’s so wrapped up in Chaplin’s own psyche, who seems to channel his childhood and his neuroses and his humiliations of youth – it keeps replaying the traumas he experienced in London,” Spinney explains. “That character also turned him into the highest-paid actor on the planet and one of the most famous people in history. It’s almost like a fairytale, in some senses … Chaplin’s determination to keep journeying inwards – the sense of introspection, how he built fibers of his life into his art – is what made our structure possible. He never rested on his laurels.” Spinney and Middleton use this biographical lens to process the greatest hits of Chaplin’s filmography as an extension of his interior turmoils. “The extraordinary canvas of his life maps quite neatly on to his films,” Middleton says. The early silent hit The Kid allowed Chaplin to project his wounded inner child on to a street urchin and give him the nurturing home a young Chaplin always dreamt of. The Yukon adventure The Gold Rush indulged his boyhood imagination and the old-fashioned romance City Lights was his pushback to the talkies he hoped were a passing fad. He responded to the widespread desperation of the Great Depression with the industrialized bustle of Modern Times, and addressed the mass ruination of the Holocaust with the Hitler satire, The Great Dictator. “After he was rejected by the American establishment and public in the wake of Monsieur Verdoux, he came back and made Limelight, the story of a music hall star who was renowned as a tramp comedian, with his public now having fallen out of love with him,” Middleton continues. “There’s a shape to his life that syncs up neatly with the chronology of his films, and we were fortunate for that. But at the same time, we didn’t want to be wedded to that in any way.” The latter half of the documentary shifts focus from Chaplin’s work to his tumultuous personal life, in which a few crises threatened to tarnish his outward-facing profile. There was the smear campaign mounted against him by the House un-American activities committee, which painted Chaplin as a communist sympathizer for being generally pro-peace. Uglier still were the acrimonious, scandalous divorces – his separation from second wife Lita Grey marked by her proto-Me Too accusations and the scandal-mongering media’s portrayal of her as a gold-digging liar. Chaplin fans must contend with the dissonance between an artist who preached goodwill and magnanimity on screen and his contemptible goings-on behind closed doors. “There were some uncomfortable elements of Chaplin’s biography that we felt had to be foregrounded in the film,” Middleton says. “We tried to find as much as possible in the way of first-hand accounts and testimony, looking for people who could speak directly to this. That’s what led us to the incredible interview with Lita Grey, conducted in 1965 around the release of her autobiography. This was all well-documented at the time, when it was the most expensive and sensational divorce in Hollywood history. The way Lita’s story was brushed aside by parts of the press has a strong resonance with whose stories are believed in the modern day. She says that she was disbelieved by the public because of their idolization of Charlie. They couldn’t reconcile the details they were discovering through the divorce settlement with the image of the tramp on-screen. Over the past few years, as a society, we’ve been facing that same dilemma. It was possibly one of the first times in history that people had to confront this dissonance.” “His star-image quickly crumbled under the pressure of these very plausible allegations about a pattern of abusive behavior,” Middleton adds. “We were interested in how those two sections spoke to one another. We trusted that audiences are sophisticated enough to consider these two ideas together.” That troubling contradiction was one of many that come to define Chaplin in the film’s analysis, which concludes only that the closer one looks, the more unknowable he appears to be. What’s certain is that the distance between the man and his onlookers through history is by his own design, his evasive withdrawal ultimately being his clearest, truest quality. Lying behind the instinct to hide, pervading so much of what the comic genius did, is anxiety – over being seen, exposed or rejected. “He seemed to put up so many barriers to the people closest to him in his life,” Spinney remarks. “There’s a sense that, as his daughter Jane says near the end of this film, he achieved his life’s dream. In the workhouse, he dreamed of wealth and fame, and he made it happen. But later in life, he’d admit that he always felt very insecure about his wealth, like he could be thrust back into poverty at any time and lose it all.” The Real Charlie Chaplin is out in US cinemas on 19 November and will be available on Showtime from 11 December with a UK date to be announcedAnd with that, we are going to put the blog to bed. Thank you so much, as always, for spending the day with us. Before we go, let’s recap the big stories from today: Australia extended humanitarian visas for Afghans. Victoria recorded 1,007 new Covid-19 cases and 12 deaths. “Division doesn’t work against this,” the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, said of the controversial pandemic bill that continued to be debated in parliament. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said unvaccinated people should be able to “go get a cup of coffee in Brisbane”. The Queensland deputy premier, Steven Miles, slammed the PM’s comments advocating for unvaccinated freedoms. New Zealand recorded 167 new local Covid-19 cases. No new Covid cases recorded in the Northern Territory overnight. A former detective defended the earlier investigation into William Tyrrell’s disappearance. Northern Territory health workers fear for Indigenous communities amid Covid outbreak. And that is a wrap – thank you so much – let’s do it again tomorrow! The bulk of the work to remove combustible cladding from Victorian buildings remains unfinished, a report released today reveals. From AAP: Victoria has barely made a dent in fully removing combustible cladding on buildings, with less than a fifth of rectification works completed. Cladding Safety Victoria’s annual report was among a dump of more than 100 documents from state government agencies tabled in parliament on Thursday. To 30 June this year, the report reveals CSV had overseen the completion of rectification works on 107 buildings since the statutory authority was set up in December 2020. Some 25,524 square metres of cladding was removed from 40 private apartment buildings and 67 government-owned buildings, equivalent to 1.25 times the playing surface of the Melbourne Cricket Ground. The MCG is one of three sports and entertainment venues to have flammable cladding removed so far, along with a major hospital, 10 public housing buildings and 40 Victorian schools. But the bulk of cladding removal works remain unfinished. Of the 723 buildings referred to the CSV by mid-2021 including 176 over the last financial year, 536 were inducted into the program. Removal work was under way on a further 206 buildings – which means rectification is still incomplete or hasn’t started on 429 in total. In Victoria, the debate over the (very) contentious pandemic bill looks likely to spill into tomorrow. The former federal Labor MP and trade union leader Craig Thomson has been granted bail in Gosford local court but has surrendered his passport and agreed not to approach any witnesses involved in a complex visa scheme. Wearing a white open-neck shirt, Thomson appeared by video link from Gosford police station and was represented in court by another Labor figure, the former New South Wales secretary of the ALP, Jamie Clements. Read the story here: The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, has been speaking at a virtual event in Canberra. AAP has this report: India’s prime minister says technology and data are the new weapons of the digital era and democracies need to be aware of their dangers as well as opportunities. Narendra Modi told an Australian Strategic Policy Institute forum India would not let “a few vested interests” misuse the openness of democracy. “The digital age is changing everything around us. It has redefined politics, economy and society. It is raising new questions on sovereignty, governance, ethics, law, rights and security,” Modi told the virtual event on Thursday. “But we also face new risks, and new forms of conflicts across diverse threats from sea-bed to cyber to space.” He labelled technology and data the weapons of the digital era. “The biggest strength of democracy is openness. At the same time, we should not allow a few vested interests to misuse this openness,” Modi said. The Indian government has been accused of repression and censorship. The fashion designer Lisa Gorman will depart the business that bears her surname, after 22 years in business. Known for her colourful prints, artist collaborations and playful, almost childlike cuts, Gorman’s womenswear label has built up a cult following in Australia, with fans trading and reselling popular garments online through dedicated Facebook groups. Lots of similarities being drawn between the US freedom protests and what has happened in Victoria over the past few days. Indigenous health workers in the Northern Territory town of Katherine say they fear for vulnerable community members – including many living on the streets or in severely overcrowded homes – as authorities scramble to contain a Covid outbreak. The Northern Territory recorded no new Covid cases on Thursday, but the chief minister, Michael Gunner, says concern remains for “large vulnerable households” in Katherine and the tiny remote community of Robinson River. And we’ve got an escapee - this from AAP: A 37-year-old Queensland man who arrived in Tasmania without approval has allegedly absconded from a quarantine hotel by climbing down from a third-storey balcony. The man, who arrived on a flight from Sydney on Wednesday, was discovered missing from his room at Peppers Seaport in Launceston around 9am on Thursday. He was arrested in the nearby suburb of Newnham about an hour later and has been charged with failing to comply with emergency directions. Premier Peter Gutwein said the man is awaiting a coronavirus test result but investigations suggest he had “minimal contact” with people despite spending about nine hours in the community. In mid-October, a coronavirus-infected NSW man left hotel quarantine in Hobart, sparking a three-day lockdown across the south. Despite spending time at several houses, a park and a Woolworths supermarket, he didn’t spread the virus. PK asked Davey if the PM, has in fact also been in people’s lives the last few years in a big way. She said this: And people are, after two years of it, people are tired. They’re exhausted. And they’re frustrated. That still does not give anyone the excuse to threaten the safety or the wellbeing of anyone. “I don’t care if it’s an elected politician or whether it’s their neighbour. There should never be threats of violence.” Nationals senator Perin Davey is now on Afternoon Briefing. She tells Patricia Karvelas: I don’t condone violent protests. I think everybody has the right to peaceful protest. But what we’re seeing does cross the line. I don’t condone it at all. But to be fair, as well, a lot of the questions that have been put to the prime minister have been about what he plans to do, regarding a – a bill before the Victorian parliament. And, so, I think the prime minister is absolutely right condemning the violence, but he’s also right in that it’s not his place to tell the Victorian parliament what they should and shouldn’t be doing.” Western Australia will hold a parliamentary inquiry into homelessness in the state, amid a spate of deaths among those sleeping rough in Perth. Guardian Australia reported last month that researchers from the University of Western Australia had recorded at least 44 deaths this year among people who’d experienced homelessness in Perth. The average age of those who died was 49. News of the inquiry follows a year-long investigation into street deaths by the West Australian newspaper, which reported on Thursday that the 2021 year-to-date figure of homeless deaths in Perth has now reached 51. The inquiry, to be chaired by Liberal upper house MP Peter Collier will look at issues including the current funding and delivery for services, the state’s 10-year homelessness strategy, and how “existing data systems and how data informs service delivery”, according to the terms of reference. Collier told Guardian Australia the inquiry was “not a finger-pointing exercise” and was aimed at improving the lives of people experiencing homelessness in Perth. “In the 21st century, the fact that we’ve still got thousands of people sleeping on the streets at night is unacceptable. That’s not a political statement, that’s just fact. What we’re going to do as a committee is ascertain whether what’s being provided is adequate and appropriate. He said “inevitably” the deaths of people experiencing homelessness would be examined part of the inquiry. “We’re not going to prejudge ... We’ll ascertain whether the services and the provisions are adequate and whether they did, perhaps, add to deaths on the streets. The Greens have also previously expressed support for an inquiry, but the WA Labor government, which has a majority in both houses, has previously dismissed the need for such a probe, pointing to a record spending on housing and services in its recent budget. Greens MP Brad Pettitt, who is on the committee that will run the inquiry, told Guardian Australia he hoped it could put politics aside to take an “open and transparent” look at the issue. “All of the evidence is that homelessness in Western Australia is growing. Deaths on our streets have been increasing at an alarming rate. There are some clear gaps on the kinds of information that are collected around that. Advocates have also been calling for an inquiry for some time, pointing not just to the UWA research, but also a spate of high-profile deaths of Aboriginal woman in the Perth CBD. Husic is now asked about a marketing firm claiming to work for the Labor party offering to pay TikTok users to post anti-Scott Morrison sponsored content. The party can work out how it does its advertising and how it’s set up. So I honestly don’t have evidence right in front of me that that’s the case. If it is, you know what - I don’t mind. I would rather we engage the creativity of young Australians instead of paying oodles of money to all these advertising agencies, If young Australians have got ideas on how to use social media in that way to engage other young Australians who may not necessarily - let’s face it, they don’t necessarily engage in politics, well good on them.” (Side note - pretty sure school strikes for climate is young people being engaged) Husic is attacking the PM for earlier condemning the protests and calling on the government to step back from interfering in people’s lives. He said: He was called on today to exercise national leadership to say to the country, ‘We will not tolerate this type of behaviour being directed in this way to our democracy’. And it seems like, with Trump, Scott Morrison doesn’t want to upset violent extremists. Why? Is it because he wants to curry their votes because today was not the day for him to exercise some sort of moral equivalency. Today was the day for him to say on behalf of every average Australian that goes, ‘Mmm, this is too far, this is wrong and we’re going to stamp it out’.” Ed Husic is the member for Chifley and the shadow minister for industry and innovation. He is on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing now with Patricia Karvelas. He said the protests in Melbourne represent “a threat to democracy”. “This is a result of what has festered for some time because the Morrison government has refused to take the advice of its own agencies, refused to take stock of what’s been said for the last few years. “This represents and edging towards a form of domestic terrorism, right-wing extremism in this form. “This represents a serious threat to democracy and it should be called out. “I’m frankly stunned that it took Scott Morrison days for this to happen and I’m even more alarmed by the attempt to establish some sort of moral equivalency like what we saw with Donald Trump at Charlottesville.” The Lachlan River flood event may be subsiding but perhaps not for long. River levels peaked at 10.53m at Forbes on Thursday morning just below the 2016 flood height, the Bureau of Meteorology said today. Meteorologists, though, are watching a low-pressure trough that will develop into a discrete low, bringing with it more rain. Ben Domensino, a senior forecaster at Weatherzone, predicts another 30-50mm of rain will fall in the Lachlan catchment, so we might see renewed flooding there. The same system, though, will bring a lot of rain and potentially thunderstorms to the region around Sydney. Depending on how far north it tracks, the city could receive 40-100mm over the Sunday to Monday period, Domensino says. With Sydney’s dams at 96% full and the big one, Warragamba at 100% capacity, there is the potential for reservoirs to spill and for some flooding in the Hawkesbury-Nepean river. It seems an age ago but that valley copped severe flooding just last March. With conditions tilting towards a La Nina in the Pacific, we can expect a wetter than normal summer. Given that some inland dams are at above capacity already - Burrendong is at 129% - there’s a fair bet emergency services are in for a busy season ahead. Earlier today Victorian premier Daniel Andrews was defending the pandemic bill in parliament. He said: This is about keeping us open. This is about making sure that we can recover and rebuild, heal and go forward after 1-in-100 year event. Heal, as in healing a wound and something you wouldn’t know much about I wouldn’t have thought. You know, really, wordgames and laughter, that’s what we get from this one, not a leader’s bootlace on the back door - on the back door but on the front steps, sucking up to extremists. Sucking up to violent extremists, you ought to be condemned.” It currently looks like the government cannot pass the bill as it stands. But northern WA you’ve got extreme heat warnings - along with parts of the NT and QLD. Stay safe and hydrated. Hey (southern) WA! Its your turn for rain: Brisbane’s Catholic Archbishop has been the first to impose a vaccine mandate on his priests - giving them one month to get fully vaccinated if they haven’t already. Archbishop Mark Coleridge says unvaccinated clergy present a health risk to parishioners. Human Rights Law Centre legal director Daniel Webb has commented on the postponing of the Victorian government’s controversial pandemic bill, which was due to be debated and possibly voted on in the upper house today. He says it’s “clear” Victoria needs to have something in place to support “common sense public health measures” to keep people safe when the state of emergency lapses on 15 December: “The pandemic isn’t over and governments around the country are still relying on public health and emergency powers to help manage it. The new bill isn’t perfect but it’s a big improvement on the existing law. There are some new human rights and transparency safeguards in there that aren’t in the laws in other states, like an express requirement that all decisions and actions comply with Victoria’s Human Rights Charter. These are the sorts of safeguards that ultimately help governments make better decisions and strike the right balance between public health and the right to life and other rights and freedoms. We do however think there should be an outer limit on how long a pandemic declaration can be extended for and stronger appeal rights for detention. But overall the new bill offers much greater transparency, oversight and human rights protections than the current law and the law in other parts of the country.” I just want to jump back to Western Australia quickly. Not only has premier Mark McGowan been forced to close his office indefinitely after violent threats - but he has also condemned “deranged” behaviour from anti-vaxxers after they targeted WA schools. The anti-vaxxers have been targetting schools in WA that are offering on-site vaccination for their students. Allegedly, one protestor told a student in Perth yesterday that they “might as well shoot you now”. McGowan said their “extremist behaviour is verging on urban terrorism”. “It’s demented, it’s deranged, it’s outrageous, it’s selfish. And I’d just urge these people to stop. Harassing kids at their schools or in shopping centres is not the Australian way.” Those who follow the blog religiously (and I know there are a few of you!) will remember earlier this week we posted about a catch to South Australia opening its border that concerned some Greens MPs in NSW and VIC. On 23 November SA will open its borders to fully vaccinated people from all Australian states and territories, but quarantine will apply to LGAs with community transmission and less than 80% of the population fully vaccinated. Because of statistical anomalies, both City of Sydney and City of Melbourne have shown low vaccination rates - but that looks like it is about to change for Melbourne at least: Gary Jubelin, the retired homicide detective who once led the William Tyrrell case, has defended his previous investigation as the renewed search for the child’s remains continues. The former detective was responding to criticisms from the state’s current police commissioner, Mick Fuller, that the new investigation team had “inherited what was a bit of a mess”. “There’s been death threats and there’s been threats to rape my staff,” McGowan told reporters. “It’s disgusting and disgraceful and they should stop because it’s not going to make the government change its policy.” police are investigating. Hello team Guardian, Cait Kelly here. First up, thanks to Stephanie Convery who smashed it this morning. I want to start on a lighter note, and I think a lot of you will be pleased to hear this ... From Sunday, fully-vaccinated Singaporeans will be able to visit Australia. Students, family members and tourists will all be able to come without quarantining. 83% of the city-state has had two doses of the vaccine. It’s the first travel bubble since a similar corridor ended with our mates across the ditch. And with that, I’ll hand you over to the magnificent Cait Kelly, who will take you through what remains of the afternoon. Thanks for sticking with me! OK, just as a slight aside, I don’t know about you, but I am very glad to see that our resident agony aunt Eleanor Gordon-Smith has tackled the big topic in the lead-up to the silly season: managing family events with that agonising aunt (or sibling or cousin) who refuses to get vaxxed. This is not your common or garden variety burglary. Thieves have uprooted more than 200 citrus trees from an orchard in South Australia’s Riverland. Grower Jeff Knispel, the joint managing director of Nippy’s Group, said sometime after dark on the Friday before last, someone snuck in and stole the trees. They had been planted just days before, so they would have been easy to pull out. A small, camping style shovel was left behind. Read more on this juicy story here: Here’s some more detail on the situation with the South Australian deputy premier Vickie Chapman. If you missed it, a parliamentary committee has recommended that she be found guilty of wilfully misleading parliament in statements regarding her decision to block the development of a timber port on Kangaroo Island when she was planning minister. From Max Opray at AAP: Labor MP Andrea Michaels tabled the parliamentary committee’s final report into Chapman’s rejection in August of the $40m timber port, describing her denials of conflicts of interest as “Trumpesque at best”. “Blatant denialism of objective evidence and plain truth does the attorney general no favour,” Michaels told the SA parliament on Thursday. The parliamentary committee found Chapman, who is planning minister and attorney general, should be suspended from parliament for nine days and make a public apology. Chapman and her family have long held property on Kangaroo Island, but she told the committee she had no personal interest in any business or industry. The Labor opposition is set to push for a no-confidence motion in Chapman on Thursday afternoon, which, if successful, would be the first time in the state that a no-confidence motion has been passed in the lower house against a minister. The SA premier Steven Marshall had described the inquiry as a “kangaroo court” and previously said he fully supported his deputy. Residents of the central-western NSW town of Forbes began returning to their homes and businesses tried to reopen their doors on Wednesday after officials said floodwaters from the Lachlan River had peaked. Dave Rankine, a spokesperson for the state emergency service, said the floodwaters had reached 10.52m and had stayed at that level since 3am: Whilst we haven’t seen a drop in the river, [that] probably suggests it’s plateaued. The threat of rising floodwaters remains though, with more rainfall forecast. We had planned for the worst-case scenario which was 10.65m and would have seen water right the way through town; it hasn’t eventuated. Whilst it’s been a small inconvenience for local businesses who’ve had to shut for a few days. Read the full story here: To New South Wales now, our photographer Mike Bowers is out in Forbes, where floodwaters from the Lachlan River have been rising this week. Traditional owners in Western Australia have requested urgent help from the United Nations after the tabling of the state government’s new draft of the Aboriginal cultural heritage bill. The WA government says the bill will be a “new way” to protect Aboriginal heritage in the wake of the Juukan Gorge disaster. But the Aboriginal Heritage Action Alliance, a coalition of senior Aboriginal people from WA, said the bill didn’t address the “urgent need” to strengthen legal protections for sacred cultural sites. Dr Hannah McGlade, on behalf of the alliance, sent a letter to the UN on Wednesday seeking immediate assistance before the bill is passed in parliament. We’ll leave the NT press conference there. Crossing fingers for all the folks in remote communities that the outbreak has been contained. The NT chief health officer says the woman who is hospital has had one dose of the vaccine, and that the high vaccination rate in Robinson River has probably protected her: That high vaccination rate is a protection to that community. We may be seeing some of that benefit in it – we know that half of those were – of all the cases we had, about nine out of the 19 were fully vaccinated. We’re probably benefitting from that. Certainly they’re benefitting from that in terms of how ill they may get. I should have mentioned yesterday that the lady that is in hospital has had one dose of vaccine. And that’s probably protecting her as well. So, I think if we hadn’t, if we hadn’t had that level of vaccination, we may be looking at some quite different. We had an enormous uptick in our vaccination rates. I have to say I feel we have turned the corner. The general tenor of this press conference is definitely cautious optimism. All of the known Covid cases are from three households, authorities say, and the vast majority of people in the locked down areas are complying with stay-at-home orders. Care packages are being rolled out to communities and in Katherine emergency accommodation has been set up for those who need to transit through or need a place to stay. Robinson River meanwhile should soon be at 100% first dose: The high vaccination rates of Robinson River has been crucial. We have prepared for this, we have surged in, the community has been magnificent. Only 15 people remain to receive a first dose in Robinson River. I understand they all want to be vaccinated today. Gunner turns to the worryingly low vaccination rates in Katherine: The rate was 71%, and that’s a concern ... I understand the issue may be a mobility one and we’re tasking the local team to provide options today. I have asked for on-the-ground advice. I have seen a photo of a queue to our clinic. It may be that people were prioritising testing and this will shift to vaccinations today. Vaccinations remain one of the five reasons to leave your home in a lockdown. If you have family or a mate who isn’t vaccinated, encourage them to get their first dose today. We need to see a lift in the vaccination rates in Katherine. There’s another exposure site on the list for folks up there but Gunner is sounding cautiously optimistic. The next few days remain crucial. We still have lots of testing and tracing work to do, but things are looking more positive. There’s one new exposure site that I want to highlight. That’s the BP service station in Katherine on 13 November. If you’re there on the date from 2.40 to 4pm, please call the Covid hotline and identify yourself as a close contact. You will need to isolate and get tested and remain isolated even after a negative test. It’s a different date and time to the already announced casual contact site at the BP. From the NT chief minister: The total number of cases, cluster number two, remains at 19. Nine are fully vaccinated, two have one dose, five are unvaccinated, and three are not eligible to be vaccinated. There were no new positive cases in the Northern Territory overnight. This is good news but it’s not a date to get ahead of ourselves. We won’t presume this means we have trapped the virus. This is delta, this is in large vulnerable households, we’re not out of the woods. The next day or two remain crucial. We’re still waiting for tests to return from Robinson River. NT chief minister Michael Gunner is giving a Covid update now. My colleague Melissa Davey has pulled together a wrap of all the forthcoming changes to Victoria’s covid restrictions, which are kicking in early thanks to the state hitting its vaccination target faster than expected. We’re going to hear from the Northern Territory government shortly about the Covid outbreak in Indigenous communities there. Joe Martin-Jard from the Northern Land Council just spoke on the ABC about that outbreak, which is currently centred in Robinson River and Katherine, but there are fears it may spread to Borroloola. We’re very shocked ... The people, through no fault of their own – they’ve been listening to the messages about getting double vaccinations, been very disciplined that way, doing the right thing – and there’s people in the Northern Territory letting us down. Martin-Jard is calling on the NT government to put Borroloola into lockdown. We call on them again, lock it down until at least Monday. We’re probably too late. We are hearing reports this morning that people fled Borroloola and are now in Darwin. Nonetheless, it would be good to lock it down anyway until Monday. And we need to lock down Robinson River. Because a lot of families move back and forth between those two places. Back in Victoria, and Legislative Council leader of the opposition David Davis just asked whether the Victorian government’s motion to delay debate on the pandemic legislation meant discussion would resume later today or at a further date. He did not receive an answer. It came after a rather trivial argument about finger pointing. One MP (I didn’t catch their name) accused another of finger pointing, while, unfortunately, finger pointing themselves. Sticking with South Australia just for a moment, and some news for sports fans: The alleged conflict of interest issue relates to Chapman’s decision to block the development of a timber port on Kangaroo Island when she was SA’s planning minister. The SA parliament is expected to move a motion of no confidence in the deputy premier, and it’s possible that will get up. The ABC is reporting some breaking news out of South Australia, that a parliamentary committee has recommended SA’s lower house find the state’s deputy premier Vickie Chapman “guilty of contempt” for wilfully misleading parliament and for having a conflict of interest in a planning decision. I expect we’ll hear more about that soon. Hello folks. Thanks so much to Matilda Boseley for her inimitable blogging this morning. I’ll be with you for the next couple of hours, be kind! With that I shall hand you over to the one and only Stephanie Convery, making her daily news blog debut! You are in for an absolute treat! See you all tomorrow! New Zealand has reported 167 new cases of Covid-19 today, as its delta outbreak continues to spread across the country. Two people died yesterday, according to the health ministry, and 85 are in hospital. While the vast majority of cases are still in Auckland, infections have also cropped up in Northland, Waikato, Bay of Plenty, MidCentral, Canterbury and the Lakes District. Particularly notable this week were cases in the Wairarapa – just outside Wellington – and in Christchurch, the South Island’s largest city. According to ministry figures, 91% of eligible adults (those aged 12 and over) have had their first dose of the vaccine and 82% are fully vaccinated. Over in the Legislative Council in Victoria, Labor’s motion to postpone debate on the pandemic bill has just carried 20 votes to 17. Upper house opposition leader David Davis said he “expected today we would be debating the pandemic legislation” and encouraged the Coalition’s proposed amendments to the bill to be circulated. The Victorian government hoped to pass the bill this week with the support of three key crossbenchers, but will have to enter into critical further negotiations if an agreement is to made before the emergency powers end on 15 December. Just a bit more on those case numbers out of the ACT. The Territory recorded 25 cases in the past 24 hours. That’s the highest for almost a month, since 28 cases were recorded on 21 October. It’s also more than double the cases recorded the day prior. Case numbers have generally hovered around the 10 per day mark in recent weeks. The ACT has only recently lifted the majority of its restrictions, including removing the need for masks in most settings. It’s still too early to say whether this latest result is part of a trend back to higher case numbers. But the good news is the ACT’s population has a remarkable vaccination rate. The vaccination rate of ACT residents aged 12 and over has now reached 96.8%. That’s reflected in the low numbers of Canberrans in hospital. Only three people are hospitalised with Covid in the ACT. One is on a ventilator and in intensive care. Queensland’s deputy premier Steven Miles has accused the prime minister of attempting to appeal to anti-vaxxers in order to help curry votes in the next election after he said unvaccinated people in Brisbane should be allowed to “go get a cup of coffee” if the state is at 80% vaccination. He is so desperate to claw together a coalition of anti-vaxxers for his own political benefit. [The new venue vaccination rules] do not deserve to be undermined by a PM more interested in currying favour with coffee baron donors and lunatic backbenchers than the health and the jobs of Queenslanders. Dan Andrews turns to the protesters outside Victorian parliament today. He condemns “extremists with intolerable views” among the demonstrators, but doesn’t want to say much more because of charges that have been laid by Victoria police. On Coalition MPs who are yet to denounce the protests outright, he is less measured: I’m so deeply grateful that some people have stood at the back door today professing to be constructive and work together while their colleagues are standing in front, alongside extremists ... That’s not democracy, that’s political games. To all those complaining about lockdown, we’re not in lockdown because the Victorian community didn’t listen to you, they went and got vaccinated ... division doesn’t work against this but a unified community does. Just imagine for one moment a premier over the last two years that had been beholden to extremists. Would we be at 90% today? I don’t think so. Would we be open today? Absolutely not, and if we were, our hospitals would be full to bursting. Dan Andrews’ presser has turned to the pandemic legislation, which is in disarray today after former Labor minister Adam Somyurek announced he would return to the upper house to vote against the bill. The premier says he’s “not here to comment on individual members of the Legislative Council”: If you want to have a chat to him you can absolutely do that. We don’t have the numbers in the upper house ... we’ll try and get an outcome that keeps us safe. I don’t know if this outcome will get resolved today, tonight, tomorrow, we’ll just have to wait and see. The story today is Victorians being proud and their government being grateful to them ... we are united in our belief in science and the power of doing something for yourself and everyone else. The Australia Capital Territory has recorded 25 new Covid-19 cases in the latest reporting period. Anthony Albanese has come out this morning to offer a significantly more unreserved condemnation of the rhetoric coming out of the Victorian protests: I condemn it, there’s no place in Australian public life. For people threatening the lives of politicians or anyone else. What we’ve seen is the participation* as well of at least one member of the House of Representatives in Craig Kelly, and stake members of the Liberal party along with with other figures who participated in these demonstrations setup included explicit threats against the premier of Victoria, and against other people in public life. *Participation in the protests, that is. Not the participation in the threats themselves. Here’s the full (lengthy) press release on all the changes coming to Victoria from midnight tonight. This would be a great time for me to actually have weekend plans, wouldn’t it? Good news for regional Queensland! The restrictions on hospital and aged care visitation will be lifted in Goondiwindi. These were imposed after a positive case was recorded in the area. The fourth day of the latest search for the remains of missing boy William Tyrrell has begun, with police continuing their focus on soil in the home where he went missing in 2014 and a patch of nearby bushland. This morning specialist teams continued clearing trees in the area of bushland on Batar Creek Road in Kendall, a town about four hours’ drive north of Sydney and about an hour inland from Port Macquarie. Yesterday the search team discovered red fabric that was quickly ruled out as being from the Spider-Man costume that William was last seen wearing. But the patch of land where the fabric was found was covered with a protective tarpaulin overnight, and officers have resumed sifting through earth. Later this morning NSW police assisted by the Australian federal police forensics imagery and geomatics team continued searching at the former home of William’s foster grandmother, where he was last seen. Searchers are using ground-penetrating radar in the garage of the home to look for disturbances or anomalies in the soil under a slab of concrete. The concrete is understood to have been laid after William disappeared. The renewed search comes seven years after William went missing in September 2014, when visiting his foster grandmother with his foster family. Many of these new freedoms apply only to those who are fully vaccinated. Ben Cowie: Restaurants, cafes, live music venues will operate at full capacity for vaccinated people and, as the premier mentioned, you will be able to have as many people as you can tolerate in your home, and we strongly encourage all of those people to be vaccinated. There is no limit [on how many people can get] together in a public place and all the customers are fully vaccinated, those under 12, all those medically exempt will be able to enter non-essential retail. OK, here is Ben Cowie with all the places that Victorians will still need to wear their masks: The premier referred to face masks, there requirements will be moved in a large range of settings, they will still be required in some particularly sensitive or high-consequence settings. This will include primary school staff, visitors and students in grades 3 to 6, as is presently the case. Serving staff at hospitality venues will still be required to wear masks. They will be required in indoor retail settings for now, there is a mix of essential and non-essential services in shops and a range of shopping centres, for instance, with a lot of people aged under 12 who are unable to be vaccinated in those retail settings as well, which is why we made a recommendation to government to retain those settings. Taxis, rideshare will require masks, as will passenger planes, although high-risk workplaces, masks will still be required, so thinking about meat processing in particular. Victorian deputy chief health officer Prof Ben Cowie admits that some people will die from Covid-19 in the months ahead: Even with 90% vaccination, we will continue to see infections with Covid-19 in the community. But for vaccinated people, they are so much less likely to get seriously ill, to end up in hospital, to end up in intensive care, or obviously also so much less likely to lose their lives. It is that important. As we move forward, some people will still need to be admitted to the hospital system, and there will be a loss of life. That is a tragedy, do something that we need to support the families and those affected, as the community has continued to do throughout the pandemic. All of us at some stage we’ll know someone who has had the virus, or will get Covid. Victoria should consider stricter air quality enforcement measures and ensure agencies such as the Environment Protection Authority are adequately resourced to police them, a Legislative Council Committee inquiry has found. The Environment and Planning Committee received 145 submissions and heard from more than 40 witnesses. Its chair Sonja Terpstra said: We’re pleased that we found that Victoria’s overall air quality is good but there are pockets of pollution that lead to severe health outcomes and we think there’s much more that could be done to address those. The committee has made 35 recommendations addressing a range of issues including the pollution caused by domestic wood heaters and vehicle exhaust and aimed at improving community consultation to mitigate air pollution. It found that wood smoke from domestic heaters makes a significant contribution to air pollution, particularly in winter: The government should assist renters and people from low socioeconomic backgrounds to transition away from wood heaters and towards reverse cycle air conditioning ... We’d also like to see the government consider a rebate scheme to phase out wood heaters from homes in built-up areas. This could be done by helping replace home heating systems when houses are put up for sale. The committee made a range of recommendations aimed at mitigating the impact of motor vehicle pollution, including further promoting the uptake of electric vehicles and a range of measures to reduce vehicle idling, especially near schools. The full report can be found here. Victoria’s health minister Martin Foley has confirmed isolation protocols will also change dramatically from midnight, with many people who would have previously been required to isolate for two weeks now simply required to produce a negative PCR test: Now that we have achieved this astonishingly, by global standards ... at 90% double dose, we can take a whole series of steps that keep Victoria open, and keep Victoria safe ... I want to touch briefly on some of the details around what that 90% double dose means when it comes to making sure that the quarantine and isolation obligations can be reduced as a result of those really high numbers of vaccinations. Victorians who test positive will continue to have to isolate, but with changed circumstances, we will go into more later ... From 11.59pm tonight, the vast majority of people who come into contact with a confirmed case, outside of their home context, won’t have to do self-quarantine. They will have to receive a standard PCR test, and isolate it until they get that negative result. That means that if an office, restaurant, nightclub, any of those areas you want automatically how to quarantine the patrons, all the staff who previously designated primary close contacts, will be quantified as a tier one contact and will have to do isolate accordingly. You will get your test, and as long as it is negative, you are free to go about your lifestyle. While a huge number of restrictions are being lifted in Victoria, a mask mandate for indoor retail venues will remain, the premier has confirmed. Dan Andrews also confirmed Victorians will be able to celebrate “a normal Christmas”: Because of public health advice, we will keep them on in retail for a few more weeks. Until the middle of next month. And we hope that if we continue to see a trend of lower hospitalisations than we thought and falling hospitalisations, and we may be able to make that change. As we look to Christmas, it will be a Christmas like no other, but a normal Christmas. It is one that we have all earned, and one that every Victorian I’m sure we’ll enjoy. Dan Andrews: Because 90% of Victorians have gone and gotten vaccinated, so many of these rules, almost all of them can fall away ... Whether it is 100,000 people at the MCG on Boxing Day, or a smaller group of people standing up at the local pub having a beer. This is a Covid-normal that every Victorian has wanted, this is the safe delivery of the national plan – I am not only proud of Victorians but also deeply grateful. Victoria premier Daniel Andrews is speaking now and has confirmed that the state will imminently pass through the 90% double vaccination mark, so new, relaxed restrictions will come into effect from tonight: What do these rule changes from 11.59pm tonight mean? Well, first and foremost, there are no more caps, there are no more closures. There are no more rules in terms of how many people can be in different spaces. As it is to your home, back to normal. The number of people in a pub or cafe or restaurant, back to normal. There will not be Covid rules that determine how many people are at the pub, it will be the liquor licence, back to normal. You can stand up to have a drink, dancefloors, all of those things that we have missed, and that are absolutely about getting to as normal a situation as possible. That normality that we have all craved, we are able to deliver that as a result of the amazing work that Victorians have done in getting vaccinated in record time. And in record numbers. The politicians have descended on Forbes as flood waters continue to plague the town: Looks like the Victorian press conference today will indeed be confirming that restrictions will be eased once the state hits its 90% double vaccination rate: Victoria’s fire authority has declared its first total fire ban of the season, as the state government prepares 50 planes to assist in fighting bushfires this summer, repots AAP. The Mallee is forecast to experience temperatures in the mid 30s, strong and gusty winds and a risk of thunderstorms on Thursday. With a severe fire danger rating, the Country Fire Authority has declared the region will be subject to a total fire ban for Thursday. It means no open air fire can be lit or remain alight from 12.01am to 11.59pm, and strict rules also apply for use of farm machinery, chainsaws and lawn mowers. A very high fire danger rating is forecast for the nearby Wimmera region on Thursday, while it is deemed high for the Northern Country and South West and low-moderate for the rest of the state. Meanwhile, emergency services minister Jaclyn Symes says 50 aircraft, including firebombing planes, will be “strategically placed” across Victoria over the summer to help firefighting efforts. These include the state’s highest capacity helicopter, a CH47 Chinook carrying 11,000 litres of water or retardant, which will be used in the hottest part of the day and can continue into the night. Two large air tankers that can carry 10,000 litres and require less room for takeoff and landing will be based at Avalon Airport, one of which will be shared with Queensland. These aircraft are always a critical weapon in our firefighters’ arsenal during summer, ensuring that Victoria has the strongest possible fire response each year as we head into the fire season. While the outlook for this fire season indicates a lower threat of prolonged bushfires, grass and crop blazes remain a high risk across the state after average-above average rainfall and strong fuel growth. We will be hearing from the Victorian premier at 10.30am. Although the press conference is not about the pandemic legislation, I’m sure Daniel Andrews will get asked some questions on the topic, so it should be well worth a listen. I’m just hunting down the exact quotes for you by Victorian opposition leader Matthew Guy, who has told ABC radio that the sports minister Martin Pakula is “a little unhinged” after the Labor frontbencher suggested Liberal MPs were cozying up to protesters spreading violent rhetoric. Well, Pakula has now responded, doubling down and accusing the state Liberals of not doing enough to condemn neo-Nazism: Hydrogen produced by fossil fuels is more expensive, will release more greenhouse gas emissions and comes with a greater risk of creating stranded assets, according to new research from the Australian National University. In the paper, published in the peer-reviewed engineering journal Applied Energy, researchers compared the emissions and financial cost of producing hydrogen using fossil fuels or renewable energy. “Blue hydrogen” is produced using natural gas while “green hydrogen” is made by running an electric current through water using an electrolyser powered by renewable energy such as wind or solar. “Clean hydrogen” is the term used for when carbon capture and storage is used to capture carbon dioxide emissions during the production process, similar to proposals for “clean coal”. You can read the full report below: NSW Health has managed to get the office number announcement up and, as expected, the state has recorded 262 new Covid-19 cases. We now know that the state has also recorded three Covid-19 deaths in the latest reporting period: The man accused of raping Brittany Higgins, Bruce Lehrmann, will stand trial in June 2022, with a tentative date of 6 June set for a three- to four-week trial. Lehrmann is pleading not guilty to one charge of sexual intercourse without consent and denies any form of sexual activity took place. ACT director of public prosecutions Shane Drumgold will also hold a criminal case conference with Lehrmann’s legal team on 7 February, a process that aims to reduce the issues at dispute at trial. The ACT supreme court held a directions hearing on Thursday, at which Drumgold asked for a trial date and indicated there was “not a lot of benefit” to the pre-trial conference. But registrar J Reece said the practice was to hold a conference for all criminal matters. Drumgold and Lehrmann’s lawyer, Warwick Korn, then agreed to hold one. The matter has been listed for further mentions on 16 December and 28 February. Reece extended Lehrmann’s bail to 7 February. Lehrmann was present in court only via audio and was silent throughout the hearing. The matter was listed for trial as a “special fixture” (indicating a trial of more than a week’s length) to begin on 6 June. Drumgold indicated that the prosecution case will take two weeks. Prime minister Scott Morrison was asked what he thought about some of his state Liberal counterparts mingling with protesters when, at other times during the same demonstrations, prop gallows had been displayed and some in the crowd had called for the execution of high-profile Victorian politicians. Reporter: What do you think of state-level MPs joining in on these protests and associating themselves with these messages? Morrison: I don’t support any of that. Oh, and we have some awesome blog news this morning! You can now filter the blog to read only the key events, just in case you want to quickly get across all the biggest stories of the day: It seems NSW Health is having difficulty tweeting out the Covid-19 numbers this morning, however, the new data is available on their website. The state has reported 262 new Covid-19 cases in the latest reporting period. Interestingly, the PM appears to be advocating for states to relax mandatory vaccine laws, saying people should “be able to go get a cup of coffee in Brisbane regardless of whether you’ve had a vaccine or not”: Australians have done an amazing job when it comes to leading us through this pandemic. But now it’s time for governments to step back and for Australians to take their life back and for Australians to be able to move forward with the freedoms that should be this. That’s what we’re doing as the government and where we see it going. Our position on mandatory vaccines, for example, is in very specific circumstances. We aren’t in favour of mandatory vaccines imposed by the government. Businesses can make their own choices on the law but we aren’t about telling them Australians what to do. Vaccines are only mandatory in cases where you have health workers working with vulnerable people. That’s what our medical advice has always been and, as we get above 80% in particular, which the scientific advice shows us and the research showed us that means Australians can have their lives back, they should be able to go to a get a cup of coffee in Brisbane regardless of whether you’ve had a vaccine or not. Victoria’s daily case numbers have jumped back over the 1,000 mark, with 1,007 new infections recorded in the state. Sadly, 12 people infected with the virus have died. Scott Morrison has condemned the threats of violence coming from Victorian protesters but says it’s also time for governments to “take a step back” from people’s everyday lives. He is speaking now in NSW: We are a civil, peaceful society. We have disagreements and we don’t handle them with violence ... No matter how frustrated people might be, that’s never the answer and there needs to respect shown in those debates that we have. Has to be appropriate guidance and stability. There are many who feel frustrated. Over the last couple of years, governments have been telling Australians what to do, now there has been a need for that as we have gone through the pandemic, the time is now to start rolling all of that back. Not a lot on the stats front in Australia this morning, although extended labour force figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics might shed some handy insights into where the pinch points are in the economy. That’s also where wage bargaining might be of interest too. Greg Jericho dived (never dove) deep into yesterday’s release of the wage price index here. Key observations include the fact that, yes, wages are on the rise but they aren’t keeping up with the CPI, and so in real terms are going backwards. The pay freeze for public sector employees is one of the drags, and that will come to an end as wage claims start to build. If the AFR’s story today about Scott Morrison resisting pressure to open up the economy for a surge in migration is correct, competition from overseas workers will be some way off. Mind you, it would presumably take some time for people to arrive, set up new lives and find work in any significant numbers. And Covid restrictions on people arriving and leaving over the past couple of years will probably have put off more than a few potential migrants. On the markets, Australian shares are poised to open flat, to the dismay of speculators, with the main overseas stock indices down a bit. The main overnight news including more jumps in inflation, especially in the UK. There the CPI came in at 4.2% versus October last year, or higher than economists expected, and twice the Bank of England’s 2% target. Core inflation, which strips out volatile items was the highest in a decade at 3.4%. The ANZ wrote in a briefing note: The strength in price rises, combined with the strong post-furlough labour market data earlier in the week, would seem to open the runway for the BoE to hike rates. Although, given the surprise non-hike earlier in November, markets may be reluctant to price-in a December move with absolute certainty. (Note to self: avoid “hike” when discussing rates, unless it’s something about mountains.) Australia is hoping a tourism campaign lures travellers from Singapore when two-way quarantine-free travel resumes between the two countries, reports Georgie Moore from AAP. From Sunday, fully vaccinated Singaporeans can arrive in Australia without quarantining as long as they return a negative Covid-19 test. Tourism Australia has launched a campaign to encourage travel from the city-state worth about $1.5bn to the Australian economy. Managing director Phillipa Harrison told the Nine Network on Thursday: It is not going to make up for the loss of international but, surely, it is a great start ... [Singaporeans] are very familiar with Australia. They travel far and wide around Australia. That is why we are back in the market with our first conversion brand campaign in quite a period of time, convincing them to come back. Australians were this month given the green light to travel to Singapore. Harrison expects post-Covid tourism to rebound by 50% relatively quickly as international and domestic restrictions reduce. There is a lot of demand for travel around New South Wales, Victoria and also the ACT ... It is a good start, but we do need all of the borders open as soon as we can. Prime minister Scott Morrison has flagged that quarantine-free travel with South Korea and Japan could be on the horizon. NSW Labor is calling for an overhaul of the state’s grant process after a number of pork-barrelling accusations levelled against the Coalition government. The state opposition plan to introduce a new government grants administration bill to parliament which they say will: Impose new reporting requirements on ministers and agencies Confer new powers on the auditor general to follow the money Introduce new grants guidelines Opposition leader Chris Minns says Labor wants to “draw a line in the sand” on the pork-barrelling, basically daring premier Dominic Perrottet to publicly decline to support the bill: It is time to end the rorts and deliver a fairer outcome for the people of New South Wales. We are willing to work with the Premier and the government to realise these reforms. But if the Premier won’t come to the table on grants reform, the people of New South Wales are right to demand an explanation. The NSW government will move to ban dark roofs as part of its push to deliver more sustainable housing and reach its target of net zero emissions by 2050. Speaking to the Committee for Sydney, planning minister Rob Stokes foreshadowed the policy switch to ensure all new housing has light-coloured roofing. He said University of NSW research commissioned by the federal government found Sydney’s ambient temperatures could be reduced by up to 2.4C if dark roofing was ditched across the city. A light-coloured roof could reduce temperatures inside the home by up to 10C during a heatwave. Stokes told the Committee for Sydney on Wednesday: This would have an enormous impact on the urban heat island effect in our city, and I will be asking the Department of Planning to implement this as part of our Net Zero Cities approach. You can read the full report from Anne Davies and Elias Visontay below: There is a choice selection of Victorian state politics memes on the interwebs this morning, let me tell you: Victorian crossbench MP Fiona Patten has told ABC News Breakfast that the pandemic powers bill will have to be adjourned now that Adem Somyurek plans to vote against the legislation: Certainly of this morning, the bill is due to be adjourned and the parliament will go on to other bills while the government tries to work out what they’re going to do. They’re in a pretty precarious situation now, without, you know, with a state of emergency ending and no other pandemic protections in place. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, has requested “detailed drafting” from the Australian Law Reform Commission to ensure children are not discriminated against in faith-based schools, as the government pushes ahead with its revised religious discrimination laws. But as the crossbench reveals they will either oppose the revamped bill or seek to reinstate the ability for doctors to refuse patients on religious grounds, the government looks likely to need Labor’s support to pass the legislation before the election. All government legislation faces difficulty in the final sitting fortnight, with two of its own senators, Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic, vowing to withhold their votes in protest against vaccine mandates and One Nation also promising “so much mayhem” in the Senate. You can read the full report from Sarah Martin and Paul Karp below: Temporary humanitarian visas issued to Afghans who helped Australian forces and were trapped on the ground after the allied withdrawal will be extended, reports AAP. The decision to extend the visas on an “ongoing basis” affects certified local workers, including interpreters, under the Department of Defence, the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and the Australian federal police. It also includes people who worked in other capacities with the Australian government in Afghanistan, and their families who were issued temporary humanitarian visas, the federal government said on Thursday. More than 5,600 temporary humanitarian visas were issued during the Afghanistan crisis in August. More than 3,500 Afghan temporary humanitarian visa holders have begun their settlement journey in Australia. Immigration minister Alex Hawke called on the ruling Taliban to not stop people who want to leave Afghanistan: Australia expects the Taliban to uphold its undertakings to allow Australians and Afghan visa holders to depart Afghanistan safely if they wish to do so ... We continue to work with international partners to that end. But temporary humanitarian visas granted to other Afghans outside the certified local worker program will expire. Hawke said those people would get priority under Australia’s humanitarian and refugee intake program. Initial priority will be given to vulnerable and persecuted minorities, women and children and those who have links to Australia, the government said: The government will continue to make announcements regarding Afghanistan and the evolving humanitarian situation in the near future. Australian universities have converted as few as 1% of their casual staff to permanent roles six months after labour laws changed, leaving “shocking” levels of insecurity in an industry hard hit by Covid-triggered job losses. This week staff at the University of Newcastle conducted a 12-hour digital “sit-in” to protest after having just five of 2,300 casual staff converted to full-time work. The National Tertiary Education Union described the conversion rate as “abysmal across the sector”. In March the federal government amended the Fair Work Act to mandate that casual staff who meet two criteria be offered full-time or permanent part-time positions. To be eligible, they must have been employed for at least 12 months and have worked a regular pattern of hours for at least the six previous of those months. You can read the full report below: Victorian crossbench MP Fiona Patten says she doesn’t see how anyone in the upper house would change their mind to support the pandemic bill after Adem Somyurek announced he would return to parliament to vote against the bill, plunging to vote into deadlock. Patten is asked about the situation on ABC radio: He may be coming in for some payback ... Given the aggression, the intensity of this debate, I’m not sure anyone is possibly willing to change their mind on this legislation. As a key crossbench vote, Patten says she has been the target of much of the protester vitriol: I was walking down the street the other day and someone had tagged a sign that said, “Hang Dan Andrews.” I don’t remember a time in Australia’s history where we’ve talked of killing our political leaders ... On Saturday’s protest, there was three nooses hanging off a mock gallow, reflecting the three crossbenchers. We’ve never seen anything like this. I’ve been having threats of snipers outside my office ... We’ve certainly seen an increase in security around the building. These people are saying they’re fighting for democracy ... but because of all of these threats, we’ve had to close the parliament to the public. I mentioned before that an Adem Somyurek-shaped wrench has been thrown in the works of Daniel Andrews’ new pandemic powers bill after the former Labor member and current MP said he would not be voting to pass the legislation. The Victorian upper house now appears to be headed for a deadlock, with 19 MPs supporting the bill and 19 against it. Somyurek told the Herald Sun via an op-ed that there isn’t enough oversight built into the laws, even with the amendments announced yesterday: Given its importance, there is not enough attention and scrutiny on it ... Parliamentary accountability has declined to such an extent that it ceased to exist in lower houses with the advent of disciplined modern political parties. Accountability of the executive only exists in the upper house, where the government does not control the numbers in that chamber. Where it does, our parliamentary system is essentially an elective dictatorship. The federal opposition is continuing its internet policy rollout, this time promising one year’s free NBN access to up to 30,000 families with no broadband at home if it wins the next election. A day after committing to upgrade up to 1.5m premises to the faster fibre to the premise NBN connection, Labor has promised free internet for one year for eligible families with school-aged children. The policy came about after the difficulties many families faced during the pandemic, when homeschooling became the norm. As Stephanie Convery reported previously, in some cases, community services such as libraries had to step in to fill the gap for families struggling without internet access during lockdown. The Labor policy is part of a policy plan highlighting, and then filling, government gaps exposed during the pandemic. Families in need would be identified through schools, education departments and through local community organisations. An intelligence agency chief says malicious cyber activities “pose a significant risk to Australia’s national security and to international stability”. In a speech in Canberra today, Rachel Noble, the head of the Australian Signals Directorate, will say her agency is launching offensive cyber operations to “strike back against offshore cybercriminals conducting malicious activities”. She will say the agency is “fighting that battle with criminals – state actors and serious and organised crime”. ASD has previously disclosed that a quarter of cyber incidents reported to it last financial year targeted critical infrastructure and essential services, including healthcare, energy, water and telcos. In her speech this morning, Noble will expand on the alleged perpetrators: Some were state actors undertaking intelligence gathering, reconnaissance and pre-positioning malicious software most likely with a view to activate it at a time of their choosing to deny, degrade or disrupt critical services to Australians. They are also capable of moving laterally between networks – getting in to the weakest and moving up into the strongest by using trusted network pathways to get there. Our goal is to defend our networks by pushing them off before harm is done and to undertake offensive cyber operations to deny them the benefits of their crime. In other remarks, Noble will also argue against any move to split ASD (there has been talk moving cyber security into a standalone agency, separate from ASD’s key role of gathering “signals intelligence”): The idea that we could draw a line somehow between these functions would take away the very cutting edge that Australia has, and needs, over our adversaries. She will offer a gloomy assessment of the current global tensions, without naming any particular country: We are living in one of the most strategically uncertain times of my generation and perhaps even the generation before me. We are at the crossroads, some are opining, of a potential major global power shift. She will also say it’s the job of ASD and other intelligence agencies to “enable our government and allied governments to have the best possible understanding of foreign adversaries’ intent in order to help the government make the best decisions for our national interest and avoid misunderstandings or miscalculations”: It is also a vitally important role of intelligence agencies, if the worst does happen, that we can ensure not only the best possible force protection and overwatch of our military and that of our allies, but that we are also able to generate capabilities through intelligence collection and more recently offensive cyber effects that will greatly shorten any conflict – like we always have. Good morning, everyone, it’s Thursday and there is plenty to get through. It’s Matilda Boseley here and I’m horrified to report that I have run out of coffee in my home. As a result, I’m nursing a cup of tea this morning, so if you notice a slight dip in energy, you know why. Well, why don’t we start off in Victoria, where the future of the state government’s new pandemic powers bill has now been plunged into doubt after disgraced MP Adem Somyurek, who was previously a member of the Labor party, had his parliamentary suspension lifted. The Victorian government has been confident the bill will pass after making amendments to secure the support of upper house crossbenchers – the Greens’ Samantha Ratnam, Reason Party MP Fiona Patten and Animal Justice party MP Andy Meddick. But the return of Somyurek, who quit the party before he was expelled for allegedly leading a widespread branch-stacking operation, opens the door for him to cast the deciding vote. If he votes against it as he has suggested he will, it would result in a tie and would mean the bill would have to be reintroduced in parliament’s lower house. Up in NSW, police have descended on the mid-north coast town of Kendall for a fourth day, vowing to leave no stone unturned in the search for the remains of three-year-old William Tyrrell. Yesterday the police strike force set up to investigate the disappearance of William in 2014 charged a man and a woman over the alleged assault of a child. NSW police said information had been received about the suspected assault of a child during ongoing investigations under Strike Force Rosann. They refused to provide any additional detail but multiple reports said the charge did not relate to William himself. With all this in mind let’s jump into the day. There’s a lot to get through.The detention of Zhang Zhan, the Chinese journalist jailed after reporting on the Covid pandemic in Wuhan, is intended as a “warning to others”, her former lawyer has said, as calls grow for her emergency release on medical grounds. Hundreds of Chinese human rights lawyers and citizens have put their names to an open letter calling for immediate medical care for Zhang, who her family fear is close to death. Zhang has been on a hunger strike for more than a year in protest at her persecution for reporting on the Wuhan lockdown in early 2020. Her reports challenged official claims about the Wuhan lockdown and the outbreak, which authorities had attempted to cover-up. On Thursday she was awarded the Reporters Without Borders’ 2021 Press Freedom award for courage. Zhang, a 38-year-old former lawyer, was sentenced in December last year to four years in jail on charges of disseminating false information in her video and blog reports from Wuhan and in interviews with foreign press. She was first arrested in May of that year, accused of “picking quarrels and provoking trouble” – an accusation commonly used against dissidents, activists and journalists. Ren Quanniu, whose legal licence was revoked after he represented Zhang and members of the Hong Kong 12, said it was possible Zhang’s severe punishment was “retaliation” against citizen journalists trying to cover the Wuhan outbreak, aimed at sending a message to others given her initial arrest was so widely covered by international media. “The virus issue is indeed very sensitive, including where it came from and what is the situation in Wuhan,” he said. “She went there to do some on-site interviews, and was in contact with Radio Free Asia and the Epoch Times for interviews. Both are viewed by Chinese officials as hostile media.” Ren said the conviction was also the manifestation of China’s strict control over journalism, public opinion, and freedom of speech. “No matter if you are citizen journalists or independent media, things that are so-called ‘sensitive’ and do not conform to the calibre of propaganda are not allowed to be said. If you make these things public, you may encounter similar results like Zhang Zhan. This is a warning to others.” While human rights observers, legal groups, and media organisations maintain she should never have been convicted in the first place, an international campaign is urgently calling for her release on any grounds possible, to save her life. Family, friends and legal contacts have said they have tried to get Zhang to end the strike but she could not be convinced. Shortly before her sentencing, Zhang’s lawyer at the time, Zhang Keke, reported she was being restrained and force-fed via a tube. Attempts by the family to petition authorities for emergency care appear to have stalled, with Covid restrictions stating the paperwork must wait 48 hours to be disinfected before it can be given to prison administrators. An application by the family to the Shanghai Prison Administration Bureau said they understood the case was sensitive but doctors had said it was highly likely she could die without treatment and they were willing to cooperate with the demands of authorities to secure her release. An open letter signed by at least 163 lawyers and citizens has urged authorities to release her into medical care. “She is hanging by a thread, we are very worried,” said an English translation of the letter. “In order to prevent a tragedy, we think it is necessary to write a letter to you expressing our common wish: that is to conduct a comprehensive physical examination of Zhang Zhan and give her emergency treatment.” The letter said Zhang was innocent and praised her work in the early months of the outbreak when little was known about the dangers of the virus and Chinese authorities were attempting to cover it up. “When many people fled Wuhan in fear, Zhang went in alone. This kind of courage is rare,” it said. “[This] is behaviour a modern government should encourage. It not only contributes to disaster relief, but creates an atmosphere of mutual assistance and friendship … It is unjust to use criminal means to punish Zhang Zhan’s actions, which were not only harmless but helpful.” Last week the US state department criticised the “arbitrary” detention, and called for her immediate and unconditional release.When a writer is born into a family, claimed Czesław Miłosz, the family is finished. Exempt from this home-wrecking rule is Saša Stanišić, one of literature’s good sons. His autobiographical novel, first published in Germany in 2019, prefers to honour rather than smash Stanišič’s family, who have already been through worse than the emergence of a writer in their midst. Where You Come From explores some overlapping terrain with Stanišić’s widely translated debut novel How the Soldier Repairs the Gramophone. Author-narrator Saša revisits the town of Višegrad on the Drina river, now in Bosnia and Herzegovina, from where he and his parents fled to Germany in 1992 when he was in his early teens. Shortly after the family’s exile, many of the town’s Muslims were massacred by Serb military and police forces, their bodies dumped in the Drina. Saša’s father is Serbian-Orthodox, his mother Bosnian-Muslim (and a lecturer in Marxism). When mother and son are safely out of the country, the father returns to Višegrad to be with his parents. On reuniting with the family as they make a new life in Heidelberg, he bears a fresh scar on his leg about which he does not speak, and about which Saša does not ask. Years later, a successful writer in his late 30s and a father himself, Saša looks back on a pleasant, normal childhood that ended with the war that would tear Yugoslavia apart. In these absorbing childhood sections, he supports the football team Red Star Belgrade, plays on a Commodore 64, and reads Choose Your Own Adventure books (a foreshadowing of the literary game that will constitute the novel’s final stretch). Near Višegrad is the village of Oskoruša (population: 13), home to more members of Saša’s family. Saša proffers picturesque vignettes from Oskoruša’s past and present, but worries that he is exploiting “‘Where I Come From’ kitsch to put into a book”. With the far-right renascent in Germany and across Europe, a deeper anxiety haunts Saša. It seems to him “regressive, even destructive to talk about my origins or our origins in an age when where you were born and where you came from were once again being misused as distinguishing features, when borders were hardening […] when exclusion and refusal of entry were on the ballot again”. Where You Come From has arguably been overpraised in Germany, where it won a major national book prize, but it’s understandable that a rattled liberal establishment would want to celebrate its implied politics of tolerance, post-nationalism and integration. At times, Stanišić’s tone resembles a Der Spiegel editorial: “Today is September 21, 2018. If there were a national parliamentary election in Germany this Sunday, the far-right AfD Party would get 18 percent of the votes.” Stanišić enjoys including lists, lyrics, transcripts and assorted documentary titbits as he muses on the experiences of exile and assimilation, shame and family. A mild, fairly likable narrator, Saša is most engaging when discussing either his efforts to adjust to German life or his earlier, youthful adventures as the fog of war came rolling towards his homeland. Parts of the book read like a family photo album, interesting or not depending on how curious we are about another person’s grandparents, uncles, cousins. This family “shattered along with Yugoslavia”, and is now scattered across Europe and beyond. Saša’s updates on his relatives’ lives are less gripping than, say, a recollected scene in which he and his “Yugo” classmates in Višegrad are asked to herd themselves into ethnic categories drawn up on a blackboard – a tremor of the atavistic tribal horrors to come (“A couple of months later, Muslims in several cities are ordered to wear white armbands”). Saša reimagines the disintegration into genocidal ethnocentrism that followed Tito’s communist rule over Yugoslavia as a shift in literary genre: Tito proved irreplaceable as the central voice telling the story of Yugoslavian unity; the folksy accents of the new narrators were vulgar and brutal. Their manifestos read like incitements to ethnic hatred. […] The new narrators were named Milošević, Izetbegović, Tudjman. They went on long reading tours, visiting their people, telling them a new story. The book’s final third is its weakest. Saša returns to Bosnia-Herzegovina to visit his ailing grandmother, and we hear no more about his life in Germany. Following an epilogue, the novel morphs into a Choose Your Own Adventure story of the kind that had amused the young Saša. A fantastical Balkan fable threaded around the old woman’s passing, it’s a nice idea, but its emotional core – the death of a man’s grandmother – is not enough to carry the formal whimsy, and so it becomes a slightly irritating frippery. Where You Come From is most rewarding when it cleaves closest to straightforward memoir: a story about place and displacement, where you begin and where you end up, and how much – and in what way – this matters. • Rob Doyle’s Autobibliography is published by Swift. Where You Come From is published by Jonathan Cape (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Sebastian Przetakowski came to the UK when he was 24. He wanted a holiday, and to make a bit of money to buy a car. His uncle was working in construction here and got Sebastian a job as a labourer. The plan was to spend two or three months working in the UK, then return to Poland. That was in 2004, and he’s still here – settled, a UK citizen, married, with two kids. He gradually climbed the ladder, eventually starting his own construction business in London, doing loft conversions, extensions and garden offices. His daughters, six and four, are at school here; they supported England in the recent World Cup qualifier with Poland. “We had a small war at home,” he laughs. The business grew, from 12 people to about 50. There were a few guys from the Czech Republic and Romania, but most came from Poland. It made communication easier but also, Sebastian says, Poles are good workers. “We have a very high work ethic and always try to work to the highest possible standards. Maybe because we have struggled. Poland has had difficulties since the war, people were always trying to do their best, I think that’s the reason.” Around the time of the EU referendum, Przetakowski felt less at home in Britain. “You could feel the tension. There were places, some pubs, clubs, restaurants, where you could feel you were not welcome. And Nigel Farage on the TV.” His brother, the carpenter in the business, left. “He said he didn’t want to live here any more.” A few other friends and employees – plasterers, plumbers, decorators – went back. “The Polish economy at the time was doing quite well, there was a big demand for construction.” Przetakowski was settled here, with his family and his business, so he stayed. But the exodus meant it was harder to find workers, both skilled and unskilled. And then Covid swung in like a big wrecking ball, sending more EU workers flying home. The most recent Federation of Master Builders State of Trade survey, published in August, found that 53% of builders are finding it hard to hire carpenters, while 47% are struggling to find bricklayers. Add to that material price rises (reported by 98% of respondents) and you’re looking at a sector under a lot of strain. Przetakowski has had to reduce his own workforce. “And raise the wages of the people who stayed in order to reward them in some way and stop them from leaving.” There has been plenty of work coming in during the pandemic, “from people with money for projects like extensions and loft conversions. I’m fully booked up to next year, and can’t take on any jobs because I can’t get the people. Everyone is struggling to find workers.” Before Brexit, Przetakowski could just call and get a cousin over for a few months. “Now it’s going to be difficult because of the new immigration system, it will require a lot of bureaucracy and paperwork. We’re going to need a solution from the government. The construction industry urgently needs temporary workers from the EU; this is a must.” At the Tory party conference, Boris Johnson said Brexit would be good for British workers, as their wages would rise. Przetakowski has nothing against hiring Brits; he recently had some British bricklayers working for him. “They were reliable, worked on weekends and bank holidays.” But it’s not as if there’s a surplus of British workers at the moment either. The problem is not just about the double hit of Brexit and Covid, says Przetakowski. “Young people are not getting into construction any more, it’s not fashionable. The decline needs to be reversed.” That means more apprenticeship schemes, for a start. “Also we have to get young people, including young women, to start thinking about working in construction and that it can help the environment as well. We can build flats with solar panels, with access to electric car charging – maybe this will make the industry more fashionable.” He says that tension, the feeling of being unwelcome, has mostly gone. But so have so many much-needed workers, and they are still going. A Polish family at his children’s school is heading back to Poland next year. “It’s not like it’s behind us,” he says. His carpenter brother, meanwhile, after initially returning to Poland, went to work in Germany. “It’s closer to Poland, he can drive there and back to see his family every two weeks. And it’s in the EU.” The money might be a bit less, but when you compare travel and living costs, he’s better off. “He’s much happier there than he was here.”This is about as big as it gets, says English National Opera’s music director Martyn Brabbins. Wagner’s Ring Cycle – the Mount Everest of opera, around 16 hours of music in total, and the ultimate challenge for any company. Director Richard Jones is staging all four operas in new English translations over the next few years. The cycle begins on 19 November at the London Coliseum with the second in the tetralogy, The Valkyrie – which is about five hours long. Brabbins will be conducting almost 100 musicians, so many that the boxes closest to the stage will accommodate four harps, timpani and percussion; cast and crew number many more. The Ring is a miraculous piece of work, says Jones. “I’ve always enjoyed thinking about it. I adore it. I’m addicted to it.” The story The Valkyrie (Die Walküre) is often staged as a standalone work. Its third act opens with Ride of the Valkyries, one of opera’s best-known moments, depicting the eight Valkyries – warrior sisters of Brünnhilde, our heroine and daughter of Wotan, ruler of the gods – bearing heroes slain in battle to Valhalla. But there are several hours more, involving incest, murder, passion, betrayal, battles, loyalty and love. Nicky Spence (below, front), like most of the cast, is making his role debut. “I’m singing Siegmund. I’m a misanthrope who never seems to be able to get things right and seems to piss off everyone else along the way, until he meets Sieglinde – who he doesn’t know is his twin sister. They are both dealing with huge abandonment issues. They don’t really know where they’ve come from, where they fit in. Really, they need to put their emotional baggage issues in the hold. This is all unfurled in act one, gloriously. Siegmund has got some of the most lyrical, beautiful music Wagner ever wrote. I feel so lucky.” At this tech rehearsal, the cast are in costume – which is contemporary dress – but not wigs or makeup. Most wear Covid masks when they’re not singing, as does everyone around the building. “It’s so nice not to be put in a crazy costume, says Spence. “My wig is good, though … a kind of 90s Keanu Reeves sexy Bear Grylls survivor look.” Matthew Rose sings Wotan, one-eyed king of the gods. Tell us the story? “A brother and sister meet and fall in love not knowing who they are. Then, in act two, Siegmund has to be killed because incest is wrong. I tell Brünnhilde he has to die in battle, but she goes against that because she believes in the love he and Sieglinde have. So Wotan has to turn up and kill him. Act three is basically Brünnhilde being told off, but I’m distraught to have to punish her. She has to lie on a rock with fire around her until a hero can rescue her. It’s actually a pretty simple story for five and a half hours.” Matthew Rose (Wotan) and Rachel Nicholls (Brünnhilde) “It was 25 years ago that I first heard this piece and I knew even then it was something I would love to do,” says Rose. “The music affects me so much. I was due to sing the role in January for a concert performance that was, of course, cancelled, but Covid at least means I’ve had 18 months to work on it and really think about it and absorb it. I must have 53 recordings of Die Walküre. I’m a bit of a geek like that. It’s nice to go back to the score and, having heard where the trees have sprouted up in the performance history, just to clear all that out and do it afresh.” Director Richard Jones with stage manager Rosie Davis (left) and Matthew Rose (Wotan) The production “It is a such a privilege to work with Richard,” says Rose. “Every word, every nuance, everything has such meaning.” “Richard makes it all about the characters. He’s got such a sexy mind,” says Spence. “We’ve had reams and reams of notes. Because the set is not flashy it’s all about the interaction between the characters. Where have they come from, where are they going, and the relationships between them.” The cast is all British, and most are making their role debuts. “That meant they brought a freshness and curiosity to the rehearsal room, and a need to be really nourished as to what I think the scenes are about,” says Jones. “But once you get on stage, they’re bombarded with technical stuff and I’m saying things like ‘Put your foot there. Stand like this.’” Technical rehearsals in progress at the Coliseum The day of the tech rehearsal, Jones and his team are grappling with bad news from Westminster council, which has just vetoed all the fire effects on stage. “The first line of the play is: ‘This fire isn’t mine so I’ll stay here,’ and the last line is: ‘I will surround you with my magic fire,’ says Jones. “It’s really serious. I don’t know what we are going to do … there’s councils of war going on as we speak.” How much sleep are you getting? “This week? Not much! You do say: ‘I will never have a sleepless night over a show.’ I’ve vowed that so many times… but yes, the Westminster council thing is a blow. Your mind does race.” Claire Esnault (left) and Mikaela Hale, freelance prop makers, in the props department with the dummy corpse Marty The props In the props room, things are relatively calm, if bloody. The team are prepping the dummies that represent the fallen warriors that lie across the stage as act three opens. “Compared with a show like Satyagraha [Phelim McDermott’s spectacular staging of Philip Glass’s opera has just finished a run] it’s quite prop-light actually,” says senior prop technician Katie Howard. Crew instructions for exactly how to lay each dummy in position on stage Everything is made in house by the ENO props team. The dummies are all fully articulated so that when they are up in the flies they hang and swing like real corpses. Some have been given names. I’m introduced to Marty (above), so named because the team think he looks like Back to the Future’s Marty McFly. Boris lies on a nearby shelf, union jack flag defiantly in hand. He’s part of a different production – HMS Pinafore. “He used to scare us every time we walked into the room.” It’s a firm no to my suggestion of sneaking him on stage as an additional fallen warrior. “They’d have an apoplectic fit.” There’s red grape juice for the wine, but the tinned fruit? It turns out that in part of the action, Hunding and his men have to rip open and eat what looks like a tin of dog food. “We prep it with a hollow bottom and put mandarins in instead,” says Katie. The spears are very delicate and risk losing their tips if they fall over. The team have to make sure the fake one one is given to the right person to be thrown on to the ground as the “real” ones would smash into pieces. Act three features 25 minutes of black snow falling from the skies. The plastic has been treated to be non-flammable and is being recycled for re-use in each show. The props crew laboriously sweep it up and return it to bin liners. Emma Bell (Sieglinde) tries to get plastic black snow out of her hair, left. The props team (right) arrange 10 dummy corpses on stage. Each position has been carefully planned out by the set designer “It gets everywhere … stuck on bodies (real and fake), in hair, on clothes. I’ve swept this floor five times already. ” Rachel Nicholls as Brünnhilde Brünnhilde is brave and strong, but she is a teenager who doesn’t know very much about human love, says the soprano Rachel Nicholls. “She takes it upon herself to disobey her father’s orders at enormous cost to herself. And yet I think she’s more emotionally intelligent than him. She makes her case for herself very well and gets her punishment commuted into something she can cope with. Although she’s going to be abandoned on the rock, Wotan is going to surround her by a ring of fire so only a hero brave enough to fight through can wake her.” (Spoiler alert: that comes in the third opera, Siegfried.) Matthew Rose (Wotan) and Rachel Nicholls (Brünnhilde) and part of Nicholls’s costume “The way we’re representing this in this production is I’m flown on wires about six or seven feet above the stage, just suspended by Wotan’s big cuddly red coat, which he’s been kind enough to wrap me in before he’s put me to sleep. I’m supposed to be in a state of suspended animation until the next opera and so it’s poor Matthew (Wotan) who has to be responsible for clipping my harness to the wires. We’ve practised it a lot. The aerial stuff is super exciting.” Brünnhilde’s horse, Grane, is brought to life by dancer Lauren Bridle, pictured here backstage being helped into the headdress. The music “The thing to remember about the Ring operas is that most of the musical interest is in the pit,” says conductor Martyn Brabbins. “The singers sing great words and great melodies, but most of the drama and emotion and characterisation comes from the orchestra. It’s this amazing web of seamless creativity. Everything is characterised brilliantly, from darkness to light, anger to happiness, love and beauty, to all kinds of dramatic interactions between the characters, and the vast majority of it is done by the orchestra. Which is great for me! Pianist Richard Peirson plays a piano reduction of Wagner’s complex score for the tech rehearsal. “It’s a huge span of music that you really have to pace. A conductor’s job when he or she has a really great orchestra, like I do here, is to set things in motion then off it goes, then you reset, and off it goes again. You need to know when to inject the energy, the pace and the colour. It’s nearly four hours of music and you’ve got to get it just on track all the time otherwise it derails.If you get one bit wrong the next won’t connect.” “We’ve got an amazing wealth of talent within such a relatively small talent pool here in Britain. It’s wonderful to have an all-British cast, all, apart from Rachel (Brünnhilde) and Brindley Sherratt (Sieglinde’s husband, Hunding) making role debuts. Vocally, it’s massive for so many of them. But it’s been a complete joy.” Backstage, sweeping up black snow, is Bradley Cauchi, one of the running props crew. “I’m not used to opera – I worked for many years in the West End on shows including Les Mis. It’s very different here, a lot quicker, the shows change constantly and you move from one thing to another. I got a bit blase about hearing people sing really well, but here, standing in the wings, listening, it’s like WOW! It’s so good. The music is awesome!” ‘Bold, radical and always relevant’ ”When this was first scheduled, says the bass Brindley Sherratt, “I wasn’t able to be in it because I was committed elsewhere. In the darkest days of the second lockdown I had Covid quite badly, so did my wife and my daughter, and my work for the rest of the year had all just disappeared. Then my agent called and said: “They’re now putting on Walküre in the autumn and this time you’re able to be in it.’ It was a light at the end of the tunnel. Just fantastic, and so bold to announce that you’re doing the entire Ring Cycle when everybody else was just like, ‘We’re all going down the pan.’” Brindley Sherratt (Hunding), Nicky Spence (Siegmund, middle) and Matthew Rose (Wotan) “Wagner was a theatrical radical. I think he is the most influential modern artist. More than Beckett, more than Pirandello,” says Jones. “The Ring is like great Greek drama. Since it was first performed in 1876, there has never been a period when it wasn’t germane to the contemporary world.” “I’ve done a Ring Cycle before, and if you’re involved with something so huge and so technically difficult there’s always a real sense of collegiality, but what’s so special about this particular project is that we’re all – director, conductor, cast, crew – from within these shores. We’re all knackered but we’re all clubbing together. Come and see us. It’s going to be epic!” Sherratt adds. Emma Bell (Sieglinde) and Grane backstage; Wotan and Brunnhilde say goodbyeFor her debut play, bestselling author Zadie Smith has adapted The Wife of Bath, from Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, for 21st-century north-west London. With bawdy humour and an ear for gossip, it’s a love letter to her local area set in a pub that is loud, crowded and bustling with life. One of the best known Tales, The Wife of Bath sees an outspoken woman talking about the power of her body over her husbands. 600 years later, the character – here called Alvita, played brilliantly by Clare Perkins with a loose tongue and a loud laugh – still speaks to us; we couldn’t stop her if we tried. This is essentially a monologue with eager extras. Smith’s pilgrimage is a pub crawl, and we’ve stopped for a lock-in at the Sir Colin Campbell, a real Irish pub situated down the road from the theatre. The old pub is luminously designed by Robert Jones, with a semicircular bar lined with bottles running the length of the theatre, with some of the audience seated at bar tables. Centre stage is Alvita, ready to regale us with the disaster stories of her five former husbands, and the lessons she’s learned about men along the way. It’s good fun. The Wife of Bath was revolutionary, for in a world where a woman was defined by her marital status, here was one who had married five times, and who talked unashamedly about sex. In this slightly tipsy setting, Smith steps it up for a modern audience, describing who gave the best head, and who couldn’t get it up. Around our protagonist, the author of NW and Swing Time gives us bickering pilgrims in the form of a band of strangers you might bump into on Kilburn High Road. Speaking in verse, the cast of 10 leap into different characters as Alvita’s stories move from one husband to the next. Even Jesus makes an appearance, a bar tray creatively forming his halo. The show is divided, as was Chaucer’s writing, into prologue and tale. You don’t need to have studied the 14th-century poem to enjoy the mix of characters in either, although Smith’s script is more impressive the closer you’ve read the original text. There is clever mimicry in the way Smith echoes Chaucer’s work, adapting his tale from Arthurian England to 18th-century Jamaica, but there are moments where the play gets lost in its own tangents. By sticking to a relatively faithful adaptation of Chaucer’s verse, there is too a certain sense of stagnancy. As we jump from one story to another, the overall show lacks a sense of development, and some elements feel hammered in unnecessarily – though for those, I’ll blame Chaucer. Perhaps it’s a curse of adapting a sprawling text; you get the brilliant parts as well as those that go on a bit. Nevertheless, Smith is brilliant at sowing the seeds of characters, giving little snippets that build them fully and immediately. Her writing also has a physical humour that director Indhu Rubasingham and movement directors Imogen Knight and Celise Hicks translate effortlessly onstage; getting the men to grind to Cardi B’s WAP has the room cackling. Presented in association with Brent Borough of Culture, The Wife of Willesden is a celebration of community and local legends, of telling a good story and living a life worth telling. Not bad for an original text that’s 600 years old. At the Kiln theatre, London, until 15 JanuaryMichael Williams, an associate of disgraced R&amp;B star R Kelly, has been sentenced to eight years in prison after intimidating an accuser in Kelly’s trial for sexual abuse. Williams, a relative of a former publicist for Kelly, had pleaded guilty to arson. In June 2020, he drove 200 miles to where one of Kelly’s accusers, known pseudonymously as Jane, was living, and set a car leased by Jane’s father on fire. “The vehicle, leased by the victim’s father, was heavily damaged,” prosecutors said during the trial in April this year. “Fire investigators also detected an accelerant along the outside perimeter of the residence. Williams had previously made internet searches about the detonation properties of fertiliser and diesel fuel, witness intimidation and witness tampering, and countries that do not have extradition agreements with the United States.” Jane’s father had also received a threatening text message, saying: “It might be wise for you to protect your daughter from heartache she’s gonna endure through this and after.” Jane was not at the sentencing, but said in a statement: “My mental state deteriorated tremendously due to fear, invasion of privacy and trauma among many other things. Because of your actions, I live in fear and have had to relocate my entire life.” Other associates of Kelly have been accused of witness intimidation. Donnell Russell, a former manager of Kelly, is accused of threatening to leak sexually explicit photos of one woman. Russell has pleaded not guilty and awaits trial. Richard Arline Jr pleaded guilty earlier this year to pressuring a woman not to testify against Kelly, offering hush money. In September, Kelly was found guilty of nine counts against him, including sex trafficking, sexual exploitation of a child, racketeering and kidnapping. The court heard testimony from numerous women who said Kelly coerced them into sex and controlled their lives with physical and emotional abuse. He will be sentenced in May and faces decades in prison.A witness to the explosion outside Liverpool Women’s hospital has described how he tried to rescue the suspected bomber before he was repelled by flames. Emad al-Swealmeen was trapped in a taxi when a device that he is believed to have made exploded on Sunday. CCTV footage of the incident shows Liam Spencer, who was metres away, rushing towards the taxi seconds after the blast. Speaking to the BBC, Spencer said: “I could see the man in the back. I went to go grab him but he was engulfed in flames very quickly. I couldn’t reach a hold of him without setting myself on fire.” Spencer, 21, who used to work at the hospital, had parked his car outside the entrance with his partner, Stephanie Stitt, inside. The explosion occurred just before 11am, after he had entered the hospital to collect some of belongings. The video shows Stitt was in the car less than 10 metres from the blast. It shows her fleeing the car just before Spencer goes towards the burning taxi. Spencer said he was shocked when he was told it was believed to be a terrorist incident. He said: “I’d worked there for nearly two years and it’s just never an incident like you think would happen at a women’s hospital for babies … it’s probably the most innocent place on Earth.” Stitt said she was traumatised by her narrow escape. “At the minute I’m an emotional wreck,” she told the BBC. “At the time I just couldn’t stop shaking. I think it was just the adrenaline and the whole shock of everything. “I haven’t stopped crying because … I thought the car had been hit and then all this stuff had gone flying over the car, and I’m just thinking that things could have been different, like my life could have been lost, more than anything, or I could be in a worse situation than I am now.” Spencer said: “I’m just constantly worried about ‘what if?’” The taxi’s driver, David Perry, escaped seconds before his car fully caught light and has since been discharged from hospital. It has emerged that Swealmeen began buying materials for the attack in April. Spencer described Swealmeen as a coward. He said: “I just think it’s a selfish and cowardly thing to do.” Stitt said the couple wanted to thank the doctors and nurses at the hospital for “helping us on that day and doing whatever they could to help”.Royal Mail is handing £400m to shareholders after its parcel delivery business benefited from the greater shift to online spending during the Covid pandemic. It achieved a £311m pre-tax profit in the six months to 26 September, after barely scraping a profit last year, thanks to an accelerated trend to more parcels, which it described as a permanent shift. Revenues rose by 7% year-on-year to £6.1bn. The news sent shares up 7% on Thursday, making the postal services firm the top riser on the FTSE 100 and pushing its market value up by £300m to £4.7bn. The strong financial recovery plus cash buffers built up during the pandemic have allowed Royal Mail to give shareholders money, despite its ongoing investments in automation to make it more efficient and efforts to make £110m in costs savings. It said on Thursday it would return £400m via a £200m share buyback that will start immediately and a £200m special dividend. It will also pay a £67m interim dividend. Keith Williams, Royal Mail’s non-executive chair, insisted the company would be able to fund investment in new technology and growth from future cash flows, justifying the shareholder returns, even as it prepares for the crucial Christmas period. The company failed to cope with parcel volumes at Christmas last year, but Simon Thompson, who was installed as chief executive in January this year, said it had improved its efficiency and invested in more double-decker lorries as well as driver training since then. The date of the last post for Christmas day has not been changed. “The things we learned we now have in place for this year,” Thompson said. The results mark a turnaround in fortunes for the delivery company, after the early pandemic lockdowns depressed Royal Mail’s profits, adding new costs and hitting the volumes of letters sent. Nevertheless, Royal Mail said it has experienced a “structural shift” in parcels, with volumes up by a third during the financial half year compared with before the pandemic – although they were down by 4% compared with 2020, when customers were locked down at home and non-essential shops were closed. The company, which was controversially privatised in 2013, has struggled with what it described as the “structural decline” of letters as more people use email for official purposes, with revenues from parcels overtaking that from letters for the first time a year ago. It delivered more letters between April and September than the equivalent last year, but still a fifth less than in 2019. At the same time Royal Mail has been restructuring. A new management team has brought in an agreement with the Communication Workers Union after a breakdown in the relationship under former chief executive Rico Back and cuts to 2,000 management jobs in June 2020. Royal Mail has also been pushing to weaken some of the “universal service” requirements imposed on it as a former state-run operation, including removing the obligation to deliver post on Saturdays. Thompson hinted that it would push this agenda further, saying the company needs to “start defining what a sustainable universal service is for the future”. “We have to acknowledge the world has changed,” Thompson said. The company did not want to “invest in services that perhaps customers no longer need,” he said.‘Helloooooh! How are you? I’m good, I’m good.” It takes me about three seconds to warm to Melissa Etheridge. The American singer-songwriter has been through hell in the past few years, but you won’t find her moaning. For someone who has endured so much – Etheridge lost her 21-year-old son, Beckett, to opioid addiction last year – she has a remarkable ability to accentuate the positive. And over the next hour and a half, she does just that. There is a swaggering self-confidence and a soulfulness to Etheridge – she would make a great existential cowboy. She has had hit records across the world (with the notable exception of the UK), won Grammys for her singles Ain’t It Heavy and Come to My Window, and in 2007 secured an Oscar for I Need to Wake Up, a song she wrote for Al Gore’s climate crisis documentary An Inconvenient Truth. Etheridge is probably as well known for her open-book life as her music. She is one of the US’s first out and proud lesbian rock stars. Yes I Am, her fourth album, marked her official coming out in 1993 and has sold more than 6m copies in the US. “People were like: ‘Do you think coming out hurt you?’ and I was like: ‘Oh God, no! Coming out was amazing for my career.’ It made me unique back then.” She laughs, deep and joyous. “The world was changing in the 90s. The gay movement was coming up, we were organised and it was just a perfect time for me.” She became an activist for LGBTQ+ rights, the environment and cannabis’s medicinal properties. But her activism was always rooted in life, rather than polemics. Sure, she went on demos, but what she was good at was talking openly about the issues that affected her. So, when she and her then partner, Julie Cypher, had children with a sperm donor (the singer-songwriter David Crosby), she talked about it. When she later had twins with her then wife, Tammy Lynn Michaels, using an anonymous donor, she told us about that, too. When she was diagnosed with breast cancer, again she shared it; after having chemotherapy, she performed at the 2005 Grammys with a bald head. As for her response to Beckett’s death, she has done what she always does – talked it out. She has released an album of previously unrecorded songs called One Way Out. She wrote them early in her career, when she wasn’t out and was worried that they were too personal. Now, she wonders what she was bothered about. One Way Out shows off the breadth of her talents. On the title track, she rasp-rocks at her bluesy best. I’m No Angel Myself is tender and confessional. The album ends with Life Goes On, a defiant anthem written in 2002 that could just as easily have been written about Beckett in the past year. Etheridge, 60, is talking to me on a video chat from her home in Hidden Hills, a gated community in Santa Monica, Los Angeles. It is a glitzy contrast to Leavenworth, Kansas, where she grew up in a fascinating, if dysfunctional, family. Her mother, Elizabeth, was an exceptionally bright secretary who became a top computer programmer, but was never rewarded for it. “Have you seen the movie Hidden Figures?” she asks, referring to the 2016 biopic about three trailblazing African American women who worked for Nasa in the 60s. “She programmed these massive computers, then the army hired her. She became a GS-15, which is the highest civilian rank you can get, but she got paid half of what anyone else got and all the generals took her work and said it was theirs. So she was bitter, bitter, bitter, but she did this great work.” Her mother became a high-functioning alcoholic who drank herself into oblivion every night. Etheridge’s father, John, was a teacher who taught the US constitution, coached the college basketball team and was adored by Etheridge and his students. In her 2001 memoir, she wrote that her older sister physically and sexually abused her for five years from the age of six. “I know that all kids experiment and play doctor and that might have been all Jennifer thought it was, but it sure wasn’t that to me,” she wrote. Today, she says she has no relationship with her sister. “It’s understood between the two of us that there’s nothing there except we shared a childhood and it was really tumultuous.” The family was repressed in a rather English way, she says. They never acknowledged the turbulence going on behind closed doors, instead pretending everything was fine and dandy. Music was her salvation. At the age of eight, she took guitar lessons; at 10 she was writing songs and by 13 she was performing in local bars with a country band. Her choir director at church told her she had a strange voice, but she realised rockers such as Robert Plant and Janis Joplin also had strange voices and she could sing like them. She idolised Bruce Springsteen. “I didn’t think: ‘He’s a guy, so I can’t be like him.’ I felt I could make the same choices, write the same quality of music, and it doesn’t matter that I’m a woman.” *** After a year at Berklee College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts, she quit and headed for LA, playing in lesbian bars. In her mid-20s, she was spotted by Chris Blackwell, the founder and boss of Island Records, and signed to the label. After releasing her first album, she went around radio stations asking them to play the record, only to be told they already had a woman on their playlist. Despite this, her first three albums were hits in the US, while the fourth was huge. The world was a very different place for lesbian couples then, however. “Growing up in the late 70s and early 80s, being gay meant you weren’t going to have children.” Did that bother her? “No, I was like: ‘I want to be a rock star,’ so it was fine with me. Then in the 90s I was with someone who was like: ‘Hey, I want to have a baby.’” By then, Etheridge also wanted children – and realised it would make a statement. “The more gay people have children, the more it’s normalised. People constantly came up to me and said: ‘Thank you for showing me we can have children.’” But she knows the battle against homophobia is yet to be won. She takes a sip from her water bottle. “That’s one of the things that broke my heart when Beckett passed away. I thought, everybody’s going to go: ‘See, they can’t have children.’” She tells me proudly about Beckett’s older sister, Bailey, who has just completed a master’s degree at London School of Economics. I tell her I interviewed Crosby recently. “Oh yeah! He’s a hoot, isn’t he?” Does she regard him simply as a donor? “No, he loves them dearly. One of the reasons we chose him as a donor is because he had children.” She grins. “Many of them. He’s still finding children.” How many has he got? “Oh, at least seven or eight. A few years ago, Bailey called me and said: ‘I have another half-sister we found!’” No offence, I say, but, of all the men in the world, why choose the decadent Crosby? “Because, one, he gave up parental rights. Bailey laughs at this: at the time, I was very good friends with Brad Pitt. There was a moment when I considered Brad, but he wanted children so badly. I was like: ‘He’s not going to stand back and not be a father and not be in their life.’” Also, Crosby’s wife, Jan Dance, was hugely supportive, Etheridge says. “They had had fertility issues and had some help. They were like: ‘We are so grateful for that that we would love to pass this on.’ It was very loving. The kids looked just like David. They had the cheeks, those eyes. Beckett looked the most like David.” Is it true that Crosby, a recovering addict, blames himself for Beckett’s addiction, thinking it might be genetic? She nods. “But he can’t. Everybody has choices. You can’t just say: ‘Oh, that’s David Crosby’s son, so …’ That doesn’t work at all.’” Has she said this to him? “Yeah, I tried to.” Does he accept it? “I hope so, because it’s nobody’s fault.” She talks about how Beckett struggled. “Teachers would say: ‘He just glowers at me.’” She smiles at the memory. “He looked like he was angry all the time.” And was he? “I think he was afraid.” He was a gifted snowboarder. After a bad accident, he started taking painkillers, which led to his opioid addiction. I ask how a parent gets through the death of a child. “You don’t,” Etheridge says, quietly. “I’m constantly thinking about him. Constantly. His pictures are up. We talk about him. The way I make myself OK is I actively do not choose guilt or shame. In his last year, I said to myself: I need to make choices now, because there is a possibility that he may not live. I need to know I did everything I could for him, but also take care of myself. It is not my job to save him. I can’t quit everything I’m doing to try to convince him not to take heroin or opioids. That’s not the way humans are made. He was an adult and he was making his choices, so I came to peace with that a few months before he died.” She pauses. “When I say ‘peace’, it’s not like: oh, it’s fine he’s dead.” She says that, after her cancer, she studied all sorts of stuff – quantum physics, quantum biology, ancient religions. She was trying to make sense of life. In the end, she realised that only if she was happy could she make others happy. She also realised it was pointless blaming others, as she had blamed her family for her unsettling childhood. “Well, then how can I blame myself for my son? Just so much as I know I made my own choices, the same thing with Beckett.” He had moved to Colorado, where he still managed to mountain bike and snowboard, despite his dependency. “I thought he was going to be happy. But the pandemic was really hard on him. The isolation. All of a sudden, the parks were closed and he crumbled.” Etheridge sent the police to check on him three times. The third time, they found him dead. It is 18 months since Beckett died. Etheridge says it is pointless to grieve. She prefers to celebrate him. “I believe that, when I think of my son in loving ways, I am close to him. His spirit is there. When I am grieving and sad, that’s when I think I’m far away, because I don’t think those things exist in the non-physical world, so you have to be in a loving state to connect with loved ones. He wouldn’t want me to be ruining my days thinking awful things. So it’s my job to stay in a state where I can connect.” Does she have nice memories? “Oh yeah! He was so sensitive. I think this is a common thing in people we lose this way. I would have the deepest conversations with him at 11 years old. We would talk spirit, the world, history, existence, everything. But when it came to things like school, if he couldn’t do things perfectly, he didn’t want to do them. So he’d never start anything. It just stunts you. I spent years sitting there with him and his homework going: ‘Just pick up the pencil.’” I ask if she was in any way relieved when he died. Again, she pauses. “If I dig down and I think about it, yes, there is a certain amount of relief. That’s actually harder for me when it comes to the guilt – how relieved I am. I’m just being honest. It was so hard for years. It was making me ill again. If he was in trouble, it affected everything. When he died, there was awful, awful sadness. Horrible. But there absolutely was relief I didn’t have to be afraid to look at my phone any more. I was relieved for him, but, yes, for me, too.” Did it take a long time to admit she was relieved for herself? “You’re one of the first people I’ve admitted it to. Talking to my wife, I would absolutely say there is relief.” *** Etheridge has been with the actor and writer Linda Wallem, who co-created the TV series Nurse Jackie, for 11 years and married for seven. They share the same date of birth (29 May 1961) and pretty much everything else. “The relationship is ridiculously wonderful,” she says. “We are mad about each other. We spend every single day together and it’s perfect.” Etheridge’s previous long-term relationships, with Cypher and Michaels, ended disastrously. Despite appearances, she didn’t really believe in herself then, she says. “I was trying to have the other person make me better. And it never works.” What does she mean? “Well, I used to think I wasn’t pretty. And if somebody I consider really gorgeous likes me, then I must be pretty. I’m validated.” She laughs at the stupidity of it, says those days are long gone and returns to Linda. “Her sense of humour is just top, so we laugh. And she’s very intelligent – and intelligence is very sexy. And she’s kind.” As for her 15-year-old twins, “they are magnificent, gorgeous”. When she thinks of her three surviving children, she can’t help thinking of how tortured Beckett was. “I look at the other kids and think they’re fine. They all love to be here.” As long as she stays positive, she says, she can still connect with Beckett. So, all in all, she has little to complain about, she says. Etheridge is one of life’s great survivors. Her ability to overcome the horrors life has thrown at her is astonishing, her positivity infectious. After saying our goodbyes, I find myself singing the chorus of the final song on her album at the top of my voice for hours on end. “La la la life goes on …” One Way Out is out nowThis week the Portuguese parliament attracted headlines around the world, and even some attention from The Daily Show, after we banned bosses from contacting their employees outside of working hours. Under the new laws, employers will now face sanctions if they text message, phone or email their workers when they are off the clock. For us, this is as an essential move to strengthen the boundaries needed for a good work-life balance. There should be a boundary between the time when an employer’s authority prevails, and the time when the worker’s autonomy should prevail. There should be a boundary between the time in which a worker is a resource in the service of the person paying their salary, and the time in which they should be the owner of a life that is not all about work. We have introduced these new labour laws to avoid the blurring of the boundary between the time we spend serving others and family time. The boundary between time as a commodity with a financial value, and the precious time remaining for the enjoyment of life. In the age of the industrial revolution, workers could be little more than workers. The demand for shorter working hours was a central tenet of the labour movement from the very beginning. It was a demand that sought a way out of the extreme fatigue caused by long working hours, and the poor health caused by overwork. This alone would have been more than enough of a reason. But the demand for shorter working hours was also about establishing that workers should be more than just a labour force, that they should also be people de facto, and not just de jure. The worry has been that the rise of remote working is threatening to take us back to that period before trade unions won protections for their members, when the working day stretched out endlessly. Remote working has to be a step forward, not a step back. When more and more of us are working remotely, it is all the more essential to establish clear boundaries between working time and personal time. The ongoing digital transition made the need to legislate remote working necessary. The pandemic has made it urgent. We conceived this new legislation before the pandemic began, but it has become even more necessary now: to respond to the perverse, undesirable effects of the rapid expansion of tele-working. The necessity of all kinds of digital software means surveillance of workers has also grown very rapidly. Remote working has great advantages, but like all new phenomena that develop very quickly, carries new risks. Risks, above all, for the weakest part of the labour relationship: the workers. Labour market regulation cannot ignore the innate inequality between the parties: employers and employees. A work relation is not one between equals that can be freely regulated by the individual contract. In passing these new labour laws, we kept in mind the words of the 19th-century French preacher and writer Henri Dominique Lacordaire: “Between the strong and the weak, between the rich and the poor, between the lord and the slave, it is freedom which oppresses and the law which sets free.” Between the weak and the strong, the state must intervene to redress the balance. In an unequal relationship such as that between boss and worker, it is not enough to establish the latter has a “right to disconnect”; to switch off their mobile phone, close their laptop, or ignore phone calls that arrive in the middle of dinner with their family. Any abuse that conflicts with that right must be deterred through sanctions. This is why we have prohibited employers from contacting workers outside working hours, and imposed potential fines for breaking the rules. In practice, the right to disconnect has to be reinforced with that prohibition. We can always weaken new labour laws by invoking the difficulty of enforcing them whenever employment is precarious and wages are low – but we shouldn’t. If the labour market makes it difficult to apply new laws, then we have to insist on reforming the labour market, not give up on regulating it. The law that we have just passed honours the legacy of the Portuguese Socialist party, in all those previous battles for workers’ rights. It is not in fact a radical law, but one that helps us take another step towards the development of Portugal as a more decent and egalitarian society. Ana Catarina Mendes is parliamentary leader of the Portuguese Socialist partyThere are no juggernauts in the NFC Prior to the season, the Bucs, Rams and Packers all profiled as 13-win teams. Ferocious defenses. Smart coaches. Elite quarterback play. All three ticked every box. Surely, they would mop the floor with all before them and compete with one another for the coveted first-round bye, right? Not quite. All three remain among the best teams in the conference, but over the course of the season, flaws have been exposed. The Packers’ offense hasn’t been as explosive as in years past, while the Rams and Bucs continue to stumble over their own feet. The Cardinals had the look of a both-sides-of-the-ball team to start the season. But with injuries mounting, some of that early-season shine has dissipated. So far, the NFC playoff picture is just as gummy as in the AFC. The Chiefs are 6-4 Fun fact: The Chiefs are tied for the second-most wins in the AFC. For all the (rightful) consternation about the Chiefs’ early struggles – the issues on offense, the broken defense – the team still rank among the upper-tier of AFC contenders. The Chiefs offense was back to its best against the Raiders in Week 11, albeit with some help from a Vegas side that appeared to misunderstand exactly how teams had been stifling Mahomes and Co all season long. Most importantly: The defense has taken a midseason leap. Most defenses get better as the season runs along. A coordinator figures out what his group can and (most importantly) cannot do. Still, it’s not often that a defense jumps from the are-they-even-trying level all the way up towards sneaky-good territory. Hidden in the shadows of the Mahomes discourse, the Chiefs defense has been getting it right for the past month. Over the past three weeks, it ranks as the 10th-best defense in Expected Points Added (EPA), ahead of the Cardinals, Rams and Saints, three of the league’s top units overall. That figure has been buoyed by a couple of cupcakes on the schedule, including Jordan Love’s less-than-stellar debut, but the defense has shown signs of life – and the team’s schedule isn’t exactly oozing with tough opponents the rest of the way. Jalen Hurts’ evolution Don’t look now, but Jalen Hurts is operating one of the NFL’s few Must Watch offenses. The Eagles are using their quarterback’s legs to great effect on the ground, leveraging the threat of Hurts as a runner to open up all kinds of room for the team’s running backs. In the passing game, the Eagles are chucking the ball deep early and often. The Eagles have embraced a similar philosophy to that of Lamar Jackson and the Ravens – though Jackson is the far superior quarterback and is running a more sophisticated system on a snap-by-snap basis. It’s a boom-or-bust style. They’re not bothering to ask him to be a Tom Brady-like rhythm-based passer. That’s not his game. Instead, they’re embracing what he can do, leaning on quarterback runs and letting him uncork the ball downfield over and over again. Hurts might not wind up being the long-term solution in Philadelphia, but he’s proof that good things can happen when you build a system around the strengths of a young quarterback – stripping the fat out of the playbook and honing in on what they do well – rather than asking them to be someone they’re not. Cleveland’s meandering defense Baker Mayfield and Kevin Stefanski take the bulk of the criticism when it comes to the Browns. But what about the should-be-elite defense, that of the best two-man pass-rushing tandem in the NFL and a secondary swimming in high-end draft picks? The Browns finished 22th in expected points added per play last season, a measure of the unit’s down-to-down value. They made a bunch of savvy upgrades this offseason. The result: A group that ranks 28th in EPA this season. Ooof. For a team that is increasingly reliant on the flow of the game – the offense needing to run the ball and then take the play-action shots that flow from that – the defense hasn’t been close to good enough. The talent suggests dominance; the results don’t agree. Stefanski and the Browns have a bunch of tough questions to answer during the final stretch of the season. Figuring out if they can patch together an effective defense while injuries mount will be as big a challenge as any. Justin Herbert: dink and dunker Do you know what wasn’t the issue with Justin Herbert during his rookie season? His willingness and ability to throw the ball downfield. The Chargers built a splash play offense, one that regularly asked Herbert to do superhuman things. Herbert delivered, planting himself right at the top of any ‘which quarterback would you want for the next 10 years?’ discussion. It’s not that Herbert has regressed this year, but that the Chargers are asking so little of their budding star. The Chargers brought in Joe Lombardi, the former Saints quarterback coach, to pilot the new offense. His answer to the concerns about Herbert’s protection issues during his rookie season: To run the Drew Brees offense with… not Drew Brees. Elements of the system work great, but they also restrict the aspect of Hebert’s game that makes him such a unique talent – throwing the ball over seven yards, for instance; or making plays outside of the confines of a carefully crafted structure. Herbert has attempted just 29 throws over 20 yards this season, and that trend doesn’t look like it will reverse as the season progresses. He attempted 69 throws over 20 yards last season, at an average of more than four per game. The Chargers find themselves 21st in explosive play rate this season, per Sharp Football Stats, despite having one of the game’s premier playmakers handling the ball on every snap. Go figure. Cordarrelle Patterson Remember when the Jaguars listed former Michigan quarterback Denard Robinson as a ‘Designated Weapon’ on the team’s official depth chart? It was hokey, but it was a window into where the sport was heading on offense: position-less players who could flex from outside as wide receiver, line up in the slot, or shuffle into the backfield and take a handoff as a running back. Enter Cordarrelle Patterson. After bouncing around the league as an elite kick-returner, Patterson has become The Guy in Atlanta, serving as both a running back and receiver. Along with Kyle Pitts, he is the Falcons offense, which tells you an awful lot about Atlanta’s soft rebuild as much as it does about Patterson himself. Currently, Patterson has 776 all-purpose yards and four touchdowns. If advanced numbers are your thing, Patterson ranks 14th in the league in yards after contact as a runner (ahead of Leonard Fournette!) and he is averaging 3.22 yards per route run, by far the highest figure of any receiving threat in the league. Not bad for former bust-turned-returner.Why is meaningful action to avert the climate crisis proving so difficult? It is, at least in part, because of ads. The fossil fuel industry has perpetrated a multi-decade, multibillion dollar disinformation, propaganda and lobbying campaign to delay climate action by confusing the public and policymakers about the climate crisis and its solutions. This has involved a remarkable array of advertisements – with headlines ranging from “Lies they tell our children” to “Oil pumps life” – seeking to convince the public that the climate crisis is not real, not human-made, not serious and not solvable. The campaign continues to this day. As recently as last month, six big oil CEOs were summoned to US Congress to answer for the industry’s history of discrediting climate science – yet they lied under oath about it. In other words, the fossil fuel industry is now misleading the public about its history of misleading the public. We are experts in the history of climate disinformation, and we want to set the record straight. So here, in black and white (and color), is a selection of big oil’s thousands of deceptive climate ads from 1984 to 2021. This isn’t an exhaustive analysis, of which we have published several, but a brief, illustrated history – like the “sizzle reels” that creatives use to highlight their best work – of the 30-plus year evolution of fossil fuel industry propaganda. This is big oil’s PR sizzle reel. ••• Early days: learning to spin Humble Oil (now ExxonMobil) was not self-conscious about the potential environmental impacts of its products in this 1962 advertisement touting “Each day Humble supplies enough energy to melt 7 million tons of glacier!” Life Magazine, 1962 The truth behind the ad: Three years earlier, in 1959, America’s oil bosses had been warned that burning fossil fuels could lead to global heating “sufficient to melt the icecap and submerge New York”. Their knowledge only grew. A 1979 internal Exxon study warned of “dramatic environmental effects” before 2050. “By the late 1970s”, a former Exxon scientist recently recalled, “global warming was no longer speculative”.’ ••• ‘Reposition global warming as theory (not fact)’ In 1991, Informed Citizens for the Environment, a front group of coal and utility companies announced that “Doomsday is cancelled” and asked, “Who told you the earth was warming … Chicken Little?” They complained about “weak” evidence, “non-existent” proof, inaccurate climate models and asserted that the physics was “open to debate”. Both ads from the Informed Citizens for the Environment, 1991 The truth behind the ads: Instead of warning the public about global heating or taking action, fossil fuel companies stayed silent as long as they could. In the late 1980s, however, the world woke up to the climate crisis, marking what Exxon called a “critical event”. The fossil fuel industry’s PR apparatus swung into action, implementing a strategy straight out of big tobacco’s playbook: to weaponize science against itself. A 1991 memo by Informed Citizens for the Environment made that strategy explicit: “Reposition global warming as theory (not fact).” ••• ‘Emphasize the uncertainty’ Mobil and ExxonMobil ran one of the most comprehensive climate denial campaigns of all time, with a foray in the 1980s, a blitz in the 1990s and continued messaging through the late 2000s. Their climate “advertorials” – advertisements disguised as editorials – appeared in the op-ed page of the New York Times and other newspapers and were part of what scholars have called “the longest, regular (weekly) use of media to influence public and elite opinion in contemporary America”. Left: New York Times, 1984. Right: New York Times, 1993 Between 1996 and 1998, for instance, Mobil ran 12 advertorials timed with the 1997 UN Kyoto negotiations that questioned whether the climate crisis is real and human-made and 10 that downplayed its seriousness. “Reset the alarm,” one ad suggested. “Let’s not rush to a decision at Kyoto … We still don’t know what role man-made greenhouse gases might play in warming the planet.” Left: New York Times, 1997. Right: New York Times, Wall Street Journal and other publications, 2000 The truth behind the ads: “Exxon’s position”, instructed internal strategy memos from 1988-89, was to “extend the science” and “emphasize the uncertainty in scientific conclusions” about the climate crisis. Or as a 1998 “Action Plan” by Exxon, Chevron, API, utilities companies and others declared: “Victory will be achieved when average citizens” and the “media ‘understands’ (recognizes) uncertainties in climate science”. ExxonMobil continued to fund climate denial through at least 2018. One of their 2004 advertorials claimed “scientific uncertainties” precluded “determinations regarding the human role in recent climate change”. That was untrue. Nine years earlier, the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change had concluded a “discernible human influence on global climate”. ExxonMobil’s chief climate scientist was a contributing author to the report. ••• Economic scaremongering “Don’t risk our economic future,” implored the Global Climate Coalition, a front group for utility, oil, coal, mining, railroad and car companies. This 1997 ad also targeted the Kyoto negotiations and was part of a $13m campaign that was so successful that the White House told GCC: President Bush “rejected Kyoto, in part, based on input from you”. Global Climate Coalition, 1997 The truth behind the ad: Put “emphasis on costs/political realities”, instructed a 1989 Exxon strategy memo. Just as the fossil fuel industry funded contrarian scientists to deny climate science, it also touted the flawed economic analyses of industry-funded economists. The best predictors of fossil fuel industry ad spending are media scrutiny and political activity. Today, economic scaremongering has gone digital, with huge spikes in television and social media ad spending by oil lobbies each time climate regulations loom. In the runup to the 2018-20 US midterm and presidential elections, ExxonMobil spent more on political advertising on Facebook and Instagram than any other company in the world (except Facebook itself). ••• It’s not our fault, it’s yours From 2004 to 2006, a $100m-plus a year BP marketing campaign “introduced the idea of a ‘carbon footprint’ before it was a common buzzword”, according to the PR agent in charge of the campaign. The targets of this campaign were the “routine human activities” and “lifestyle choices” of “individuals” and the “average American household”. In 2019, BP ran a new “Know your carbon footprint” campaign on social media. Both ads were published in various publications from 2004 to 2006. The truth behind the ads: Big oil’s rhetoric has evolved from outright denial to more subtle forms of propaganda, including shifting responsibility away from companies and on to consumers. This mimics big tobacco’s effort to combat criticism and defend against litigation and regulation by “casting itself as a kind of neutral innocent, buffeted by the forces of consumer demand”. ••• Greenwashing: talk clean, act dirty “We’re partnering with major universities to develop the next generation of biofuels,” said Chevron in 2007. This is also a top talking point of BP, ExxonMobil and others. The New Yorker, 2007 ExxonMobil has been trumpeting its research into algae biofuels for more than a decade – from black-and-white print ads (2009) to digital commercials (2018-21). New York Times, 2009 New York Times, 2018 The truth behind the ads: Greenwashing confers companies with an aura of environmental credibility while distracting from their anti-science, anti-clean energy disinformation, lobbying and investments. The goal is to defend what BP calls a company’s “social license to operate”. One way fossil fuel companies give themselves a green sheen is to establish – then boast about – what a 1998 API strategy memo termed “cooperative relationships” with reputable academic institutions. Big oil’s colonization of academia is pervasive. Shell’s ongoing sponsorship of the London Science Museum’s climate exhibition comes with a gagging clause prohibiting the museum from discrediting the company’s reputation. As for algae: America’s five largest oil and gas companies spent $3.6bn on corporate reputation advertising between 1986 and 2015. ExxonMobil has spent more on advertising than on algae research. ••• ‘We’re part of the solution!’ BP “developed an ‘all of the above’ strategy” for marketing energy from 2006 to 2008, “before any presidential candidates spoke of the same”, according to BP’s PR lead. Big oil continues to promote this narrative of “fossil fuel solution-ism’, including its “all of the above” language, on social media, in Congress and in paid-for, pretend editorials in the Washington Post. To make this spin stick, fossil fuel companies have been calling methane “clean” since at least the 1980s. “Natural gas is already clean,” said API Facebook ads and billboards last year. One of BP’s many ‘all of the above’ ads grouping oil and natural gas with renewable sources American Petroleum Institute native advertising in the Washington Post, 2021 The truth behind the ads: In contradiction to the science of stopping global heating, big oil asserts that fossil fuels will be essential for the foreseeable future. The “all of the above” energy mantra was – as BP’s advertising creative put it – “co-opted by politicians in 2008” and became a centerpiece of the Obama administration’s energy policies. The campaign also positioned methane as a “clean bridge” fuel. Like “clean coal”, calling methane “clean”, “cleanest” or “low-carbon” has been deemed false advertising by regulators. ••• Distorting reality in the 2020s and beyond A Shell TV ad last year featured birds in the sky, fields of wind and solar farms, the CEO of a Shell renewables subsidiary saying she’s “made the future far cleaner and far better for our children”, and not one reference to fossil fuels. The truth behind the ad: Between 2010 and 2018, 98.7% of Shell’s investments were in oil and gas. Such misrepresentations are industry-wide. Today, we’re all inundated with ads that leverage a combination of narratives, including those illustrated above, to present fossil fuel companies as climate saviors. It’s way past time we called their bluff. The narratives highlighted here are a selection of “discourses of climate denial and delay” previously identified by the authors and other researchers. The advertisements selected to illustrate these discourses were identified by the authors based on a review of dozens of peer-reviewed studies, journalistic investigations, white papers, ad libraries, newspaper archives, social media reports and lawsuits.What is happening? A huge storm dumped record rainfall across swathes of British Columbia in Canada and Washington State in the US between Saturday and Monday. Thousands of people have been forced to leave their homes, others became trapped on cut-off roads, and several towns were completely cut off. Mud and landslides have destroyed parts of major highways. British Columbia’s premier issued a state of emergency on Wednesday and troops have been deployed to help those still stranded. The port of Vancouver, the largest in Canada, was forced to suspend all rail access, and the city itself was all but cut off from the rest of Canada. At least one person has been confirmed dead and others are missing. In the town of Abbotsford, farmers ignored an evacuation order and desperately tried to save their animals from rising waters, in some cases tying ropes around the necks of cows and pulling them to higher ground. Why is the flooding so bad? The area has been drenched by unusually heavy rain – what one meteorologist has referred to as a “parade of storms” – since September. More rain fell in Bellingham in Washington State between Saturday and Monday than normally falls there during all of November. The heavy rainfall is linked to an atmospheric river, a narrow corridor of concentrated moisture in the atmosphere. Hurricane scientist Jeff Masters has described the phenomenon as like “a river in the sky that acts like a pipe transporting huge amounts of water vapour out of the tropics”. The flooding has been exacerbated by clearcut logging and its effect on slope stability, the rate at which water is absorbed into the ground and the ability to hold soil in root systems. Without trees, heavy rains can wash large amounts of sediment into nearby water systems, choking creeks and streams and causing them to quickly overflow. The risk of landslides and debris flow has also been heightened by summer wildfires in the region. “There’s a very clear link between a wildfire happening and the risk of a landslide or debris flow,” Thomas Martin, a forester in the province, said on Tuesday. “If you burn a lot of the trees, grass and shrubs, there are fewer living things to intercept the water. It just flows directly off the hill. And fires can make the soil hydrophobic so the runoff increases even more.” What happened in the region in the summer? The storm is battering the same region that five months ago suffered an extreme heatwave, fuelling destructive wildfires. In June the small mountain town of Lytton registered a temperature of 49.6C (121F), obliterating Canada’s national heat record. Police stations and hospitals reported a surge in heat-related deaths – 595 in British Columbia, and dozens more south of the border. Roads buckled as asphalt expanded. At least one city suffered power cuts. The extreme weather was caused by an extended “heat dome” parked over the Pacific north-west. Although not an official term, a “heat dome” is created when high pressure in the upper atmosphere acts as a sort of lid, preventing hot air from escaping. Combined with high temperatures, this causes hot air to sink to the surface, causing further warming as it descends. How is the situation linked to the climate crisis? Scientists who analysed the regional heatwave found that human-caused climate change made the extreme weather at least 150 times more likely. Referring to both the heatwave and the storms, Joe Boomgard-Zagrodnik, an agricultural meteorologist at Washington State University, told NBC this week: “We were super hot and dry in the summer, and the switch flips. It definitely matches what the climate models show for the future around here – hotter, drier summers and wetter winters.” As the climate warms scientists expect atmospheric rivers to form in more rapid succession, grow more intense, and become longer, wetter and wider. According to Environment Canada, there have been five atmospheric rivers already this season, which is highly unusual. The way in which the summer fires exacerbated the winter flooding is an example of a compound climate disaster. • This article was amended on 19 November and 2 December 2021. The headline was amended to be more accurate about the area affected by these events. The Pacific north-west, which was the only area highlighted in an earlier headline, generally refers just to the US; to make clear that parts of Canada are also affected, “British Columbia” has been added. A graphic was corrected to show cooling vapour from Pacific weather systems depositing rain when ascending the western faces of BC mountains rather than during the vapour’s subsequent descent. The death figure for British Columbia at the time of publication was 595, not 486 as an earlier version said. And the caption of the satellite photo has been amended to remove an incorrect reference to it showing the Fraser Valley.Tens of thousands of people in Canada and the US have been left without power after a large storm hit the Pacific north-west. British Columbia and Washington State in particular have been affected by flooding and landslides. Whether you live or work in the area, or are helping with search and rescue efforts with the emergency services, we would like to hear from you. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. Though we’d like to hear from you, your security is most important. We recognise it may not always be safe or appropriate to record or share your experiences – so please think about this when deciding whether to send your information to the Guardian. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Jo March is a heroine well suited to musical theatre. She pulses with enthusiasm; she’s obsessed with the dramatic; she’s just a tiny bit full of herself. “I am bursting with energy,” Jo sings in this adaptation of Louisa May Alcott’s most famous novel. And so is Lydia White’s compelling performance as the March girl who wants to live more than the life that 19th-century society has ascribed to her. Bronagh Lagan’s production – at the play’s London premiere – is fired with charm, and it’s Jo’s relationship with her gentlest sister that’s most touchingly rendered, thanks to Anastasia Martin’s lovely turn as Beth. Beth’s duet with neighbour-cum-benefactor Mr Laurence over that precious piano of his is one of the highlights of Jason Howland’s score. Meanwhile Marmee, the girls’ inspiring mother, is given a powerful voice of her own in this version, and beautifully sung by Savannah Stevenson. The fact that a show that made its Broadway debut 16 years ago hasn’t made it to London sooner does, however, hint at a few problems. One is the narrative pacing of Allan Knee’s book, which rather strips the other siblings of any meaningful development: one moment Meg is meeting John Brooke, the next she has twins. As for Sev Keoshgerian’s timid and slightly gauche Laurie, he’s barely spent any stage time with Jo before he’s proposing to her. The musical treatment, meanwhile, amplifies the source material’s sentimentality to the extent that it’s constantly threatening to push the needle into twee. Some of the most enjoyable moments are the ones where Lagan goes all out for laughs that puncture the prevailing earnestness. Amy and Laurie’s proposal announcement (“The Most Amazing Thing”) offers welcome comic relief amid the maudlin aftermath of you-know-who’s passing, and the scenes at the start of each half where Jo acts out her “blood and guts” stories – with the cast inhabiting her characters behind her in a glorious celebration of melodrama – are wonderful fun. Which makes sense, as this is very much the musical of How Jo Became a Writer. And while White does a sterling job with it, it’s a shame that we don’t get more of the Little Women. Little Women: The Musical is at Park theatre, London, until 19 DecemberLast year, many people got many things wrong about how the pandemic might change our lives. No, cities did not die; yes, people still blow out birthday candles and risk spreading their germs. But few 2020 forecasts missed their mark so spectacularly as the oft-repeated claim that, as the world reopened, we’d return to it in sweatpants. If any single event crystallizes this misfire, it’s last month’s announcement that the direct-to-consumer loungewear brand Entireworld was going out of business. The company had been a breakout darling of 2020, its cheerfully hued cotton basics poised at the fortuitous intersection of “cute enough for Zoom” and “cozy enough to work, sleep, and recreate from bed in, for the bulk of a calendar year”. News outlets, meanwhile, pointed to Entireworld’s astonishing 662% increase in sales last March not as a right-place, right-time one-off, but an indication of our collective sartorial destiny. “[T]he sweatpant has supplanted the blue jean in the pants-wearing American imagination,” declared GQ last April. The New York Times Magazine followed suit a few months later with an Entireworld name-check in its August 2020 cover story, headlined “Sweatpants Forever”. But it wasn’t to be. Instead, as 2021 brought forth the world’s reopening, I noticed a style sensibility that seemed to defy last year’s housebound pragmatism. From Instagram to the streets of my New York City neighborhood, the people were turning looks. Kooky looks, to be precise, from platform Crocs to strong-shouldered silhouettes. My online window shopping exploits turned up scores of sundry garments, across brands, all in the same exuberant hue of 90s DayGlo green. From sensible underpants to faux fur–trimmed tops, I subconsciously catalogued the color labels assigned to each (“celery”, “gross green”, “slime”). This new, psychedelic palette seemed like a spiritual departure from Trump-era minimalism and its many shades of beige. Less dutiful, more winking. Sweatpants seem destined for a mere supporting role. Jessica Richards, a trend forecasting consultant based in New York City, agrees that the pandemic has changed the way we dress. “It’s actually for the better,” she says – and in more ways than one. It’s no coincidence that the styles of the Great Re-entry reflect a certain giddiness, says Dr Jaehee Jung, a University of Delaware fashion studies professor who researches the psychology of fashion and consumer behavior. “The fact that there are more opportunities to present ourselves to others makes us excited about the clothes we wear,” Jung tells me. “I’m definitely seeing people taking more risks, in terms of color choices, prints and patterns, even shapes and silhouettes that they wouldn’t have worn before,” says Sydney Mintle, a fashion industry publicist in Seattle. “People are like, ‘life is short, wear yellow.’” Tamar Miller, CEO of the women’s luxury footwear brand Bells &amp; Becks, has seen this fashion risk-taking impulse first-hand in her company’s recent sales. “My absolute, number-one, kind of off-the-charts shoe is one I did not expect,” she says. That shoe, per Miller’s description, is a pointed-toe loafer in black-and-white snakeskin leather, topped by a prominent decorative tab with hardware detailing. It’s a bold choice, and one that affirms the demographic breadth of the desire to make a statement. Miller’s target customers are not members of Gen Z, but rather their parents and grandparents. Secondhand clothing – and its promise of luxe-for-less – has also found its time to shine. 2020 was a banner year for the online resale market. Digital consignment platforms like Depop, ThredUp, and Poshmark swelled with the sartorial discards of an estimated 52.6 million people in 2020, 36.2 million of whom were selling for the first time, according to a survey by ThredUp. A majority of millennial and Gen Z consumers indicated that they plan to spend more on secondhand apparel in the next five years than in any other retail category, a sentiment expressed by 42% of consumers overall. It’s a phenomenon that may also be contributing to the moment’s ethos of mix-and-match experimentation. “Gone are the days of sleek, edited ‘capsule wardrobes’, and in their place are drawers overstuffed with vintage treasures sourced from Poshmark or Depop,” writes Isabel Slone in a recent Harper’s Bazaar article headlined “How Gen Z Killed Basic Black”. This doesn’t necessarily mean that fast fashion is on its way out. (“Some of those brands are doing big business, and the numbers don’t lie,” Mintle sighs.) But the boom reflects, and may have helped accelerate, a growing departure from trend-chasing and disposable, low-cost wares. You might even say that reflexive participation in fads is so 2019 – not least because the US is struggling with supply chain bottlenecks as we enter the holiday season. But our Roaring Twenties may be on the horizon. For 2022, Richards anticipates sparkle, novelty, “shoes that go ‘clunk’” and “really maximalist styling”. She didn’t mention sweatpants.It’s lunchtime on a cold Thursday in January 1969. After weeks of sometimes difficult rehearsals and recordings, the Beatles and their new songs finally – and spectacularly – collide with the outside world. The occasion is now fixed in their iconography. On 30 January on the roof of 3 Savile Row, the London HQ of their company Apple, the four – joined by the US keyboard player Billy Preston – performed five songs: Get Back (three times), Don’t Let Me Down (twice), I’ve Got a Feeling (ditto), Dig a Pony and One After 909. They played with a tightness and confidence that belied the last-minute nature of events, while a sense of urgency and drama was provided by two police officers, determined to shut everything down. This magical performance forms the finale of Get Back, Peter Jackson’s new three-part documentary series about the Beatles. Neither the band nor the people watching on the rooftop and down below are aware that this will be their last ever live performance. But for the viewer, that knowledge makes everything more compelling. What happened that day highlights one of Get Back’s themes, something that is often overlooked: the group’s fascinating relationship with their audience and the wider public. Down below, on streets dominated by the elegant facade of the Royal Academy, a swelling crowd gathered, and their opinions were sampled by camera crews who asked the most simple of vox pop questions: “Do you know what music you’re listening to?”; “Do you like the music you’re listening to?”; “Do you normally like listening to the Beatles?” Among other things, the resulting footage – used in the original 1970 documentary Let It Be, and now recut by Jackson – proves that the Beatles could still tease out the prejudices of age and class. This is shown by the responses of a gaggle of businessmen who gather in the doorway of 2 Savile Row. “This type of music is all right in its place – it’s quite enjoyable,” says one man whose slicked-back hair, horn-rimmed glasses and double-breasted overcoat give him the air of a character from a late-60s sitcom. “But I think it’s a bit of an imposition to absolutely disrupt all the business in this area.” A man next to him is asked if he ever enjoys the Beatles’ music. “In the right surroundings,” he shoots back. “But definitely not now.” When I ask Paul McCartney about these scenes, he mentions a sequence from the first Beatles film, 1964’s A Hard Day’s Night. The four are portrayed confronting a bowler-hatted commuter who objects to sharing space with them in a train compartment. He responds to Ringo Starr blaring music from a radio with a line that, back then, was common currency: “I fought the war for your sort.” “There’s always the guy in the bowler hat who hates what you’re doing,” says McCartney. “He’s never going to like it, and he thinks you’re offending his sensibilities. But you’ve got to remember, as we always did, there’s the people who work for that guy. There’s the young secretaries, the young guys in the office, or the tradesmen or the cleaners. Those are the people who like us. Also, a lot of the bosses too. We always knew that there’s the establishment, then there’s the working people. And we were the working people. Working people tended to get us, and understand what we were doing. And occasionally, you would get the kind of snob who would get angry. In a way, that was part of the fun.” By and large, the array of people with positive opinions of the rooftop performance outnumbered the detractors, proving that the Beatles had an almost universal appeal – from female twentysomethings to a passing cab driver (“Is it their new record? Oh, great! I’m all in favour of it”) and the trilby-hatted man who offers the opinion that the Beatles are “real good people”. The band’s reach, it seemed, was formidable – and, to some extent, this had happened by design. As McCartney has pointed out in the past, the early run of singles – Love Me Do, Please Please Me, From Me to You, She Loves You – had deliberately used personal pronouns, to maximise their popular resonance. Later, such McCartney songs as Eleanor Rigby, Penny Lane and She’s Leaving Home brilliantly mixed the everyday with the poetic. In John Lennon’s case, even his most surreal imagery often originated in the ordinary: “newspaper taxis”, “4,000 holes in Blackburn, Lancashire”, I Am the Walrus’s “stupid bloody Tuesday” and “choking smokers”. The brief detour into avant garde film-making they titled Magical Mystery Tour, let us not forget, centred on a coach trip around Devon and Cornwall. Whatever they did, they never really lost the quality we now know as being “relatable”. Their work in early 1969, moreover, was partly based on a very relatable idea. When they began work at Twickenham Film Studios, they were aiming to go back to their roots and reconnect with their audience. The starting point for the rehearsals and recording sessions that would produce the album and film titled Let It Be was a plan to globally televise their first performance in front of a crowd since 1966. This necessitated long conversations about who their audience now were, and how they might be gathered together. The movie’s director, Michael Lindsay-Hogg, said they ought to somehow play to “the whole world”. Among the ideas they considered was a show at a Roman amphitheatre in Libya, staged in front of some kind of microcosm of humanity. (Not unreasonably, Starr worried that “every time we do something it’s got to be really awesome”.) Could they stage an event that somehow represented their global appeal? In the summer of 1967, they had pulled off something like that, playing All You Need Is Love to a worldwide TV audience of at least 400 million, thanks to the new technology of satellite broadcasting. In September 1968, Lindsay-Hogg had directed the promotional video for Hey Jude which featured a multiracial cast of about 300 extras (“We wanted a mix, which would be like the world of England at the time,” he later said). This time, though, George Harrison’s antipathy to returning to the stage, which led to his temporary walkout, meant that any ambitious plans soon proved to be non-starters. Blasting out their music into central London without warning on a cold January day was a last-minute compromise … but in attracting a crowd of all ages, it just about made the same point. And so to a slightly smaller aspect of the 50-year Let It Be/Get Back saga. As well as new CD and vinyl editions of Let It Be, Jackson’s series is accompanied by a Get Back book which, like the films, tells a much more nuanced and complicated story than the received idea of the sessions as a time of unending strife. It features superb images by Linda McCartney and Let It Be’s on-set photographer Ethan Russell, and transcripts taken from 120 hours of Beatles conversations – which, it still amazes me to say, I was given the task of editing. After that job was complete, Apple then got in touch with me and my colleague John Domokos with an idea: given the centrality of vox pops to some of the 1969 footage, and also our Guardian video series Anywhere But Westminster, could we make a short film about the Beatles, their 21st-century audience, and London? We spent time in and around Savile Row and the West End, collaring the public, pointing at the rooftops, and asking much the same questions that had been posed in 1969. This time, no one was dismissive or snobby, and 99% of our interviewees responded to the idea of anyone trying to stop the Beatles’ last live performance with incredulous laughter. We met a hip-hop aficionado who talked about learning of the Beatles through other artists sampling their music, and a man whose 24-year-old daughter had just completed a cover of Eight Days a Week and put it online. “The youngsters are still into them,” he marvelled. From one passerby, we got a matter-of-fact summary of what we were trying to get at: “Nobody dislikes the Beatles. Everybody at some point has a memory to one of their songs. So they’re part of our collective culture.” The best example of this were the Thayer family from Somerset, whom we later met outside Abbey Road studios, restaging the famous cover of the album of the same name. Dad Tom led his kids – Lois, Evie and Jude (named after the song) – across the zebra crossing, while mum Esther took the photo. High fives ensued. And there, once again, was the Beatles’ magic: a very ordinary part of the British streetscape, once again filled with wonder by history’s most truly universal pop group. • New versions of Let It Be and the Get Back book are out now. Peter Jackson’s Get Back begins on 25 November on Disney+Good morning. The military has been deployed in British Columbia after a storm described as a “one-in-100-year event” caused devastating flooding and landslides across the same region that suffered a record-breaking heatwave five months ago. The Canadian government signed off the province’s request for federal assistance after the premier, John Horgan, issued a state of emergency, warning that the death toll was expected to rise. Horgan emphasized the role of the climate emergency in extreme weather events, saying: “While Environment Canada called this a one-in-100-year event, we know the increased likelihood of intense storms is due to the climate crisis.” Scientists who analyzed the region’s summer heatwave found that human-made climate change made the event at least 150 times more likely. The agriculture minister, Lana Popham, added that “thousands of animals have perished” in the devastation. What is the death toll? At least one woman has been confirmed dead, and at least three people are missing. What about south of the border? Three-quarters of the homes in the Washington border town of Sumas were damaged by flooding. Rittenhouse’s attorneys ask judge to declare mistrial over video Kyle Rittenhouse’s defense attorneys have asked the judge to declare a mistrial, arguing that they were sent a lower quality version of the drone footage that acted as a “linchpin” in the prosecution’s case. The defense attorney Corey Chirafisi said the state provided them with a compressed version of a video taken by a drone. The footage, which was played by prosecutors during closing arguments, was said to show Rittenhouse pointing his rifle at anti-racism protesters before being chased by Joseph Rosenbaum, the first man he shot and killed. Why does it matter? The video is key because the prosecution argues it proves that Rittenhouse lied on the stand when he said he did not point his gun at protesters. This is the second mistrial request judge Bruce Schroeder has heard. Last week, the defense asked for one over what appeared to be out-of-bounds questions asked of Rittenhouse by the chief prosecutor. Paul Gosar censured over video aimed at AOC The House formally censured the Arizona congressman Paul Gosar on Wednesday after he posted an animated video showing him killing the Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacking Joe Biden. Censure, which is the toughest sanction the House can impose barring expulsion, was approved by 223 to 207, largely along party lines. Gosar, a Trump loyalist who is one of Congress’s most far-right members, was also stripped of his committee assignments. In a speech before the vote, Ocasio-Cortez underlined that the sanction was not personal, but “about what we are willing to accept”. Jackie Speier, the Democrat from California who introduced the resolution, said she would have introduced the same resolution had it been a Democrat. Which Republicans voted for censure? Just two – Congresswoman Liz Cheney of Wyoming and Congressman Adam Kinzinger of Illinois – voted with Democrats. How common is censure? The House has censured members on almost two dozen occasions, but just six times in the past century. In other news … The US Capitol rioter who wore a horned headdress has been sentenced to 41 months in prison for his role in the 6 January attack. Jacob Chansley pleaded guilty in September to obstructing an official proceeding. The rapper Young Dolph was shot and killed on Wednesday in his home town of Memphis at the age of 36. The artist, whose real name was Adolph Robert Thornton Jr, was at Makeda’s Butter Cookies at about 1pm when a gunman shot through the window. The Fox News boss Rupert Murdoch has said Donald Trump must “stop focusing on the past” if conservatives are to “define the future”. The 90-year-old media mogul’s rare rebuke of the former president was delivered at an annual NewsCorp stockholder meeting. Young people have a more optimistic worldview than older generations, a global study commissioned by Unicef has found. The research stands in contrast with the idea that young people’s outlook has been darkened by issues including the climate crisis and growing nationalism. Stat of the day: one bitcoin transaction uses as much power as the average American household consumes in a month Amid a flurry of politicians hailing cryptocurrency as the future, environmentalists are calling on leaders to address the climate implications of bitcoin mining. A single bitcoin transaction uses the same amount of power that the average American household consumes in a month, creating climate emissions 1m times higher than a credit card payment. Don’t miss this: big oil’s climate denial ads Since it was first warned that burning fossil fuels could lead to global heating in the 1950s, the energy sector has employed a multibillion-dollar propaganda and lobbying campaign to discredit climate science. Here are some of the ads big oil has used over the decades, demonstrating a shift in tactics as the facts and scale of the climate crisis became increasingly hard to deny. Climate check: 10 ways to confront the climate crisis without losing hope While it’s easy to slip into feelings of despair about the climate crisis, it’s important that we stay hopeful in order to keep the fight alive. “The emotional toll” of the climate emergency has become “an urgent crisis of its own”, Rebecca Solnit writes. Here are her 10 ways of dealing with both. Last Thing: the accidental Thanksgiving invite that led to a friendship Five Thanksgivings ago, Wanda Dench sent a text meant for her grandson to the wrong number. The invitation went to Jamal Hinton – then a high school student – instead. “You not my grandma,” he wrote back then. “Can I still get a plate tho?” Dench replied: “Of course you can. That’s what grandma’s do … feed every one.” They’ve spent the holiday together every year since. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendWildfires spread by strong winds tore across Wyoming, Montana and Colorado, rocking the mountain states even as they prepare for winter. With low temperature forecast at just above freezing this week in Colorado, a fire burning roughly 50 miles from Denver forced evacuations and sent plumes of smoke toward the eastern plains. The area is awaiting its first measurable snowfall, already historically late. Fire weather warnings were issued by the National Weather Service, which forecasted low humidity, high winds and warmer temperatures. The Kruger Rock fire erupted after strong winds pushed a tree on to a power line. The fire spread quickly through the steep forested area covered in pine and scrub brush. Winds gusting at 45mph (73 km/h) fanned the fire slowly eastward while local fire crews struggled to gain access. “The terrain where most of the fire was burning made it too dangerous to insert firefighters to battle the fire directly,” officials wrote in an update on Wednesday. “The gusty winds, higher than normal temperatures, and low relative humidity suggested great potential for the fire to grow quickly.” They relied on air support to suppress the fire, but the conditions proved too extreme and Marc Thor Olsen, a skilled and experienced pilot, was killed on Tuesday night when his fixed-wing plane – which had never before been used to fight fire at night – crashed in the rough terrain. “The pilot told ground resources it was turbulent over the fire, conditions were not ideal to make a drop and that he was going to make one more pass and then return to Loveland,” officials said. “Moments later, at approximately 6.37 pm, ground resources heard the plane crash.” By Thursday morning fire activity had slowed, officials said, and 40% containment was achieved on the 146-acre fire. Mandatory evacuations remained in place in the communities near Rocky Mountain national park. Fires also forced evacuations in northern Wyoming and south-central Montana, with deputies in some areas going door-to-door warning residents to flee. The wife of a volunteer firefighter battling a blaze in Wyoming reportedly died after being trapped by the flames while she was trying to evacuate. The Clark fire chief, Nate Hoffert, told reporters on Wednesday that his team was still trying to piece together what happened from clues left behind. “We believe she was trying to make it out the driveway and ran into a fire front and tried to turn her car around,” Hoffert told KTVQ. “From what I saw, it looks like her car got stuck and she must have tried to get out and try and make it back to her house and try to make it back to a safe zone and got overrun by a fire front.” The tragedy has affected emergency response teams throughout the area. “It hits incredibly close to home for our department”, Kristie Hoffert, medical chief for the Clark fire district told the Cody Enterprise on Tuesday. “We are struggling.” In decades past, fire season in the mountainous west wrapped up in the months before the winter storms, typically concluding its siege by August or September. But the climate crisis has delivered hotter days and drier landscapes, with the risks extending deeper into spring and autumn. “Colorado used to talk about a fire season,” the state’s governor, Jared Polis, said in April. “It’s now a year-round phenomenon.” Meanwhile, a historic drought and recent heat waves tied to the climate crisis have made wildfires harder and more dangerous to fight. Scientists say the the region has grown much warmer and drier in the past 30 years, which will continue to make weather more extreme and wildfires more frequent and destructive.The Najah’s Desert Oasis gas station appears on the horizon like a mirage, the only fuel stop in a stretch of nearly 100 miles of mountains and desert in this remote part of south-eastern California. The numbers listed on its sign can evoke a similar feeling of disbelief. $6.39 a gallon for regular, the display read on Tuesday. Prices at the gas station, located along historic Route 66, are among the most expensive in the United States, high even for California. The Golden state has long had the highest gas prices in the country. This week, they hit a new record amid fuel shortages and increased demand, recording an average price per gallon of $4.68. Prices at Najah’s Desert Oasis have always been higher than average, workers say, because getting anything delivered this far out – fuel included – is expensive. The station only recently got electricity after running on diesel generators for much of its 25 years. “We’re not an AMPM [chain location]. Gas stations in towns have public works. We’re completely self-sufficient. We have to do everything on our own,” said Carolynn Blair, one of the few workers who lives nearby. Najah’s Desert Oasis is more than just a fuel stop, Blair said. The station is a lifeline for travelers stranded when their vehicles break down in the harsh desert, lost hikers and those who live in this isolated region of San Bernardino county. Inside, there are tables where those passing through can get a break from the desert heat, and outside there are large fountains with koi fish. “I call us save-your-ass gas,” said Blair, a 20-year-employee of the station. “Saving lives since 1996. I believe that, too, because I know how many people we have saved … I know how important this place is. I was a child out here before it was here and before the callboxes went in, and people died out here.” In her time at the station, it has aided people, children included, who have hiked through the desert after fatal car accidents and once rescued a missing woman from the parking lot. It’s not your average gas station, she added while sitting at the register on a recent afternoon. “Not at $6.39 a gallon, it’s not your average gas station,” a man yelled from a nearby table. “But it’s the only one. It’s better than nothing.” Blair and the station manager, Teri Teixeira, laughed and breathed a sigh of relief. The station’s higher-than-average prices have been a point of contention for many customers over the years. Some, angry about the high prices, have punched and thrown things at workers. Brandy Danzy, who was on her way home to North Carolina, wanted to wait to fill up but she was on empty and the nearest station was another 40 miles away in Needles. “I guess we’re gonna have to,” she said, eyeing the pump. “Living is a lot harder out here. It’s very expensive. That’s the cost of doing business in the remote desert, Teixeira said. “People ask us all the time why the prices are so high,” Teixeira said. “I can go over in Arizona and buy fuel for less than what the owner buys wholesale from the distributor.” This region of California, near the Arizona border, has long had a reputation for higher than average gas prices, with online travel groups warning tourists to get gas on the other side of the state line. Locals, too, often travel to the neighboring state to fill up their tanks. The recent nationwide gas price hike has pushed costs even higher. “Drivers are paying $1.50 more per gallon than a year ago,” Doug Shupe, a spokesperson for AAA, told CNN about California gas prices. “It means the person who has the typical midsize sedan with a 14-gallon-size fuel tank, they’re paying $21 more to fill up that tank today than last year.” Stations in nearby Needles, just across the Colorado River from Arizona, also offer some of the most expensive gas in the state. Gas stations there reported that the long distance that fuel transporters travel to reach the region have always driven up prices in the area. At the Shell in Needles, regular fuel was $5.59 a gallon on Tuesday. “It’s a pinch point. A lot of truckers, a lot of travelers,” said Dennis Martin as he filled up his tank. “I used to work for an oil company and they laid me off because the oil and gas prices were too low. I hope they’re happy now.” Many of the station’s customers are travelers passing through, said Jessica Caudillo, a cashier at the Shell station in Needles, and aren’t aware that cheaper fuel is just down the road. “We’re right on the [Arizona] border,” Caudillo said. “If I just drive about 10 minutes I can pay the Arizona gas prices. That’s something a lot of these travelers don’t know.” Tammie Gress and Lonnie Roberts, who hauled fuel in the region before he retired, stopped at the station for ice cream on Tuesday night, but didn’t fill up due to the high prices. Fuel costs in Needles were among the worst they’d seen, but while traveling over the summer they saw rising fuel costs in almost every western state. “It’s ridiculous,” Gress said. “With the gas being so high, what do you do? Go to work and spend your check on more gas?”Winning tip: Ceramics, Potteries Museum and Art Gallery, Stoke-on-Trent The ceramics collection at the Potteries Museum &amp; Art Gallery in Stoke-on-Trent must be among the best in the world – I would say even better than that held by the V&amp;A. It’s free and easily accessible if you’re in the Midlands. The collection covers everything from prehistoric jugs, the history of household names, such as Royal Doulton and Wedgwood, to studio potters of the 20th and 21st century. My favourite pieces have to be the huge collection of cow shaped cream jugs, which have their own section, and viewing them is a suitably random way to spend an afternoon. Given how central they are, the galleries are quiet and never seem to get the numbers of visitors they deserve. Matt Impressionists, National Museum, Cardiff The National Museum, Cardiff, has one of the best collections of impressionist paintings in Europe, among its varied treasures. It is amazing to enjoy notable works from Monet, Cézanne et al without crowds. However, what draws me back, time after time, are the paintings by Pembrokeshire-born siblings Augustus and Gwen John. Augustus’s vibrant portraits, which include notables such as Dylan Thomas and Ramsay MacDonald, are well known. Less so, the subtle and intimate domestic scenes and depictions of anonymous citizens by his sister, Gwen, one-time lover of Auguste Rodin, and a hugely underrated artist. Entry is free. Moira Transport by any means, Riverside Museum, Glasgow A visit to the Riverside Museum in Glasgow is a must. Housed in a modernistic building on the banks of the River Clyde is a magnificent collection of all types of transportation through the ages. It is spread over two floors with cafes and a fantastic view of the river itself. Entry is free. Ian Major Pre-Raphaelites, St Martin’s-on-the-Hill, Scarborough On Scarborough’s south cliff, among the B&amp;Bs, is an artistic gem that is easy to miss. St Martin’s-on-the-Hill is an active church, but also home to an amazing collection of pre-Raphaelite art. The greats are all here: Morris, Burne-Jones, Rossetti, Webb and Madox Brown. Luminous stained glass, richly carved wood, gilt paintings, a coffee shop with homemade cakes (open 11am-4pm Monday to Saturday), combine to indulge all the senses. Helpfully, laminated sheets are provided to explain the art and history. A residency by Angela Chalmers has added a contemporary art twist. Entry is free. Debbie Rolls 1960s rockers, Eel Pie Island Museum, Twickenham There’s a little museum in Twickenham, south-west London, dedicated to the rock’n’roll history (as well as boat building history) of Eel Pie Island in the Thames, where some of the world’s most famous bands performed in the now sadly destroyed hotel. From the Stones to the Who to Jimi Hendrix, the place is adorned with posters, photos and wonderful first-hand accounts of watching bands at the very birth of the 1960s rock’n’roll era. The museum (open Thursday to Sunday from noon to 6pm, admission £3, with attached shop) will also appeal to boat building fans. Layla Astley Glass and coal, Sunderland Museum and Winter Gardens Sunderland Museum and Winter Gardens, established in 1846, was the first municipally funded museum outside London. A frequent visitor for 60 years, I always find something to delight and absorb me. Two of its permanent exhibitions, Glorious Glass and Coal pay tribute to what were two of the city’s main industries. Marvel at pieces ranging from Anglo-Saxon stained glass, to “rummers” – 16th-century drinking glasses – to quirky “end of day” items made from leftover molten glass, for the glassmakers’ own use. In the coal exhibition, learn about “disaster glass” sold to raise money for mining families devastated by pit accidents. Entry is free. C Jackson Anthropology, Pitt Rivers Museum, Oxford The Pitt Rivers Museum in Oxford is a real treasure trove of artefacts including toys, fishing nets, armour, medicinal equipment and feathers from all around the world. There are so many objects it can feel chaotic, but this is the beauty of it – you will always end up seeing something captivating. Strangely, though, the best thing to see in the museum is an empty display case. The Pitt Rivers is doing a stellar job of centring decolonial narratives, and is really upfront about the history that has led to artefacts being there. For this reason, it no longer displays the shrunken heads. I really admire the work it is doing to ensure that it is sharing people’s stories fairly. Entry is free. Anki House of magic, Soho, London A little unusual, but The House of MinaLima in London is amazing – it is the design studio behind the graphic props of the Harry Potter and Fantastic Beasts series, and display all manner of items from the films, including bottle labels, book covers, posters, wand box designs – any graphic element you can imagine (and many that you can’t). It is amazing to see that things that are only seen fleetingly in the films were designed in such detail. Entry is free. Philip Nash Toy trains and motor sport, Bexhill Museum, East Sussex Bexhill Museum has such fond childhood memories for me – the giant crab and the interesting talks we went to as children in the school holidays are still very clear in my mind. It’s a hidden gem with the Izzard family model railway (donated by Eddie Izzard) and a costume galley with garments dating back to the 17th century. Bexhill is the birthplace of British motorsport and it has all the history surrounding this, so if you have an interest in motorsport this is truly fascinating and will find a treasure trove of information. It’s a fantastically informative day out for children and adults alike and such a gift to my home town of Bexhill. Entry is £3. Rebecca James Nature in Art, Twigworth, Gloucestershire Nature in Art showcases a wide variety of art inspired by nature, housed in a stunning Georgian mansion in Gloucestershire. The collection is incredibly diverse, including many styles and media. A particular favourite of mine is Rosalind Wise’s painting, The Cycle of Flowers, which is based on a year of growth in the floral world. I never tire of observing this piece; a year flying by before my eyes, but always a new flower to discover. Entry is £7. Karen TranmerAlas and alack, the Thursday quiz is back. Fifteen questions on general knowledge and topical trivia, laced with a few jokes and regular appearances from Kate Bush, Ron from Sparks, the anagrams that everybody loves so much, and a hidden Doctor Who reference to spot. It is just for fun, there really are no prizes – but let us know how you get on in the comments The Thursday quiz, No 30 If you do think there has been an egregious error in one of the questions or answers, please feel free to email martin.belam@theguardian.com but remember, the quiz master’s word is always final, and you wouldn’t want him to release the scorpions.I am not a model or a celebrity, but my image has been stolen from me. When I was 17, a high school boyfriend disseminated the nude pictures I had sent him to what felt like everyone I had ever met, as well as a number of people I hadn’t. The prurient Facebook messages that flooded my inbox were daily reminders that my body was not my own. It belonged to men on the internet; I only lived inside it. What happened to me also happened, albeit on a much grander scale, to the famously desirable model and actor Emily Ratajkowski. As she recounts in her debut essay collection, My Body, a fashion photographer who took nude pictures of her when she was young, drunk and vulnerable persists in selling books of the Polaroids. He is far from the only man to profit from Ratajkowski’s beauty: as she explains in Buying Myself Back, perhaps the best piece in her thoughtful and accessible book, the artist Richard Prince featured one of her Instagram pictures in his so-called “Instagram Paintings” series, which consists of “images of Instagram posts … printed on oversize canvas”. In order to recover the photo, Ratajkowski had to purchase the artwork; ultimately, she found herself in the bizarre position of buying herself – or at least the image that had usurped her self – back. Few women are this prominent, and even fewer turn out to be unwilling fodder for celebrated artists – but on the whole, what is striking about My Body is not how different a renowned supermodel’s experiences are from those of an everywoman, but rather how continuous. At first, I suspected this made the book boring. My Body is more of a non-linear memoir than a compendium of essays – though Ratajkowski’s musings are nominally organised into discrete sections, they seem to bleed into a more general autobiographical jumble – and many of Ratajkowski’s reminiscences date back to her adolescence. She recalls her fixation on Britney Spears, her childhood home in San Diego, and, above all, her relentless objectification at the hands of various romantic interests and employers. As I rifled through accounts of inappropriate advances and catcalls, I wondered why Ratajkowski chose to devote so much space to relatively common degradations, rather than focusing on the more exotic indignities that she endured as she became famous. But as I read on, I realised that the depressing familiarity of the abuses that Ratajkowski chronicles is precisely the point. The anecdotes in My Body dramatise what is always true, if often implicit: that women can neither fully escape nor fully inhabit bodies that men are bent on appropriating. Though Ratajkowski grasps that her allure is a form of power, she also understands that “whatever influence and status I’ve gained were only granted to me because I appealed to men”. Her body is valuable only insofar as it functions as a commodity, “a tool I use to make a living as a model”. When she strips for a shoot, she “disassociates”: “I don’t even really recognize my body as me.” Still, for all her self-awareness, Ratajkowski stops short of exploring the full implications of her alienation. The very phrase “buying myself back” presupposes women’s bodies are products designed to entice male buyers. Ratajkowski’s appearance is just that – a product – yet she writes, for the most part, as if it were a natural endowment, a gift that has been “passed down” to her by her mother like a “piece of bequeathed jewelry”. “I haven’t done anything to earn my beauty,” she concludes. But of course, like all models, she has done a great deal. For one thing, she has dieted, a fact she mentions only sporadically throughout My Body. At one point, she remarks offhandedly that she booked more shootings after contracting the flu and losing 10 pounds in one week; later, she notes in passing that she “started smoking cigarettes and skipping meals to maintain a tiny waist”. As the former model turned sociologist Ashley Mears writes in her incisive ethnography of the fashion industry, Pricing Beauty, a model’s “work – and the work of her agents, clients, their assistants, and their whole social world – gets juggled out of sight.” What My Body neglects to explore is Ratajkowski’s elaborate stylisation and its social foundations. As she explains in a mesmerising tutorial video posted on Vogue’s YouTube channel (but fails to discuss in her book), her everyday makeup routine involves 15 steps and the application of 11 products. In other words, she wears more makeup to dinner with her friends than I have worn in my entire life. My point is not to shame her – on the contrary, I admire and envy her artistry, to say nothing of her patience – but rather to note that, in a book about female desirability and injustice, it is worth emphasising that beauty requires time, skill, money and effort. In other words, being beautiful takes work. For many women, it feels compulsory, and for most of us, it is unremunerated. Models or not, we have no choice but to see ourselves through the prism of our bodies; we are all forced to endure the conflation of self with appearance; and we are all at pains, in one way or another, to buy ourselves back. The rub is that many of us still cannot afford to. • My Body by Emily Ratajkowski is published by Quercus (£13.04). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The climate struggle has entered a new phase. It is marked by a search for different tactics: something that cannot be so easily ignored, a mode of action that disrupts business-as-usual for real, some way to pull the emergency brake. This search has only just begun, but the signs are there. In Berlin, half a dozen young climate activists calling themselves ‘The Last Generation’ recently went on a hunger strike, eventually refusing liquids and becoming quite frail before calling the action off. But there are other things than our own bodies that can be shut down. In conjunction with this summer’s Ende Gelände camp against fossil gas, a group calling itself ‘Fridays for sabotage’ claimed responsibility for rupturing a piece of gas infrastructure and urged the movement to embrace this tactic: ‘There are many places of destruction, but just as many places of possible resistance.’ This followed the development of a veritable archipelago of forest occupations in Germany, some of which have damaged equipment for coal extraction. To stay in the global north, the long and bitter struggles of Indigenous peoples against never-ending new pipeline projects in Canada and the US have spawned some desperate militancy: trains carrying crude oil have been derailed by activists mimicking the signal of emergency brakes. Fossil capital should take notice. New forms of resistance are coming. Parts of the earth are becoming unliveable. Facts like that, however, are in no real need of repetition. By now everyone knows, at some level of their consciousness, what is at stake. And still our governments allow fossil fuel companies to expand their installations for taking oil and gas and coal out of the ground. They cannot even bring themselves to stop showering such companies with trillions of dollars of subsidies. One doesn’t need to look at rogue denialists like Bolsonaro or Trump or, for that matter, the far-right government of Modi, which presides over a transition to ever-more fossil fuels: any well-mannered state will do. Take France, whose president poses as the most enlightened climate diplomat. The largest private company headquartered in that nation, Total, will this year commence construction of the East Africa Crude Oil Pipeline, slated to be the longest in the world, cross 230 rivers, bisect 12 forest reserves and drive 100,000 people from their land: all to carry even more crude oil to the world-economy for burning. Macron backs the pipeline as an amazing opportunity to increase ‘French economic presence’ in the region. Or take the US, where Biden is surpassing his predecessor in generosity to fossil fuel companies, showering them with drilling licenses at a pace not seen since George W Bush. Two dozen fossil fuel projects – new pipelines, new gas terminals – underway in that country would alone cause emissions equal to 404 coal-fired power-plants. As for the UK government, it remains committed to ‘maximising economic recovery’ of oil and gas in the North Sea – pumping out as much of it as possible, that is. Germany expands its autobahn and coal mines. ExxonMobil barrels on with a high-risk off-shore drilling project in a very delicate marine ecosystem in Guyana. Between 2020 and 2022, Shell will have put 21 new major oil and gas projects online. Overall, the production of fossil fuels needs to be brought down to zero as fast as humanely possible, but in the real world, producers are planning to increase extraction as if there is no tomorrow. One recent paper shows that the bulk of all known reserves must be left in the ground for there to be at least a slim chance of avoiding more than 1.5C degrees of warming; to be more exact, by 2050, some 90% of all the coal would have to remain untouched, 60% of the oil, 60% of the gas, 99% of the unconventional oil. But these are, the researchers stress, likely to be underestimates, since the modelling is based on a 50% chance of meeting the 1.5C degrees target and does not include feedback mechanisms. If the chance is raised to 70 or 80% and the recursive loops of a climate system breakdown – notably forest fires – were accounted for, even more would have to stay underground: nearly all fossil fuels, starting about tomorrow. By its very nature, fossil capital cannot countenance such a limit. Compulsively, uninhibitedly, it instead digs around for more and more to extract and then some more. For every day that passes, this conclusion receives further confirmation: the ruling classes of this world are constitutionally incapable of responding to the catastrophe in any other way than by expediting it. Unfortunately, COP26 did not produce any compelling reasons to revise that conclusion. Less than a week after the end of the summit, the Biden administration held the largest federal offshore drilling auction in US history. There is little to suggest that any other government signing the Glasgow Pact will behave differently. So what do we do? We could destroy the machines that destroy this planet. If someone has planted a time bomb in your home, you are entitled to dismantle it. More to the point, if someone has placed an incendiary device inside the high-rise building where you live, and if the foundations are already on fire and people are dying in the cellars, then many would believe that you have an obligation to put the device out of action. This is the moral case which, I would argue, justifies destroying fossil fuel property. That is completely separate from harming human bodies, for which there is no moral case. And this particular moral case for direct action is, I believe, overwhelmingly strong, if the realities of the climate catastrophe are recognised. On that premise, how could the physical integrity of fossil fuel property possibly be given precedence? Boris Johnson recently made what might generously be interpreted as an attempt to do so, when he defended the Cambo oilfield, one in the endless series of fresh investments in fossil fuel infrastructure of the kind we just can’t live with: “we can’t just tear up contracts”, he said. In this view, a contract with an entrepreneur for augmenting the device sending the flames ever higher must be honoured. It takes priority over any other concern. Just why it should have that sanctity, however, seems to me exceedingly difficult to tell. In the meantime, we can observe that slowing down the climate catastrophe means, by definition, the destruction of fossil capital: there can be no more profiting from fossil fuels. And if governments are incapable of initiating this work, because they take their orders from the top floors, then others should do so. Not because activists can accomplish the abolition of fossil fuels – only states have that potential – but because their role is to ratchet up the pressure for it. So could the climate movement in the global north achieve its goals by sending cadres or crowds to actually tear machines apart? An unassailable ethical imperative does not necessarily translate into efficacious action. We have received this lesson from the highways of the UK, where the main achievement of Insulate Britain has been rising fury from working-class people on the way to their jobs. We are deep into the catastrophe; the hour is late, but the escalation has only just begun. We don’t know what exactly will work. The one thing we can be certain of is this: we are in a death spiral, we have to break out of it, and we must try something more. The days of gentle protest may be long over. Andreas Malm is a scholar of human ecology at Lund UniversityFormer Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre is to receive a payout of almost £2m, as the top executives at parent company DMGT share £33m in pay, bonuses and share awards this year – while staff brace for job cuts. Dacre, who stood down as editor in 2018 and until earlier this month was chair and editor-in-chief of the paper’s parent company Associated Newspapers, is to receive the payout in December under one of Daily Mail and General Trust’s long-term incentive plans for senior management. The vesting of the award of 168,851 shares, worth about £1.9m at DMGT’s current share price, relates to the hitting of performance targets in 2019. The award follows a payout of £1.5m given to Dacre last December. Dacre’s payout is dwarfed by that of the top four directors at DMGT, which is in the process of being taken private by the Rothermere family after 90 years on the London Stock Exchange, who took home a combined £33m in salary and share awards in the year to the end of September. Lord Rothermere, who chairs DMGT, pocketed £10.9m while Paul Zwillenberg, chief executive, took home £9.7m in salary, bonus and long-term incentive awards. “The maximum long-term incentive payment reflects truly exceptional business performance and the executive directors’ significant contributions over the last three years,” said Rothermere, who is also chairman of DMGT’s remuneration committee. The payouts come as the company conducts a “review of employee numbers” at its 2,400-strong consumer media division, with profitability being hit by rising energy and newsprint costs that are currently at a 25-year high. On Wednesday, Geordie Greig, the editor of the Daily Mail for the last three years since Dacre stood down, was ousted. DMGT reported 3% year-on-year growth in revenues to £624m at its publishing business, which includes the Mail titles, MailOnline, the i and free sheet Metro as well as New Scientist magazine. Adjusted operating profits rose 7% to £60m. Total advertising revenues grew an underlying 1% to £284m. While MailOnline grew strongly with digital revenues up 16% year-on-year, this was offset by a 15% fall in print advertising mostly due to Metro, which relies on commuters and has struggled since the onset of the pandemic. Within this, across the flagship Mail businesses total advertising grew by an underlying 9% to £249m, including 16% growth from MailOnline and 1% growth in print advertising revenues. Digital advertising now accounts for 67% of total advertising across the combined Mail businesses. “In consumer media, we saw good revenue and profit contribution growth from MailOnline and a solid performance from the Mail print titles driving profit contribution growth for the Mail businesses as a whole,” said Zwillenberg. “Unsurprisingly, the commuter newspaper Metro and our events business continue to be significantly impacted by the pandemic.” After a boom in pandemic-fuelled traffic last year, MailOnline saw the total minutes spent by readers on the site decrease by 7% to a daily average of 135m in the year to the end of September. Total average daily global unique browsers decreased by 15% to 14.7m.During the long, grey winter of 2011, thousands of Chilean university students occupied their campuses for months to demand free, high-quality education for all. Now, a decade after they brought their demands to the top of the national agenda, that same generation is heading into the most divisive presidential election in years. The former student leader Gabriel Boric, 35, has a serious chance of becoming the country’s next president, on a pledge to overhaul the neoliberal economic model left behind by the dictatorship of Gen Augusto Pinochet. “The ‘Chilean miracle’ was just for the outside world, not for us,” says Boric sternly, the tattooed band around his forearm flashing beneath his sleeve. “But when you talk to people in low-income neighbourhoods, they will look around and ask you where this progress can actually be found.” If he claims victory in this Sunday’s election, Boric would be Chile’s youngest president in more than two centuries. But standing in his way is José Antonio Kast, his far-right opponent who is an enthusiastic advocate of the Pinochet dictatorship and its economic legacy – and who holds a narrow lead in the polls. The two men offer antithetical agendas: Kast has centred his campaign on conservative social values, security and migration, while Boric espouses an egalitarian, feminist and ecological future for Chile. While Kast proudly declares himself politically incorrect and opposes marriage equality, Boric pushes inclusivity and progressive social values. At the heart of his agenda is the overhaul of a free-market model that has enabled economic growth at the cost of deeply entrenched inequalities. “There are lots of things we want to change about the current model: the total privatisation of social rights, the triumph of individualism over cooperation, and a development model based on the extraction of natural resources,” says Boric. In October 2019, those conditions helped tip Chile – almost overnight – into the largest protest movement in decades. The country was paralysed as millions took to the streets against a host of social and economic injustices. The unrest led to a referendum last year in which Chileans voted by a huge majority to elect an assembly that is drafting a new constitution. After two tumultuous years, Boric has drawn his campaign programme together from the demands of hundreds of local meetings around the country, and he is broadly offering to make Chile more equal, sustainable, participatory and decentralised. “We are a generation whose involvement in politics began with social movements,” Boric explains. “But we realised that if we wanted to change Chile, protesting alone wouldn’t be enough – we would have to fight in institutional spaces, too.” He is fiercely proud of his home town, Punta Arenas, a tiny city far below the Patagonian icefields at South America’s southernmost tip, and regularly calls for Chile’s regions to be incorporated further into the political process. In 2013, fresh from leading the University of Chile’s formidable student union, Boric was elected to congress at 27, promising to bridge the gap between protest and politics. Alongside him, three other youthful faces took the fight from faculty hallways to the very top of the public agenda, helping to define a decade of leftwing politics. Camila Vallejo and Karol Cariola rose to lead their student unions before going on to serve in congress for Chile’s Communist party. The other, Giorgio Jackson, led the union at the Pontifical Catholic University and was later elected to congress. He is now Boric’s top political adviser. A decade on, this influential cohort find themselves bound together once more, this time in a coalition that has a realistic shot at sweeping into government. “Our movement is at a crucial point with the constitutional process under way and now the possibility of forming a government with Gabriel,” says Vallejo, 33. “Despite the differences we have had, we have known each other for years and have lived through this process together – in student debates, street protests and then in congress – and these experiences have all converged in this presidential election.” Some Chileans are concerned by Boric’s proximity to the Communist party, which is supporting his candidacy. But when the party’s leader congratulated the Nicaraguan president Daniel Ortega for his recent victory in elections which were widely condemned as a sham, Boric, Cariola and Vallejo quickly distanced themselves from the statement. On Monday, in the final debate of the campaign, Boric said that his commitment to democracy in Chile, Latin America, and beyond was “absolute”. For many in Chile, the changing of the guard has been a long time coming. “This movement had been building for decades – right through the transition to democracy and even before,” says Gabriel Salazar, a historian of contemporary social movements at the University of Chile. Four months have now passed since Boric strode onstage to acknowledge his victory in the leftwing primaries and declare his intention to bury Pinochet’s neoliberal model once and for all. “The Chile I imagine is fairer and more equal; open and democratic; a Chile which offers security and not uncertainty to the people who live here,” he explains. But while many young Chileans are excited by the shift that Boric would represent, he is wary of overestimating the cohesive power of his generation of student protest leaders. “We aren’t reinventing world order here, and nor does history begin with us,” he says. “That kind of arrogance is doomed to fail.” The elections on Sunday will demonstrate just how much Chile has changed – and whether the country is ready to remake itself in the image of Boric’s determined generation.America is overflowing with good news. Unemployment is down, wages are up, consumer confidence is rebounding, and consumers are spending more (retail sales jumped 1.7% in October, the third monthly increase). Covid seems to be in retreat, at least among those who have been vaccinated. And two big parts of Biden’s legislative agenda – last spring’s $1.9tn American Rescue Plan, and his recent $1.2tn infrastructure plan – have been enacted. So what’s not to be happy about? Apparently, plenty. Biden’s job approval rating is 12 points lower than when he took office – now just 41% (around where Trump’s was for most of his presidency). Most registered voters say that if the midterm elections were today, they’d support the Republican candidate. Even Trump beats Biden in hypothetical matchups. More than 60% of Americans say the Democrats are out of touch with the concerns of most Americans. And Republican congressional candidates now hold their largest lead in midterm election vote preferences dating back 40 years. How can the economic and pandemic news be so good, and so much of Biden’s agenda already enacted – yet the public be so sour on Biden and the Democrats? Some blame Biden’s and the Democrat’s poor messaging. Yes, it’s awful. Even now most Americans have no idea what the “Build Back Better” package is. It sounds like infrastructure, but that bill has been enacted. “Human infrastructure” makes no sense to most people. Yet this can’t be the major reason for the paradox because the Democrats’ failure at messaging goes back at least a half century. I remember in 1968 after Nixon beat Humphrey hearing that the Democrats’ problem is they talk policy while Americans want to hear values – the same criticism we’re hearing today. Some blame the media – not just despicable Fox News but also the corporate mainstream. But here, too, the problem predates the current paradox. Before Fox News, Rush Limbaugh was poisoning countless minds. And for at least four decades, the mainstream media has focused on conflict, controversy and scandal. Good news doesn’t attract eyeballs. Some suggest Democrats represent the college-educated suburban middle class that doesn’t really want major social change anyway. Yet this isn’t new, either. Clinton and Obama abandoned the working class by embracing trade, rejecting unions, subsidizing Wall Street and big business and embracing deregulation and privatization. So what explains the wide gap now between how well the country is doing and how badly Biden and the Democrats are doing politically? In two words: dashed hopes. After four years of Trump and a year and a half of deathly pandemic, most of the country was eager to put all the horror behind – to start over, wipe the slate clean, heal the wounds, reboot America. Biden in his own calm way seemed just the person to do it. And when Democrats retook the Senate, expectations of Democrats and independents soared. But those expectations couldn’t possibly be met when all the underlying structural problems were still with us – a nation deeply split, Trumpers still threatening democracy, racism rampant, corporate money still dominating much of politics, inequality still widening, inflation undermining wage gains, and the Delta variant of Covid still claiming lives. Dashed hopes make people angry. Mass disappointment is politically poisonous. Social psychologists have long understood that losing something of value generates more anguish than obtaining it generated happiness in the first place. Biden and Democrats can take solace from this. Hopefully, a year from now the fruits of Biden’s initiatives will be felt, Covid will be behind us, bottlenecks behind the current inflation will be overcome, and the horrors of the Trump years will become more visible through Congress’s investigations and the midterm campaigns of Trumpers. Most importantly, America’s irrational expectations for quick deliverance from all our structural problems will have settled into a more sober understanding that resolving them will require a huge amount of work, from all of us. Then, I suspect, the nation will be better able to appreciate how far we’ve come in just two years from where we were. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comDonald Trump’s extraordinary claim of executive privilege as a former president to prevent any of his aides and agents from testifying before the House select committee to investigate the 6 January attack on the US Capitol rests on the premise that the privilege resides with a president even after he leaves office. Trump is asserting that the position of former president is a recognized constitutional office with permanent rights and privileges. President Joe Biden, the incumbent president who rightfully holds executive privilege, has waived that privilege from covering the relevant documents and potential witnesses Trump wishes to keep secret and silent. Standing behind Trump’s supposed shield, a number of those subpoenaed by the committee refuse to cooperate with the investigation. Stephen Bannon, a Trump White House aide early in his term but not during the insurrection, has been cited for criminal contempt and indicted by the Department of Justice. Mark Meadows, Trump’s chief of staff, who was at the center of the plot, and Jeffrey Clark, the former assistant attorney general, who plotted to have states overturn lawful election results on baseless theories of fraud, have refused to cooperate on the grounds of an unspecified legal executive privilege. The US court of appeals for the DC circuit has granted Trump a temporary administrative injunction against the National Archives from turning over certain subpoenaed documents to the committee, in order to hear full arguments in the case on 30 November. In a prior ruling, however, Judge Tanya S Chutkan stated, “Presidents are not kings, and Plaintiff is not President.” Trump’s claim of executive privilege is based on his claim that as a former president he retains a “constitutional and statutory right” to protect his “records and communications” under any and all circumstances. His lawyer, in his emergency appeal to stay the disclosure, denies that the House committee has any “legislative purpose” and is merely “a rival political branch” – a rival apparently to a former president, who is implicitly another “political branch” even though he is no longer in office. President Biden, the appeal alleges, is simply a member of “rival political party”, acting on naked partisanship. Release of Trump’s communications in question, far from serving any legitimate government purpose, is designed only to “meet a political objective”. The attempted coup to overthrow a democratic election seems so astonishing and novel that the filings in the case have failed to come up with any remotely similar situation. But there is a precedent as exact and specific as it could be – and it directly contradicts Trump’s contentions. *** In fact, there was a House select committee empaneled to investigate an insurrection. That committee requested the papers of the president, subpoenaed the testimony of his cabinet secretaries and members of his administration, and called for the appearance of senior military officers. No one resisted. No one invoked executive privilege. There were no legal challenges, not a single one. Everyone fully cooperated. The president handed over his records and communications, the cabinet secretaries testified under oath, and the top general forthrightly answered questions. That insurrection began with the election of Abraham Lincoln on 6 November 1860. In a planned sequence, the federal courthouse, custom house and post offices in South Carolina were seized, and secession of the state from the Union proclaimed. President James Buchanan issued a statement declaring that while secession was illegal he had no constitutional power to prevent it. Buchanan’s passivity permitted the insurrection to advance. The small garrison of US troops stationed in Charleston was menaced by local militia. Major Robert Anderson removed his troops to the safety of Fort Sumter, located on an island in Charleston Harbor. The other forts and the Charleston arsenal were at once overrun. Soon, six other states in the lower south held elections of delegates to secession conventions, which were marked by the coercion of armed militias. To whip up the secession movement, the southern governors coordinated armed attacks from 3 January to 14 January 1861 on eight federal forts and arsenals, capturing 75,000 weapons. Washington, surrounded by Maryland and Virginia, where secessionist militias had been organized, was awash in rumors of armed assaults, including on the Capitol, and of Lincoln’s assassination to prevent his inauguration. (Indeed, there would be an assassination attempt on Lincoln’s life as he passed through Baltimore in February.) On the advice of Gen Winfield Scott, Buchanan reluctantly summoned several hundred troops to guard the capital to assure the peaceful transfer of power. The Capitol itself became a veritable army base. On 9 January 1861, in the midst of the seizure of federal forts, the House created a select committee to investigate the rolling coup that was under way. The committee demanded and received the internal correspondence of the president. It held extensive hearings and examined witnesses, including cabinet members on far-ranging elements of the subversion, from Buchanan’s dealings with the South Carolina secessionists to “the “alleged hostile organization against the government within the District of Columbia” and the “seizure of forts, arsenals, revenue cutters, and other property of the United States”. “The law has been defied, the Constitution thrust aside, and the government itself assaulted,” the committee concluded, and rebuked Buchanan for claiming the president is impotent before an attempt “to overthrow the government”. Rather than being helpless before an insurrection, the committee declared that a president must suppress it. “The Constitution makes no provision for releasing any of its officers or agents from the obligations of the oath it requires them to take.” The committee’s report quoted from the oath of office for the president: “The Executive must take care that the laws be faithfully executed.” And it cited from article 1 on the “Powers of Congress” that “Congress shall have the power” to “execute the laws of the Union, suppress insurrections …” Less than three weeks after the committee report was released, Lincoln was inaugurated, on 4 March 1861. A month later, on 12 April, with the Confederates firing on Fort Sumter, the insurrection crossed into civil war. By the end of war’s first year, Lincoln said in his annual message to the Congress, “It continues to develop that the insurrection is largely, if not exclusively, a war upon the first principle of popular government – the rights of the people.” He cautioned against the clear and present danger of tyranny: “Monarchy itself is sometimes hinted at as a possible refuge from the power of the people. In my present position, I could scarcely be justified were I to omit raising a warning voice against this approach of returning despotism.” Lincoln closed, “The struggle of today, is not altogether for today – it is for a vast future also.” In ruling whether a former president is entitled to the immunity of a king, the DC court of appeals should be informed by the precedent of the House select committee investigating the insurrection that led to the civil war, its clarion call for the president and other elected officials to uphold their constitutional responsibility to act decisively against the destruction of democracy, and the words and example of Lincoln. Sidney Blumenthal, former senior adviser to President Bill Clinton and Hillary Clinton, has published three books of a projected five-volume political life of Abraham Lincoln: A Self-Made Man, Wrestling With His Angel and All the Powers of EarthA statue of a slave ship owner outside a London museum may be moved to a less prominent place after a campaign for it to be taken down. The statue of Robert Geffrye, a 17th-century trader and former lord mayor of London, at the Museum of the Home has been the subject of a tussle between campaigners and the government, which said museums must “retain and explain” controversial artefacts. In a statement this week, the museum said: “We believe there is potential to retain the statue on site but in an alternative and less prominent space, where we can better tell the full story of the history of the buildings and Robert Geffrye’s life, including his involvement in transatlantic slavery. “We are confronting, challenging and learning from the uncomfortable truths of the origins of the museum buildings, to fulfil our commitment to diversity and inclusion.” A consultation carried out last year by the museum and Hackney council in the aftermath of the murder of George Floyd found a majority of the 2,000 residents who took part wanted the statue removed. Last October, Oliver Dowden, the then culture secretary, told the museum: “It is imperative that you continue to act impartially, in line with your publicly funded status, and not in a way that brings this into question.” This year the government announced legislation requiring listed building consent or planning permission to be obtained before any historic monuments could be removed. The move came after activists forcibly took down a statue of Edward Colston, a 17th-century slaver, and pushed it into Bristol harbour, and amid a growing debate about Britain’s colonial past and its links to the slave trade. The Museum of the Home is in Grade I-listed almshouses that were founded by Geffrye, and was formerly called the Geffrye Museum. When it reopened in June after a three-year renovation, a panel was installed beneath Geffrye’s statue explaining his connections with slavery and acknowledging the statue was “the subject of intense debate”. Last month campaigners called for a boycott of the museum by teachers, youth groups and local residents until the statue was removed. Sade Etti, a Hackney councillor, said: “Statues of those involved in slavery ought to be pulled down and removed. It is morally reprehensible to continue to support their existence.” Diane Abbott, the Labour MP for Hackney North and Stoke Newington, said the museum should “recognise the need for change and resist pressure from central government. It should remove the statue.”The parents of three teenagers who complained of mistreatment at the army’s foundation college have called for it to be shut down, listing a catalogue of alleged abuse and claiming their children were prevented from leaving the military. They include the mother of a teen who died last year while serving in the army, whose alleged abuse is to be examined as part of an inquiry into his death. The testimonies of the parents, which have been seen by the Guardian, are to be raised by the Child Rights International Network (CRIN) in a letter challenging Ofsted on why last month it rated the foundation college as “outstanding”. Staff at the Army Foundation College (AFC) were accused in 50 cases of assaulting or mistreating teenage recruits between 2014 and 2017, the Guardian reported in 2018. Subsequent papers released under the Freedom of Information Act and in parliament have revealed that recruits and their parents made 60 complaints of violent behaviour by staff at AFC between 2014 and 2020. Last Thursday an instructor at the college was demoted at a court martial after being convicted of punching two teenage soldiers. Cpl Kimberley Hey was acquitted of six other charges of battery relating to three other soldiers. The parents have spoken out about their children’s involvement with the college as part of wider calls to end recruitment of under-18s by the British army – one of the few militaries in the developed world to allow it – and as peers seek to amend a bill making its way through parliament to raise the recruitment age to 18. Alison Blackwell, who is waiting for an MoD inquiry into her son Nathan Worner’s death to report back next year, said he went from being a confident and resilient person to being withdrawn and desperate to leave the army. He alleged having been hit, slapped, pushed, kicked and verbally abused by staff during the first phase of his training at the AFC, and at 17 handed in a letter saying he wanted to leave. She said it was ripped up in his face. “He said he didn’t expect to be faced with the disgusting way they were mistreated at Harrogate. He described the staff as animals that got off on hurting and humiliating people and that Harrogate should be shut down,” she said of her son, who was found dead at his army barracks in May last year. Charlotte Poad, the mother of a young soldier who has said three friends who trained with him at the college took their own lives, said her son returned from Harrogate a “completely different person” and was discharged from the army on mental health grounds just over a year ago after a long struggle. She said her son struggled to talk about what happened at the AFC, but she and her husband believed that staff bullied and abused young recruits and encouraged fighting among them. Recruits were also made to spend many hours alone on guard duty, which affected their mental health, she said. “I strongly believe that the Army Foundation College does not look after children’s mental health or wellbeing. It is an outdated institution where bullies thrive and adults seek pleasure in seeing children broken,” Poad said. Another parent, Kevin, who does not want to identified by his full name, said his son came home “broken and exhausted” shortly after enlisting at 16. He says what followed was a struggle to get him out. “In our conversations, we had to constantly remind officers that he was only 16 and in our care, even though he had sworn an oath to the British army. [A] major conceded in the end, but then another officer indicated that our son would be charged with going awol, and said that he would never get a job or go to another college or university. Again, we were incensed – more phone calls.” Charlotte Cooper, the campaigns coordinator at CRIN, said: “AFC has a long record of formal complaints of violent abuse by its staff against the young people in its care, including 10 such allegations since 2017, and Ofsted inspectors don’t think it worth mentioning. I think teenagers and their parents would be shocked to know that an institution rated ‘outstanding’ had AFC’s record of violence against children by instructors.” An army spokesperson said: “We have a very strong duty of care and safeguarding mechanisms at AFC Harrogate to ensure junior soldiers have the right support structure and welfare provision, including confidential support lines. AFC Harrogate, alongside all phase 1 and phase 2 training organisations, are subject to Ofsted inspection on a routine basis.” The college was awarded an overall grade of “outstanding” after an inspection in May as part of the 2020/21 inspection cycle into welfare and duty of care in armed forces initial training. An Ofsted spokesperson said it inspected the welfare of recruits and trainees against the criteria set out in an inspection handbook for armed forces training establishments. “The inspection team were aware of the concerns raised by CRIN. However, we do not investigate individual complaints, but we will always take onboard any received as part of our inspection,” they said. “Our inspectors met with recruits at different stages of training to discuss their experiences of care, welfare and training. And, at the time, all recruits were highly positive about their training, as well as the treatment and support they received from staff.” • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Britain’s biggest poultry producer is set to hire up to 900 temporary staff from overseas, under an emergency visa scheme introduced by ministers after concerns about a squeeze on labour leading to turkey shortages at Christmas. Ranjit Singh Boparan, who is known as the chicken king because his companies produce around a third of all poultry products consumed in the UK, said the first workers would arrive in the next few days as it prepared for the busy festive season. Boparan said: “With just a few weeks to go until Christmas, it is very good news to be able to report that here we are in mid-November, and we’re well on the way to plugging the job gaps for the massive volume increases we get during this time of year. “This means we should be able to fulfil all our projected orders for turkeys and there will be enough turkeys to go around. Everyone should be able to source their Christmas turkey this year, which is great news.” Boparan owns East Anglian turkey producer Bernard Matthews, and the 2 sisters food group. B His 600 farms and 16 factories, which employ 18,000 people, are short of about 10% of their ideal workforce – or about 1,800 roles. However, that has reduced from a shortage of about 15% earlier in the year. The government announced in September that 5,500 poultry workers from overseas would be able to work in the UK ahead of Christmas. The temporary visa scheme was introduced amid concerns that new post-Brexit immigration rules combined with the impact of the pandemic had led to a record number of food manufacturing workers returning to their home countries, leaving poultry processing plants with huge labour shortages. Boparan said he hoped that a similar scheme would be in place for next year with an earlier start date for processing visas. He has previously warned that a shortage of labour would mean less choice and potentially empty shelves and higher prices for shoppers because of wage inflation. Last month Boparan said the cost of chicken was set to rise by more than 10%, adding that food in Britain was currently “too cheap”. On Wednesday, he said: “Labour as a key structural challenge for our sector is here for 12 months of the year, and it’s one that’s not going to go away. “We simply don’t want to see our industry shrinking when the demand is as big as ever, especially at Christmas. It would be silly to plug any gaps by using imports, for instance. We don’t think the British consumer wants to see that.” Boparan’s latest comments come as the Food Standards Agency wrote to meat producers to reassure them that it was putting in place additional measures to ensure that processing would not be widely held up by a shortage of vets. Colin Sullivan, chief operating officer of the FSA, told industry journal Food Manufacture that there may be “sporadic interruptions” when it would have to work with individual businesses on when vets could be provided to approve conditions in abattoirs, an essential part of the slaughtering process. The FSA said there were about a 20% fewer vets than then “optimum level” because of high demand across Europe and the impact of the pandemic and “migration patterns”. However, it said it had put up extra funds to improve pay to retain sufficient number of vets alongside other measures such as enabling overseas workers with a slightly lower level of English to carry out certain restricted jobs, for example.Marks &amp; Spencer is to provide sandwiches and hot food to more than 2,500 Costa Coffee outlets as the retailer seeks new ways to reach commuters now working from home. M&amp;S said it would be providing more than 30 different items to Costa including children’s food, hot meal boxes and salads under the collaboration with the UK’s biggest coffee shop chain. The retailer said the partnership with the coffee shop, which was bought by Coca-Cola in 2018, would help it reach neighbourhood locations, drive-throughs, high streets and retail parks. The deal is M&amp;S’s latest effort to widen the distribution of its food after it bought a share in Ocado’s retail arm and replaced Waitrose as the online grocery specialist’s main partner. The deal with Ocado resulted in M&amp;S being able to begin selling groceries online for home delivery for the first time just over a year ago. M&amp;S has also tested its Simply Food convenience store outlets in WH Smith stores and provided food for some British Airways flights for about three years ending in 2020. Meanwhile, M&amp;S has been revamping its stores and products to appeal more to families, helping the group return to a pre-tax profit in the six months to October after a loss of almost £88m in the same period last year. The strong performance reflected a 10% jump in food sales as well as “substantial improvement” across its once struggling clothing and homeware business. Stuart Machin, the managing director of M&amp;S’s food division, said: “Bringing together delicious, great quality M&amp;S food and the nation’s largest chain of coffee shops is great for customers as it extends our reach and supports our strategy of making M&amp;S more relevant, more often for families.” Analysts said the tie-up could be good for both parties, with M&amp;S benefiting from extra sales and the higher volumes lifting its profit margins. Costa has the chance to extend the variety food it offers, particularly on healthy eating and new trends such as plant-based foods in which M&amp;S has already developed full ranges. Bryan Roberts, a retail analyst at Shopfloor Insights, said retailers were looking at new ways to sell their products in local neighbourhoods as trips to city centres had reduced during the pandemic. “Lifestyles are changing with the shift to working from home and Costa needs to raise its game on food and M&amp;S has the brand name and credentials [to help it do that],” he said. Neil Lake, the managing director of Costa Coffee’s UK and Irish division, said: “This collaboration with M&amp;S … will build on our existing food range and help us fulfil our ambition to become the first choice for customers buying food and coffee on-the-go.”For the past 11 months, the two walls that make up a street corner in east Madrid have engaged in a mute but bitter debate that mirrors the faultlines, fights and ferocities of Spanish politics. On the left wall are 24 street signs commemorating poets and writers including Federico García Lorca, Miguel Hernández, Victoria Kent and Carmen Laforet. On the right one are 25 others honouring the likes of Francisco Franco, his coup-mongering colleague General Emilio Mola, and General José Millán-Astray, the founder of the Spanish legion best known for his spat with the philosopher Miguel de Unamuno and his shriek of: “Death to intelligence! Long live death!” Each wall bears a QR code that leads to detailed biographies of all those featured. Fachada derecha – Fachada izquierda, or Right Facade – Left Facade, is an installation by Mateo Maté, a Spanish conceptual artist long preoccupied with how nationalism can invade and distort public and private places. The title is also a pun: fachada means facade, but also contains the word facha – which means appearance, but is also slang for fascist. What was intended to spark dialogue and reflection on contemporary society, however, has itself become deeply controversial. Almost a year after Maté accepted an invitation from the building’s owners to use its outside as he saw fit, Madrid city council has decided to put an end to the debate and ordered the plaques be removed. It says the proliferation of signs is confusing, and that it alone has the power to decide on what streets are called. The ghosts of the 1936-39 civil war and subsequent dictatorship also returned to national politics once again this week. Spain’s Socialist-led coalition on Wednesday tabled amendments to draft legislation that would effectively allow prosecutors to investigate crimes committed under the 1939-75 Franco regime on the basis that crimes against humanity, war crimes, genocide and torture have no statute of limitations under international humanitarian law. The coalition said the new measures would help “bring an end to Francoist impunity”, but the opposition rightwing People’s party (PP) accused the government of seeking to divide Spain and “dynamite” agreements including the 1977 amnesty law that allowed the country’s post-dictatorship transition to democracy. Maté began the project by asking himself how he would feel if he had to sleep on the other side of a wall bearing the name of someone he could never regard as a hero. He also wanted to see how far Spanish democracy had come since Franco’s death in 1975. “The idea was to establish a dialogue about the kind of society we want to live in by using the names of these people on both sides,” he said. “I’m not talking about left and right, I’m talking about the social models we want to see ourselves reflected in as a society. It’s about street names bearing the names of our heroes and how they’re seen as examples to follow.” Maté said the response to the piece speaks volumes. Not only has the city council stepped in, but one of the tenants on the “military” side of the block has been hassled and abused – even though the artwork had nothing to do with her. Some of the names of the generals have been whitewashed over, while others have been “intervened” and replaced by posters bearing the name of Carlos Palomino, a 16-year-old anti-fascist activist who was stabbed to death in 2007 while on his way to protest against a neo-Nazi rally. “The work was to see whether our democracy was genuinely mature and whether we could talk about all this,” said the artist. “The answer seems to be no.” Spain remains deeply polarised as a result of both the 2008 economic crisis and the increasingly fragmented political scene that followed, he said. “All the political tension and ill-feeling generated by the crisis has served as a petri dish for unscrupulous politicians from both sides, both extremes, to generate more tension because it raises their profile and serves them electorally,” he said. “It’s just fuelled the fire.” Street names, many of which date from the Franco era, have long been a bone of contention between left and right. The PP, which has historically opposed efforts to probe the crimes of the Franco dictatorship, has promised to repeal the mooted democratic memory law that could see Franco-era atrocities investigated. And the party, which governs Madrid and the surrounding region, has also engaged in recent bouts of revisionism. The PP’s national leader, Pablo Casado, offered his own take in June on the coup that led to the overthrow of the democratically elected Republican government, describing the Spanish civil war as “a confrontation between those who wanted a democracy without law and those who wanted law without democracy”. The far left has also shown an appetite for a fight – especially where the PP and the far-right Vox are concerned. In one of this characteristically blunt observations in May last year, Pablo Iglesias – then the Podemos leader and a deputy prime minister – suggested Vox would like to see a coup in Spain but lacked the courage to stage one. He told its MPs: “You’re not even fascists. You’re just parasites.” Madrid city council said Right Facade – Left Facade needed to come down because it “affects how the city is seen and also confuses passersby because it features names that don’t correspond with the two officially authorised ones”. Maté and the property owners are appealing against the decision, but the artist said he was inclined to cover up the signs to prevent any more problems for tenants. He will, however, leave the two QR codes in place so visitors can scan them and make up their own minds about the names and what they represent. “To be honest, it’s all made me really sad,” said Maté. “I was very young when the transition happened but I think we’re living through far more conservative, censored and radical times in Spain and Europe than the previous generation did.” Not everyone in Pueblo Nuevo, however, will be sorry to see the installation fade away. “I don’t want to see those signs with the names of Franco and Millán Astray,” said one woman who has lived in the barrio all her life. “I prefer the other side for sure, but I don’t think either should be here really.” Asked whether she could see its value as a piece of art, she shook her head. “It’s just a bit provocative. And we have enough debate as it is.”When Fifa executives step on to the asphalt in Doha next November for the start of the 2022 World Cup finals, their next stop is likely to be the check-in at one of Qatar’s glittering array of opulent hotels, built to provide the most luxurious possible backdrop to the biggest sporting event on earth. Now, with a year to go before the first match, fans who want to emulate the lifestyle of the sporting elite can head to Fifa’s hospitality website to plan their stay in the host nation. There they can scroll through a catalogue of exclusive, Fifa-endorsed accommodation, from boutique hotels to five-star resorts. Yet behind the scenes of some of those hotels, while guests lounge around the pool or sip cocktails at the bar, migrant hotel workers claim they are struggling to survive on wages of £1 an hour. The Guardian stayed at or visited seven of the hotels listed on Fifa’s hospitality website and in interviews and conversations with more than 40 workers – employed directly and through sub-contractors – uncovered a number of allegations of serious labour rights violations and low wages. The hotels have not been named to protect the identity of the workers who spoke to the Guardian. Many workers alleged they worked extremely long hours, with some saying they had not had a day off for months. While they spent their days surrounded by the most luxurious of settings, some workers said they were housed in overcrowded rooms in stifling labour camps. A few workers claimed their passports had been confiscated. Many said their employer would not let them change jobs. While rooms in the hotels listed on Fifa’s hospitality site are charged at up to £820 a night when bought as part of a package, almost every worker the Guardian spoke to employed in housekeeping, security, valet service, cleaning or gardening said they earned less than £1.25 an hour. Many were working for less than £1 an hour. Workers made multiple allegations of breaches of Qatar’s labour law, which suggest shortcomings in Qatar’s labour reforms. These promised an end to abusive working conditions and the kafala sponsorship system that meant workers could not change jobs or leave the country without their employer’s consent. The workers’ allegations also imply that Fifa has failed to effectively carry out basic checks on the hotels investigated by the Guardian that it had signed up to its catalogue, in breach of its own human rights policy, which requires it to prevent labour abuses linked to its operations. While most workers the Guardian spoke to received salaries in line with the new minimum wage, which came into force in March 2021, that wage still equates to only £1 an hour plus a small allowance for food and board. The Guardian has also seen payslips from one worker employed directly by a hotel in Fifa’s catalogue, which show that when the minimum wage was introduced his basic wage of 750 rials (£150) rose to 1,000 rials (£200) a month, but allowances for food or transport, for example, were cut by the same amount, meaning his salary stayed the same. “Sometimes I ask myself why I came here,” he said. “The World Cup is a big thing and everyone enjoys it, but the way they treat us … we are all tired of it.” As darkness fell on one of the properties in Fifa’s brochure, guests retired indoors, leaving David*, a migrant worker from Africa, labouring near the swimming pool. A night in a standard room in the hotel costs more than David earns in a month. He is desperate to change jobs but despite recent government legislation allowing this, he sayssaid he is trapped. “My friends have tried to change jobs but our company refuses to let them go,” he said. “We have to accept it. Our boss does whatever he wants.” The hotel boasts sumptuous suites and a marble-lined lobby, but his own lodgings are starkly different: a small room shared with five others in a run-down compound on the edge of Doha. Ranjit, a security guard, stood on duty nearby, as he had done for the previous 11 hours. Ranjit’s salary works out at about 80p an hour. Yet for five months he kept nothing; everything went towards paying off the illegal £1,300 fee he was forced to hand a recruitment agent back home to secure the job. “It’s a scam,” he said. “Here they suck your blood.” Some workers across the seven hotels said they were happy with their jobs and the staff accommodation provided by their hotels. Yet the majority said they felt trapped between the demands of their employers and the need to earn money for their families back in their own countries. At one hotel, a worker alleged that the management would only give bonuses to staff who handed over their passports. It is illegal for employers to keep workers’ passports in Qatar. “We have fallen into a trap and can’t get out,” said another worker at the hotel. With 1.2 million fans expected during the World Cup, the hospitality sector can look forward to a lucrative tournament. A few hotels demonstrated good practice by recruiting their staff directly through online adverts, rather than through labour agents who often extract extortionate and illegal fees from recruits, but even in these properties the Guardian spoke to staff who were paid very low wages. The worst allegations of abuse were by workers employed through sub-contractors, in particular hotel security guards and gardeners. At another hotel on Fifa’s website a Kenyan security guard was about to begin his 12-hour shift, which he said stretched beyond 15 hours when he added travel time to and from his labour camp. If he works all month without a break he earns 2,000 rials (£400); far less than he was promised when he signed up for the job in Kenya. If he took a day off, his employer would cut his wages by 50 rials (£10). Not that he often had that option. “During the summer we had to work for three months without a day off,” he said. His passport has been confiscated by his company. “Maybe they think if you have your passport you can run away to another company,” he said. “We have no other option, so we take what is on the table.” The Guardian’s findings have shone a spotlight directly on world football’s governing body, which has been criticised by Amnesty International for taking a “hands-off” approach to workers’ rights in the host nation. A spokesperson for Fifa said it “takes any claim concerning the rights of workers contributing to the hosting of Fifa events very seriously”. The spokesperson said a dedicated team was implementing an audit and compliance system for companies involved in the delivery of the World Cup, including hotels, to ensure workers’ rights were respected. “While there is a need for continued improvement, we have already seen important progress by many hotels in Qatar in recent months,” the spokesperson added. Isobel Archer, a specialist in labour rights in the Gulf at the Business &amp; Human Rights Resource Centre (BHRRC), a charity headquartered in London, said hotels must recognise their responsibilities to all workers, including those employed through sub-contractors. “If hotel brands put even half the effort into scrutinising their suppliers’ labour practices as they do the height of their reception desks or the density of guest room pillows, we’d see transformational change for hotel workers,” she said. A report by the BHRRC this year also found evidence of widespread exploitation of hotel workers in Qatar which, it said, should be a “red flag” for football teams, fans and corporate sponsors. A Qatari official said the government “takes any violation of its labour laws very seriously, including those in the hospitality sector”. The official said Qatar had a zero-tolerance approach towards violating companies, issuing harsh penalties that included fines and prison sentences. “Awareness-raising initiatives have been launched to provide workers with information on how to raise complaints against their employer, and new mechanisms have been introduced to facilitate better access to justice,” the official added. *Names have been changed or omitted to protect workers’ identities.A “shambolic” rollout of third Covid vaccinations has left an unknown number of immunocompromised people still without proper protection going into winter, and in other cases even given the wrong type of injection, a leading charity has said. Blood Cancer UK said poor planning and confusing messaging meant “many thousands” of people with weakened immune systems might have missed out, leaving them at greater risk of serious consequences if they catch Covid. In a lengthy statement, the charity said NHS England had repeatedly failed to acknowledge the problem, while Sajid Javid, the health secretary, incorrectly said more than six weeks ago that the “vast, vast majority” of eligible people had already been invited for a third jab. People were still coming forward to say they were struggling to get a third dose, said Gemma Peters, the chief executive of Blood Cancer UK. “The rollout of the third doses has been shambolic, causing yet more anxiety for immunocompromised people.” Third doses are separate to the wider programme of booster jabs, now being extended to adults aged 40 and above. Third injections are aimed at increasing the protection for people whose immune systems have been affected by conditions including blood cancer, with Covid vaccines likely to be less effective for them. According to Blood Cancer UK, part of the confusion has been between booster and third doses. While the former are given six months after the second dose, third injections can be given after only eight weeks. And while the dose for people given the Pfizer vaccine is the same for both types, with the Moderna vaccine, while booster jabs are a half dose, immunocompromised people are meant to be given a full dose for their third jab. The Oxford/AstraZeneca jab is not usually used for boosters or third vaccinations. Blood Cancer UK said it had received numerous reports of health professionals not understanding the distinction and telling people with blood cancer they would have to wait six months. There were also reports about some immunocompromised people only being given a half dose of Moderna. The charity said that soon after the rollout began, it received calls and emails from people saying some GPs and hospitals knew nothing about the third doses, while others knew but either did not think they had to invite people or did not know how to. Even after the NHS wrote directly to eligible people, there remained sufficient confusion among doctors that the charity started to advise people to simply turn up to vaccination centres with a letter saying they had blood cancer. While in recent weeks matters seemed to have notably improved, the charity said, it was concerned there were “likely to be many thousands of people who have already been told the wrong information, do not feel able to challenge their healthcare professional, or are unaware of the third dose programme, and so still have not had a third dose”. With immunocompromised people expected to be offered a fourth dose soon, the charity said there was still “a serious problem of lack of accountability” within both NHS England and the health department, with a lack of clarity as to which was ultimately responsible for third jabs. Peters said: “Ultimately, the chaotic rollout is a result of the government and the NHS leadership failing to learn from the mistakes they have made in supporting people with health conditions at the start of the pandemic. Now, it is only by learning the lessons from this failure that they can hope to avoid repeating this failure.” Officials say the third jab programme is complicated by factors such people’s suitability for the vaccination varying amid courses of chemotherapy. An NHS spokesperson said: “Progress has been made in the roll out of third jabs, with around seven in 10 people who are immunosuppressed having had a third vaccination. “The decision on when to get a third jab for this group is made between patients and their clinicians, and can be accessed through their hospital consultant or GP, and additionally, those with a letter from their doctor can attend their local walk-in vaccination centre.”Social media platforms are biased against facts and creating “a virus of lies” that threatens all democracies, the Nobel peace prize-winning journalist Maria Ressa has said. Ressa, one of the Philippines’ most prominent journalists, said social media platforms were “manipulating our minds insidiously, creating alternate realities, making it impossible for us to think slow”. Focusing simply on moderating social media content was a distraction, she said, and it was the design of platforms, and the algorithms they used to promote content, that were in need of an overhaul. Speaking at the Australian Strategic Policy Institute’s Sydney Dialogue, Ressa accused social media companies of misusing arguments around freedom of speech. “It’s a freedom of reach issue, not a freedom of speech issue,” she said. “There’s something fundamentally wrong with our information ecosystem. Because the platforms that deliver the facts are actually biased against the facts,” she added, pointing to Facebook as the world’s largest delivery platform for news. Ressa was awarded the Nobel prize along with the Russian journalist Dmitry Muratov last month for their “courageous fight for freedom of expression, a precondition for democracy and lasting peace”. She co-founded the news website Rappler in 2012 and it hasbecome one of the Philippines’ most popular news outlets, known for scrutinising Rodrigo Duterte’s administration. Rappler has not only covered Duterte’s war on drugs and exposed government corruption but also explored the ways in which social media can be manipulated by populist leaders. Ressa said no democracies were immune from such threats. “I think what the tech platforms have shown is exactly how easy it is to use technology to manipulate human biology,” she said, adding that this transcended different countries and cultures. While regulation had been put in place by many governments to protect against other potentially dangerous technologies, they had failed to do the same for information technology, which would continue to develop in sophistication. “[Technology] is thinking word for word faster than any human being ever can. And you’re not going to be able to get AI to fix the problems that human beings have created.” Ressa said the world needed to take radical steps to protect democracies, as it had previously done at other key turning points in history. “Post world war II, we didn’t want world war III with atom bombs. That has already happened in our information ecosystem. It is manipulating our minds,” she said. Google’s senior vice-president of global affairs, Kent Walker, who also spoke at the session, said transparency around algorithms was complicated owing to the frequency with which they were changed to prevent people from exploiting the system. “I think we made 2,500, 3,000 changes last year … I think there’s a role for transparency, but we need to think through – is it with trusted government reviewers or [are there] other ways of keeping the bad actors from actually being able to reduce the quality of the search results you get, for example. This is a complicated area,” he said, adding there was a danger that many governments would also seek to manipulate search results. Ressa said the decision to award her a Nobel prize showed the scale of the crisis facing journalism and information. “Because the last time journalists got this prize was in 1936, and he didn’t get to go to get the prize, he languished in a Nazi concentration camp,” she said. (Carl von Ossietzky, a German journalist, won the 1935 Nobel peace prize.) Ressa has faced relentless harassment online and in the courts in response to her reporting. She has previously described receiving “90 hate messages an hour, 90 rape threats per minute”. She has faced a series of legal cases ranging from alleged tax evasion to defamation, and is out on bail appealing against a six-year prison sentence for a libel conviction.Stijn, 47, Norwich Occupation Humanitarian aid worker Voting record Stijn, who is from Belgium, can’t vote in general elections in the UK, and couldn’t vote in the EU referendum; in Belgium he voted Green Amuse bouche After a typhoon in the Philippines, Stijn organised karaoke: “People cried from feeling human again” David, 72, Cambridgeshire Occupation Owns a property portfolio Voting record Ukip when there has been a candidate, otherwise Conservative – he stood for Ukip in local elections Amuse bouche David reads the Guardian online every morning and agrees with very little of it For starters Stijn I told him I am Belgian and my wife is German. My job is not in the UK. I’m here because I like it. I love Norwich. David I found him a little hard to understand. Normally Dutch speakers have a very good command of English. Stijn My mother tongue is Dutch, second language French. I made him ask questions – an achievement as he tends to talk rather than do that. David When I travel in Europe, people like to practise their English on me. Some even invite me to correct them. The big beef Stijn I didn’t see a very pro-EU stance in the referendum campaign. I saw the leave campaign, which was basically: “Press this button and the whole thing blows up”, while the other side said: “Let’s not press this button because it’s scary.” It’s easy to point out that the EU is a mess, badly organised and inefficient – you won’t find anyone in Belgium or Germany who disagrees. We take that as the price to pay for sitting down and working something out. David It’s very strange when people who are leftwing like Stijn are pro the EU when the common agricultural policy, which even now is nearly 40% of the EU budget, is a huge transfer of money from the poor to the rich. In the year of the referendum, the biggest subsidy receivers in the country were the Queen, the Duke of Westminster and James Dyson. Stijn He said the bigger the institution, the more corrupt it is. I’ve worked around the world – there’s a lot of small-town nepotism and corruption, and here there is a government that likes to give contracts to their fellow Etonians and other friends. Corruption has many faces. David I think a common market is great. A free trade area is excellent. What we don’t need is political union. Stijn I have a lot of criticisms of the EU, but I also want national governments to be accountable, and for citizens to be not only at the mercy of their own governments. Working around the world, I see how that can be for minorities, for poorer communities, for refugees. I want institutions above that. Sharing plate David When I went to Ukip meetings, I made a very deliberate effort to go to Conservative, Labour and Lib Dem meetings, too – and Stijn said he was pro that kind of approach. Stijn Polarisation is not necessarily a big problem. I don’t think the ideal is that everyone gets along – there should be strong disagreement in society. For afters David We talked about the anglophone world – dominated by the US in GDP and by India in population. There is an inescapable cultural link between these countries that we don’t necessarily have with our European neighbours. Stijn An imperial state of mind is still very present in England. He talked fondly about the anglophone world – I was like: “Yeah, but it’s the result of colonisation and mass migration.” David My instincts have always been for small government. He said that’s great for people who do well, but bad for people who fall through the cracks. He’s got a point, but you have to decide which is a better big picture to run with. I’m in favour of equality of opportunity, but not equality of outcome. Stijn He looks at the world from the perspective of somebody who can fend for himself, but it disregards what happens to people who are not so fortunate. Takeaways David On one or two issues we were on opposite sides of the fence, but that didn’t mean we were enemies. That would be a hopeless way of living. Stijn While Ukip is one of the most horrible vehicles in this country in the last 10 years, he is still a dad, and a person. I think some of the ideas are horrible, and Nigel Farage is particularly horrible. But it’s nice to sit in front of another human being and talk. Additional reporting: Naomi Larsson • David and Stijn ate at Franklins Brasserie at the Thomas Paine hotel in Thetford, Norfolk Want to meet someone from across the divide? Click here to find out moreThe Springboks are in need of a new water carrier for Saturday’s match at Twickenham. Responsibilities include marshalling the defence, identifying weaknesses in the opposition’s line and relaying important information from the coach’s box. Oh, and hydrating the players on the field. The incumbent, Rassie Erasmus, who moonlights as the director of rugby, has been banned from all rugby activities for two months and suspended from all match‑day activities until September next year. His punishment, meted out by World Rugby for his 62-minute video in which he criticised in detail the refereeing performance of Nic Berry in the first Test of the British &amp; Irish Lions tour, also carries a warning “as to his future conduct”. Erasmus has been instructed to apologise to the relevant match officials, as has SA Rugby, which must now pay a £20,000 fine. Erasmus and SA Rugby will appeal. Of course they will. This saga was never going to end quietly, whatever verdict the global governing body landed on. What is more intriguing is how this changes the cultural landscape of South African rugby and its standing abroad. Several newspapers and websites – including this one – suggested Erasmus’s reputation has been “shredded” and that it “lies in tatters”. That may be true in other countries but that is certainly not the case back in South Africa. If anything it has enhanced his status, turning him into a martyr of sorts, a righteous campaigner who knew the risks of standing up to those with their hands on the levers of power and did it anyway. According to his defenders Erasmus is not an unhinged maniac, he is a brave knight charging into dragon fire to preserve the dignity of his people. South African rugby fans are fickle, but they are loyal. They can also be insecure at times. This is a wider societal issue in a former colony that is the most economically unequal in the world, where honest politicians are as rare as drop-kicking props, where a full day without a power cut is considered a luxury and where crime stats – particularly against women – are both astounding and numbing. The Springboks stand out. This team is the country’s best asset right now. And an attack on one is an attack on all. After lifting the Webb Ellis Cup in 2019, Siya Kolisi’s side became the darlings of the game. A Laureus World Sports award for team of the year capped off a remarkable journey, one encapsulated in a tear-jerking documentary that Erasmus co-produced. The most racially diverse Springbok outfit included players who had risen out of poverty. This was more than a team, it was a symbol, one eclipsing even the heroes of 1995. Then Covid hit. With South Africa placed under strict lockdown, the Springboks were denied their year-long victory parade. As the Six Nations continued in empty stadiums, and their southern hemisphere rivals played on without them, the glow of their triumph faded. They entered the Lions tour undercooked and eager to assert their champion status. That this would come against a unified force from the British Isles is significant. The Home Nations have long plundered South African talent and some hangovers from the days of empire have yet to recede. That Erasmus is Afrikaans has not been lost in the narrative. The mood was already sour by the time Erasmus released/leaked/accidentally hit “send” on his video. Warren Gatland, the Lions coach, had questioned a referee’s decision in a press conference and hostilities between journalists, at times acting as jingoistic cheerleaders, were adding a sordid intrigue to a contest stripped of fans as a result of the pandemic. But, and this should be obvious no matter your allegiance, Erasmus took it too far. World Rugby’s 80-page report revealed that he threatened Berry that unless a request for a private meeting took place, he would publish the critical footage. However the video was made public, Erasmus seemingly made good on that threat. “One of the points made by the respondents is that referees must be able to accept feedback,” the judgment stated. “That is a fair observation. However, there is a difference between feedback and abuse.” This verdict places power back in the hands of referees but it will not dispel questions concerning the content of Erasmus’s video. A poor decision from a referee can cost a coach his job. This already delicate relationship has been damaged. Berry’s testimony humanised the affair: “The whole situation has been an extremely difficult time for my family and I. His actions are against everything our game stands for and I feel it’s important to take a stand against such behaviour.” A stand has been taken, opinions on either side of the divide have calcified, and a team that were not long ago a bastion of hope around the world have now become a lightning rod for a toxic chapter in rugby’s history. None of this will have a major bearing on Saturday’s match against England though, like the World Rugby awards snub this week, it may provide extra motivation for the players. Those 80 minutes will likely be as intense as any match between the Springbok and Red Rose. After that, the circus will roll on.A fragment from a 12th-century French poem previously believed to have been lost forever has been found by an academic in Oxford’s Bodleian Library. Dr Tamara Atkin from Queen Mary University of London was researching the reuse of books during the 16th century when she came across the fragment from the hitherto lost Siège d’Orange in the binding of a book published in 1528. Parchment and paper were expensive at the time, and unwanted manuscripts and books were frequently recycled. Scholars had believed the poem, which comes from a cycle of chansons de geste – epic narrative poems – about Guillaume d’Orange, existed, but there had previously been no physical evidence that this was true. The fragment only runs to 47 lines, but it proves the existence of a poem thought to have been completely lost. The poem is set in the ninth century, during the reign of Louis the Pious, Charlemagne’s son and heir. Atkin said that while it is believed to have been composed in the late 12th century, the fragment itself is from a copy made in England in the late 13th century. “Il li demande coment se contient il? / Mauuoisement li quiens Bertram ad dit / Tun frere n’ad ne pain ne ble ne vin / Garison nule dont il puisse garir / Mais ke de sang li lessai plein Bacin,” runs an early section of the fragment, which Philip Bennett, an expert on Guillaume d’Orange from the University of Edinburgh, has translated as: “He asks him, ‘How goes it with him?’ / ‘Badly,’ said Count Bertram. / ‘Your brother has neither bread nor corn nor wine; / He has no supplies with which to save himself, / Except for one basinful of blood, which I left him.’” The quoted lines come as Bertram begs the king for help relieving the siege of Orange, a city in the Rhône Valley, describing the dire siege conditions. “In later parts of the fragment we hear him berating the queen (at one point he even calls her ‘pute russe’ or ‘red-headed whore’), who has objected to her husband leading a relieving army south,” said Atkin. Atkin also found a parchment fragment from Béroul’s Roman de Tristan, telling part of the story of Tristan and Iseult, in the same book. The 12th-century poem is one of the earliest versions of the medieval romance, and until now the only evidence of its existence had been an incomplete 13th-century manuscript in the Bibliothèque Nationale de France. The fragment found by Atkin differs “significantly” from the manuscript, and shows the poem was circulated more widely than had previously been thought. “When you find manuscript waste in a 16th-century book, it tends to be in Latin, and it’s almost always something theological or philosophical, and from the point of view of modern-day literary scholarship, perhaps not that interesting. But the fragments in this book were different,” said Atkin. “They were in French, they were in verse, and in one of the fragments the name Iseult immediately jumped out. I’m not a French scholar, and I realised I was going to need to bring in some collaborators. From there, it’s just been really fun and exciting.” She approached academics from the universities of Bristol, Edinburgh and British Columbia to help. “I knew it was something important,” said JR Mattison, a French-manuscript specialist from the University of British Columbia who helped to identify the Tristan and Iseult fragment. “This piece of the poem comes from a significant moment when Iseult speaks with her husband King Mark. This fragment expands our knowledge of the poem’s audiences and its changing meaning over time and contributes a new perspective on how Tristan legends moved across Europe.” Bennett said there had been “no physical trace” of the Siège d’Orange poem before. “There is much evidence from other chansons de geste that a poem about the siege Guillaume d’Orange suffered in his newly conquered city must have once existed,” he said. “The discovery of the fragment we now have fills an important gap in the poetic biography of the epic hero. This is a most exciting addition to the corpus of medieval French epic poetry.” The team will now work to discover more about when and where the fragments were copied, and how they came to be bound in the 1528 book. “That manuscripts were made at all reflects the value once placed on the texts they contain. But manuscripts that were dismembered and reused as waste were no longer valued as texts. Their only value was as a material commodity – parchment – that could be used to reinforce the binding of another book. The manuscripts containing these French poems were probably recycled because the texts were considered old-fashioned and the language outdated,” said Atkin. “It’s fantastically exciting to discover something that’s been lost all this time, but I do think it is also worth simultaneously holding the thought that actually, the only reason these fragments have survived is because at some point, someone thought the manuscripts in which they appeared were not valuable as anything other than waste. There’s a sort of lovely tension in that, I think.”10. In the Land of Women (2007) By 2007, Meg Ryan was already well into a wilderness period that still hasn’t ended. Indeed, it has been more than five years since she was in a film at all (Ithaca, her harmless but forgettable directorial debut). If highlights of this era have been few, her restrained, affecting turn as an unhappily married, cancer-stricken housewife in this uneven indie soap opera was a reminder that the industry did her dirty. At the very least, more little films like this could use her wattage. 9. Top Gun (1986) In only her third film, Ryan’s ostensibly insignificant part as the sparky wife (named, amusingly, Carole Bradshaw) of the protagonist’s best friend – multiple degrees of supporting separation there – shouldn’t have stood out against Tom Cruise’s squinting heroics. But she attacks her couple of scenes with such determinedly sunny star-is-born energy (“Take me to bed or lose me for ever!”) that you wonder if the producers ever regretted picking Kelly McGillis, a chemical mismatch with Cruise, as the film’s leading lady. 8. You’ve Got Mail (1998) The third of Ryan’s team-ups with Tom Hanks was the least interesting but the most commercially popular, which kind of figures. Nora Ephron’s now quaintly digitised update of The Shop Around the Corner was cornball stuff, but its two stars were by that point so comfortable with each other, playing so effortlessly off each other’s established personae, as to make the enterprise irresistible. 7. Prelude to a Kiss (1992) Through the 90s, Ryan alternated romcoms with loftier efforts, of which this extremely precious romantic fantasy was the most bizarre. Adapted from a hit Broadway play, its blend of body-swap gimmickry with more poetic musings on true soul attraction was perhaps easier to swallow on stage. But Ryan, handed the near-impossible role of a manic pixie dream girl accidentally possessed by a dying male pensioner, is really rather good, by turns suitably strange, prickly and beguiling. 6. Promised Land (1987) Michael Hoffman’s low-budget drama was the first film ever commissioned by the Sundance festival, and feels like it. A veritable checklist of earnest indie cliches, its familiar tale of small-town disappointment and Reagan-era hardship gets a vital shot in the arm from Ryan’s blazingly charismatic turn as the gobby, tattooed bride of Kiefer Sutherland’s feckless drifter. She got an Independent Spirit best actress nomination for her pains; her Next Big Thing status was official. 5. Sleepless in Seattle (1993) Ephron’s riff on An Affair to Remember hinged on a high-risk high concept for a romantic comedy. Keeping its meant-to-be lovers apart until the very final scene, it nonetheless requires them to convince us of their chemistry in isolation. That it works is down to the aforementioned perfect pairing of Hanks and Ryan: she has the harder job of the two – her character’s wildly irrational whimsy has to make sympathetic sense, and it does. 4. Joe Versus the Volcano (1990) Still, the peak of the Ryan-Hanks partnership remains their first outing, John Patrick Shanley’s fully batshit, cult-forming fatalist romance, in which Ryan flits between three roles of varying degrees of eccentricity, sort of like the ghosts of dating past, present and future. One of them is the One, suitably wily and winsome to divert Hanks’s supposedly dying protagonist from his mission to throw himself into a volcano. Well, it shouldn’t take much, should it? 3. When a Man Loves a Woman (1994) It’s the oldest Oscar-grabbing tactic in the book: a wholesome, beloved comic star dirties up, turns that smile upside down, and laughs (or rather, doesn’t laugh at all) all the way to the podium. In this slick but solemn marital drama, Ryan had reason to be hopeful: her performance as an alcoholic school counsellor was fully committed, and in many ways tougher than the film itself. Her peers in the Screen Actors Guild bought it and nominated her for the inaugural SAG awards – but the Academy remained unmoved. 2. In the Cut (2003) Ryan’s gutsiest against-type performance, however, didn’t earn her so much as a sniff of a nomination – she had been done for by cool reviews and a disastrous publicity trail for Jane Campion’s sharp, challenging, female-gaze-driven erotic thriller, which reached a nadir with an infamous Parkinson interview in which his misogyny won the public’s favour. Their loss: in a role turned down by Nicole Kidman, Ryan’s performance as an introverted writer testing boundaries of desire and masochism is a thing of nervy, tensile daring. 1. When Harry Met Sally … (1989) Still, sometimes a comfort zone is a comfort zone for a reason, and the reason Ryan will for ever be identified with romantic comedies is her pitch-perfect, megastar-making turn in one of the genre’s all-time peaks. Playing the fussy, maddening but lovably vulnerable Sally Albright across multiple phases of life and romantic philosophy, she had our hearts even before she faked a dead-on orgasm in a sandwich shop, though that certainly didn’t hurt.Thousands of farm animals have died and many more are trapped by floods in desperate need of food and water after the Pacific north-west storm battered a major hub of Canadian agriculture. Torrential rains pummelled swathes of western Canada’s British Columbia and Washington state in the US in recent days – dumping a month’s worth of rain in two days in some areas – causing floods and mudslides that swallowed stretches of highways and forced the evacuation of thousands of people. One person has been killed and several have been reported missing. Abbotsford, one of Canada’s most intensively and diversely farmed areas, was among places hardest hit. Home to more than 1,200 farms, it supplies half of the dairy, eggs and poultry consumed by British Columbia’s 5.2 million residents. Aerial footage showed several barns engulfed by flood waters. Farmers and residents have been frantically scrambling to save their animals from rising waters, resorting to motorboats and jetskis to tow partly submerged cows one by one to higher ground. Many of the farms are in Sumas Prairie, a low-lying fertile stretch of land created by the draining of a lake nearly a century ago. An evacuation order on Tuesday included 121 dairy and poultry farms, according to farmers associations. Local officials pleaded with about 300 people who defied the order. “If you are still on Sumas Prairie, you need to leave,” said Henry Braun, the mayor of Abbotsford. “I know it’s hard for farmers to leave their livestock, but people’s lives are more important to me right now than livestock or chickens.” Lana Popham, minister of agriculture for British Columbia, said the storm had battered a key part of the province’s farmland, setting off an animal welfare crisis. “There are probably hundreds of farms that have been affected by flooding. Some are still underwater, some are on dry locations and we have thousands of animals that have perished,” she said. “We have many, many more that are in difficult situations.” Officials were racing to carve out routes in impassable areas to get veterinarians to stranded animals, she said. “There will have to be euthanizations that happen, but there are also animals that have survived that are going to be in critical need of food in the next 24 hours.” Popham said she had spent the past two days on video calls with farmers affected. “Some of them are in their barns, and some of their barns are flooded and you can see the animals are deceased,” she said. “It’s heartbreaking.” She said while some farmers had towed cows out of the flood waters, the rescued animals were “not in good shape” after their ordeal. “I can also tell you that many farmers attempted to move animals and then had to walk away because the roads were disappearing beneath them.” In Abbotsford, Braun said it was too early to say how many animals had died. But a helicopter tour had given a dire picture of the storm’s impact. He said: “I saw barns that looked like they were half full of water. I can’t imagine that there are any birds left alive, but we don’t have those numbers.” In 2010, the area raised more than 9 million poultry birds. Around 9,000 cows were housed at the 60 dairy farms affected by the Sumas Prairie evacuation order, said Holger Schwichtenberg, the chair of the BC Dairy Association. As news of the order spread, he said dairy farmers had rallied together to stem the losses. “Countless farmers with trucks and trailers started hauling cattle out of the affected areas to farms like mine. We’re in a safe place, so we had 40 cows delivered to us.” He was unable to say how many cows had been moved to higher ground or how many had been left behind. Farmers have been unable to get their milk to market, forcing some to dump thousands of litres. Schwichtenberg said: “The milk on our farm got dumped last night because there’s no way for the trucks to get here. The roads are impassable.” The powerful storm comes less than six months after British Columbia was overwhelmed by record-high temperatures that killed more than 500 people and led to wildfires that gutted an entire town. “We went through the heat dome and pretty much drought conditions all summer long and now we get the complete flipside,” he said. Sign up for the Animals farmed monthly update to get a roundup of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at animalsfarmed@theguardian.comMetro Bank shares have slumped after the US private equity firm Carlyle Group said it had ended its interest in buying the UK challenger bank. Carlyle said it had agreed with the bank “to terminate discussions regarding a possible offer”. The report of a possible takeover had offered Metro Bank shareholders some hope after a torrid three-and-a-half years in which its market value plummeted from more than £3.6bn in March 2018 to less than £200m on Thursday. Metro Bank shares had risen from 103p before the talks were revealed earlier this month to 133p, their highest since February. However, they fell by 18% on Thursday to 109p in mid-morning trading. The bank had burst on to the British high street in 2010 after the financial crisis, claiming to be the UK’s first new bank in more than 150 years. It soared in value as it grew rapidly, with a focus on customer services while also using bank branches in prominent locations even as rivals cut back. Yet in 2019 it was hit by an accounting scandal that involved misreported loans, and shares plunged as its founder, Vernon Hill, and its then chief executive were forced out within two months of each other. Challenger banks – both those with bank branches and those that rely on digital apps – have struggled to dent the dominance of bigger lenders such as Lloyds and NatWest. The bank is forecast to make losses before interest and tax of more than £300m in the next two years, according to estimates compiled by the data company Sentieo. However, some observers suggested Carlyle may have been considering an offer because of the prospect of rising interest rates in the UK. Banks can benefit from higher interest rates because they raise the lending costs for borrowers while paying out similar amounts to savers. However, Carlyle’s interest in Metro Bank was thought to be only in its early stages before it was leaked to the media. In a response to Carlyle’s statement, the bank said: “The board continues to strongly believe in the standalone strategy and future prospects of Metro Bank.”Some of the countries most vulnerable to climate breakdown have called on the UN and the UK and other countries who want to lead the climate fight to help them ensure high emitters upgrade their carbon targets, as called for at the Cop26 summit. They added that countries such as Australia, which has refused to embrace strong carbon-cutting targets, would lose out economically. But they said it would be “an uphill battle” to ensure adequate revisions to national carbon targets, and that all those who wanted to see climate action must use the next year to put pressure on the governments that had inadequate plans. At Cop26 in Glasgow, countries came forward with emissions-cutting targets, known as nationally determined contributions (NDCs), that would lead to an estimated 2.4C of heating above pre-industrial levels, far in excess of the 1.5C set out in the 2015 Paris climate agreement. All countries agreed to return next year to a conference in Egypt with reviewed targets. However, some countries are reluctant to strengthen their targets – Australia, whose target is widely deemed inadequate, has already signalled its refusal, while the US and the EU have said their targets are good enough. Selamawit Wubet, a programme coordinator at the Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF), told the Guardian: “Around half of all parties met the Paris agreement deadline [to produce new NDCs by the end of 2020]. So it will be an uphill battle to encourage countries to revise them again. “What is most crucial is to have a common voice from all key actors: the Cop presidencies [of the UK, which hosted Cop26, and Egypt, host of Cop27], the UNFCCC [United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change] secretariat, the UN secretary general, as well as key negotiation and party blocs.” She said being able to review each country’s NDC speedily would be key, adding that Cop26 showed that “countries can come up with better contributions when expectations are very clear for that”. Members of the CVF, which represents more than 55 countries and more than 1.4 billion people around the world in places most at risk from extreme weather, told the Guardian their efforts had at least partly paid off before Cop26. Wubet pointed to the CVF’s “barometer”, an evaluation of NDCs up to 31 December 2020, which the bloc is looking to repeat before the next Cop in November 2022. The United Nations Environment Programme also performed “robust evaluations” of individual NDCs, though Wubet noted it did not pass judgment where baseline and other differences required additional calculations, and the UNFCCC published a “synthesis report” taking the NDCs in aggregate. “Some other technical partners also track NDCs but there is varying evaluation criteria, whereas it’s very important to be clear whether a country did in fact increase ambition or not versus their previous NDC,” she said. Sara Ahmed, a finance adviser to the V20 group of 20 finance ministers from the CVF, said countries should recognise the benefits of cutting emissions and moving to a greener economy, which would create jobs and improve health. She told the Guardian: “The pressure to deliver is not only a survival deadline and political, it is economic and financial in nature. The shift to a low-carbon and climate-resilient economy translates to greater socioeconomic gains. There are more jobs in renewable energy than fossil fuel.” The energy crisis, resulting in high gas prices around the world, pointed to the economic benefits of a low-carbon economy, Ahmed added. “The current market volatility of fossil fuels and high spot prices will impact balance of supply and demand, and investor pressure will only continue to build. The 1.5C limit is the only way forward to safeguard global financial stability in today’s highly interconnected world.” She added: “High emitter laggard countries not only break the trust the world has given them, but likely suffer economically. For example, failure by Australia to deliver 1.5C-compatible climate targets this decade will shrink Australia’s GDP by 6% and lock in an increase in net debt in New South Wales to 100% by 2060, with taxpayers ultimately footing the bill.” The government of Bangladesh, as chair of the CVF, issued a statement welcoming the outcome of Cop26. The chair said: “The vulnerable nations brought demands for urgency to Cop26 in particular on keeping 1.5C alive, reaffirming delivery of crucial climate finance, and accelerating adaptation through stronger finance. “On all these priorities of the most climate threatened nations Cop26 has delivered substantial progress: 1.5C is alive even if it remains on lifeline watch. We have nine years left to cut global emissions in half and the world has recognised the urgency of the situation in Glasgow – now the hard work begins back home in all the nations of the world to deliver on the Cop26 agreements.”This week’s “No One’s Listening” report, by the all-party parliamentary group on sickle cell and thalassaemia, comes hot on the heels of recent high-profile inquests into avoidable deaths from the condition, which found two patients had died because of poor basic care and/or neglect while in hospital. MPs are now calling, in response, for urgent changes to be made to the healthcare provided for sickle cell. Sickle cell disorder (SCD) is classified as a “medical emergency”, putting it in the same category as heart attacks and strokes. SCD is the world’s most common genetic blood condition, characterised by deoxygenated cells becoming rigid, sickle-shaped – like crescent moons – and sticky. These cells block capillaries, causing excruciating pain likened to being repeatedly hit with a hammer. It can occur in any part of the body, often in multiple places at once, leaving the sufferer unable to move, other than to writhe in agony. The pain levels are so high, I have often heard women with sickle cell describe these episodes as worse than childbirth. Without appropriate care the blockages can escalate, leading to death. The inquiry, chaired by Pat McFadden MP, included the late David Amess as one of the parliamentary group’s elected members. The findings make for very uncomfortable and frustrating reading, and reinforce the coroner’s findings. However, the broad range of people who provided evidence from across the country were unified in their assertion that issues of race and inequality underpinned the failures at every level of service, policy and performance delivery. I felt very proud to participate in the report – alongside fellow “sick cell warriors”, bereaved parents and medical figures – and to give evidence to the inquiry panel. The chance to have a voice, and hopefully help other patients, families and the NHS has been a long time coming. I offered several recommendations, most notably “listen to the patient”. Patients are often experts in the condition and their needs. Many have additional safeguards such as care plans and explanatory letters from health and social care professionals that are ignored on arrival at A&amp;E in many cases. Additionally, healthcare attitudes stigmatise the patient, while the NHS-commissioned standards of care that are meant to be provided to patients are often not delivered. This chain of events frequently only leads to one place: preventable harm. Though some white people have SCD, it predominantly affects people of African and Caribbean heritage. What truly shocked the inquiry is patients – ill and in desperate need – reporting open racism: being called the N-word, or worse. Patients were also accused of being drug addicts, without foundation, and were commonly denied treatment and pain relief. The report calls these issues out in the hope that urgent actions will be taken. Today, there are more than 15,000 people living with SCD in the UK, and only five approved treatments. A comparator genetic condition is cystic fibrosis, which has 10,500 patients and 511 approved treatments. This is not about pulling anyone down, it’s about saying, “OK, what about us?” The inquiry calls for sustainable improvements in training, attitudes, treatments and accountability, among other things, in order to prevent future deaths like those of Evan Nathan Smith and Tyrone Airey, which are far from isolated incidents. In both cases, inquests found their lives could have been saved with better healthcare. Racism within an organisation is a product of its wider culture, practice and character. To that extent should chairs and chief executives take the lead in holding their employees to account? Attitudes must change, much as they must in the world of cricket. Indeed, a parliamentary select committee on SCD deaths might be a sensible next step forward. The NHS may now respond to stem concerns over racism and poor care by pledging to clean up the service and apologise for hurt caused. I believe a healthy society treats people fairly, and so the organisations that serve within it must do the same. Excellence undoubtedly exists within the NHS – I do not deny that – and the MPs’ report doesn’t call for all healthcare staff to become experts. But understanding how sickle cell affects people can change a practitioner’s perspective. Government studies since the 1980 Black report talk of disparity and poor health care delivered to the black community, and the need to level up. The Acheson report in the 1990s said the same. The Marmot report of 2010, and the follow-up review in 2020, noted that the gap between the healthcare services received by white people and those received by black people continued to grow. If we are serious about “levelling up”, we must acknowledge the misdeeds of the past and change policies and practices to create a fairer health service and ensure no one gets left behind. The director general of the World Health Organization, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said last month: “The WHO stands in solidarity with all marginalised patients in communities not consulted, not engaged, or empowered in their own care.” The parliamentary group inquiry’s report calls on the health secretary and NHS England to prioritise taking urgent action, deliver the report recommendations, and improve the healthcare system for people living with sickle cell to prevent any further avoidable deaths. Kye Gbangbola is a sickle cell patient and chair of the Sickle Cell SocietyThe biggest surprise of Crime, BritBox’s much-heralded new drama by Irvine Welsh, is that – particularly as far as the opening episode is concerned – it could have been written by anyone. It’s set in Edinburgh, sure, and the protagonist – DI Ray Lennox (Dougray Scott) – is a drink and drug addict in recovery, but, beyond these touchstones of the Trainspotting author, it plays as a wholly pedestrian police procedural (although by the end of the six episodes Welsh has at least pushed the limits of what we normally see from the troubled detective at the centre of such shows). Lennox becomes the lead investigator in the case of a missing child, Britney Hamil. The seven-year-old has been snatched in a CCTV blind spot by a man and bundled into his white van, her fate revealed in a hauntingly beautiful and awful scene on Calton Hill at the National Monument in the closing moments of the first episode. The suspects are Britney’s grandfather (who “beasted” – molested – Britney’s mother when she was young) and her father, a local sex offender, both of whom are traced and dismissed. Lennox becomes increasingly convinced that Britney was taken by a killer called Mr Confectioner, who was responsible for the disappearance of several girls before he was caught and imprisoned. Lennox thinks the police got the wrong man. Is he right? Or is he blinkered, driven not by evidence but by whatever demons also drove him to addiction, and which were born – if his unbidden flashbacks are anything to go by – of unspeakable events in his childhood? It is not, of course, Welsh’s fault that – bar the occasional dramatisation of Lennox’s inner wish to scream in his superiors’ faces – there is none of the stylistic flair with which Welsh’s output is often linked, thanks to Danny Boyle’s Trainspotting. However, this means there is little to offset the disappointment offered by the conventional nature of the narrative. Bob (Ken Stott), Lennox’s boss and chief superintendent, is resistant to plausible theories and viable suspects to the point of idiocy, which is as frustrating and wearying to the viewer as ever. Meanwhile, Lennox’s sidekick Amanda (Joanna Vanderham) is an underwritten cipher, there to stand up to the old guard’s unthinking sexism and show that the programme makers had heard of #MeToo. Angela Griffin finds herself in a similar position as Lennox’s girlfriend, Trudi, burdened by a sexual harassment subplot untethered to the main, and lumbered with lines that seem to have been copied directly from a corporate handbook on the subject. Having watched the whole thing, I can tell you that things become a little more excessive and exuberantly Welshian during the last couple of episodes, but it’s a dreich and plodding affair till then, and not terribly innovative after that. It is leavened, in a way, by fellow detective, and Begbie-lite figure, Dougie (Jamie Sives), who is investigating the deaths of a French couple – which may or may not intersect with Lennox’s case – but he seems to belong to a totally different production. The script is odd, too. When not simply banal – with repetitive assertions of how much Lennox hates “beasts”, and Mr Confectioner specifically (“This man was pure. Unadulterated. Evil”) – it hammers home its chosen themes (“Some men can’t handle strong powerful women,” Trudi’s friend says to her at one point). Elsewhere, it strains for the kind of operatic effect that worked so well in the heightened celluloid world of Trainspotting and in Welsh’s written worlds. Here, the effect is merely absurd – not least in the opening voiceover, when Scott ponderously intones that the “ignorance of monsters is bliss … but the road to hell is paved with ignorance”. Besides, some of the dialogue is just deathly. “More often than not they’ll target kids from single-parent families,” Lennox says to Amanda, with his serial-killer-expert hat on. “Why’s that?” she asks, even though everyone in the world knows. “There’s a higher chance of chaos impeding the investigation from the start,” he replies. “Bit of a stereotype,” she says. “But it makes sense.” I’m glad that’s all cleared up and boilerplated. Some decidedly ropey performances don’t help anything, but I am aware that it is at least partly disappointment speaking. As a Welsh fan, you have high hopes for anything that comes from his pen, and the prospect of a self-adaptation of one of his books raised them, perhaps unsustainably. Ignore the name and the potential and it’s a serviceable cop show. It’s the waste that feels like a crime.‘I’ve done so many strange things in my career,” says Rob Brydon – not the least of which is journeying from the offbeat mockumentary Marion and Geoff, where he made his name, to nights like this. A Night of Songs and Laughter finds Brydon in Mr Saturday Night mode, crooning his way through a Desert Island Discs-like selection of songs that tell the story of his life. It’s slick, sentimental and spacious enough to allow for plenty of Ronnie Corbett-esque raconteurship and joshing of the crowd. Positioning him more as merry-making master of ceremonies than standup comedian, it plays to Brydon’s strengths. In such a context, for Brydon to ask, “What is it about me that attracts the old and the infirm?” can only be richly ironic. He knows full well that his latterday Max Bygraves shtick does not deliver the shock of the new. But he also loves to tease his audience – mainly, tonight, for their decrepitude. Such exchanges offer glimpses of the wolf one sometimes discerns under Brydon’s sheep’s clothing. But otherwise it’s showtunes and hip-shaking Elvis numbers, as well as heart-on-sleeve balladry memorialising the Welshman’s first kiss, his first girlfriend, and the birth of his first child. It’s always a showbiz confection, the autobiographical storytelling never more than skin-deep. But it usually works. Brydon can hold a tune and pack feeling into it; he’s backed by an excellent band led by Paul Herbert (ribbed ruthlessly throughout) – and his anecdotes zero in endearingly on his own indignity and ineptitude. For all that he jokes otherwise, his voice work and celeb mimicry is, as ever with Brydon, another highlight. It’s a matter of only mild regret that the story-of-my-life narrative peters out in act two, which devolves into singalongs of Sweet Caroline and Brydon’s chart-topping Islands in the Stream, performed in character as Gavin and Stacey’s Uncle Bryn. A bespoke lyric, written during the interval to incorporate Brydon’s interactions with the crowd, is a bit weak – some acts improvise this stuff – but after a show dedicated to Brydon’s pal Barry Humphries, making himself conspicuous in the crowd, no one leaves this feelgood evening under-entertained. At the London Palladium on 18 November and touring until 16 JulyMinisters say the £96bn integrated rail plan published on Thursday will deliver improvements quicker than original plans for the HS2 eastern leg and Northern Powerhouse Rail. In a foreword to the plan, the prime minister, Boris Johnson, said it been “clear that the plans – first drawn up 11 years ago – had to change”, while Covid had “altered some of the assumptions on which these schemes were designed”. But critics in the north and Midlands say it is a “rail betrayal” and a watered down version of what was promised. These are the key changes: HS2 The plan: The high-speed line heading north-west will be built but the eastern leg from Birmingham to Sheffield and Leeds has been scrapped beyond the east Midlands. A brand new hub station at Toton, outside Nottingham, will also not be built for HS2, but will be partially developed for local services. HS2 trains will continue on existing lines into Nottingham and Derby. What was promised: Originally, a full Y-shaped network linking London, Birmingham, Manchester and Leeds. Preliminary work on the eastern leg was paused after the Oakervee review. Northern Powerhouse Rail The plan: Upgrades to the existing TransPennine line – much of which was separately promised to be delivered as part of a programme of improvements by Network Rail under Chris Grayling. It will bring full electrification and some new track. A new section of high-speed track will link Warrington and Marsden to enable faster east-west connections. Bradford-Leeds links are to be electrified and improved. Leeds is to get a new urban transit system. What was promised: A high-speed line linking Manchester and Leeds, at the heart of plans drawn up by northern leaders and transport authorities for improved east-west connections across the region. Northern planners said the line should go through under-served Bradford. Electrification and upgrades The plan: The Midlands mainline, linking London and Sheffield, will be electrified in full and more work will be done to improve speed and capacity on the east coast line. What was promised: The Midlands mainline electrification was in progress but stopped in 2017. East coast upgrade work is in long-term progress and not yet clear if it is new money and additional projects. Integrated and contactless ticketing The plan: Funding of £360m to introduce London-style contactless ticketing and integrated fares, linking some bus and tram networks. What was promised: Reform of ticketing to improve journeys and connections has been long sought by regional transport authorities and agreed in principle, but not delivered, by ministers.Did you have any heroes in the beginning of your career that you wanted to move or look like? JoeHill I didn’t look at singers and think: “That’s how I want to move,” but I sorta wanted to sound like ’em. I started off with Eddie Cochran – that rough-edged voice – and moved on to Otis Redding, Sam Cooke, Bobby Womack and David Ruffin. I went from being a beatnik to a mod with long hair. Born to Boogie on the new album [The Tears of Hercules] is about Marc Bolan. We used to go to the hairdresser’s together. I did the 1971 Weeley festival when I was in the Faces and Maggie May was No 1 and he was in T Rex, and he was good enough to come in the dressing room and admit that he didn’t want to follow us. Not many stars would have done that. We became great mates. I loved his music. It was easier for him to wear sequins and whatever in Putney than up north. You recently revealed you were shipping your stunning model railway to the UK. How do you transport such a project? DoubleRDiner It’s a model city [based on New York and Chicago] that took me 23 years to build. It’s 60ft long by 25ft wide. Bigger than most people’s houses. It’s taken seven months to move. A lot of it had to be rebuilt, because you can’t move a model railroad. It’s very expensive, but worth it, ’cos it’s my favourite hobby and I work on it every day. I was born in Highgate, north London, and out of my window I could see railway lines and, beyond that, football pitches. I once said that I’d rather be on the cover of Railway Modeller than Rolling Stone magazine and Rolling Stone haven’t spoken to me since. Which five songs do you never tire of singing? Nigglypat58 I love them all. They’re my babies. There was a time I got tired of singing Da Ya Think I’m Sexy? because it was so critically put-down, but it made people happy, so what’s wrong with that? It still puts a smile on people’s faces when I sing it. Can you tell us anything more about the man who inspired The Killing of Georgie and how closely the song’s lyrics stick to what really happened? MissidahoPotato As a gay kid growing up in Glasgow, it meant so much to hear you singing something so passionate, if heartbreaking, about gay people. Were you nervous about how the song would be received? Trumansdad It’s a song about a guy who befriended the Faces. A very good-looking gay black guy who turned us on to so much great music. In the 70s, being gay was dangerous. Whether he got murdered because he was gay or black or robbed, I don’t know, but it was in Lower Manhattan. I think the only resistance was from the good old BBC, but they resist anything that might be risque. They didn’t realise I was helping a lot of people. It gives me more satisfaction than anything when gay guys say: “In the 70s, when it came out, it was a really black period of my life and you’ve no idea how much this song helped me.” I’ve been in law enforcement for 18 years. How do you feel about Penny [Lancaster, Rod’s wife, a special constable] being in this field, especially in this day and age? JbirdHuck7 A few years ago, she went out on the beat with real police for a TV special. She had a few frights – a woman drug addict chased her with a needle trying to stab her – but she loved it. She passed her exams and the physical stuff, such as a bleep test, to see how strong her heart is. During training, guys would swear at her and charge at her like they were rioters, but I’m so proud of her. She wants to look after the city she loves, which is London. Go girl! She’s 6ft 2in, so I don’t have to worry about her. How much did Kenny Everett’s impression of you in leopardskin trousers sting at the time? johnnyfingers When he had an inflating bum? [Laughs.] I loved it! Brilliant. I don’t mind the piss being taken out of me. I really don’t. I’ve still got those trousers. Is it true that you were paid for your legendary vocal on Python Lee Jackson’s In a Broken Dream with a set of car seat covers? doowenday My mate worked for Marcos cars and I had one of their little sports cars. He was trying to get into managing rock groups and this lot came from Australia, but they had this song which the singer couldn’t sing. My mate said: “Can you come and do a demo for me?” They had no money, so he offered me a set of carpets for the car. I sang it in two takes and never heard anything more about it until A$AP Rocky sampled it in Everyday. My boys love that, but ’cos it’s A$AP Rocky, not because of me. I throughly enjoyed Elton John’s account, in his autobiography, of his endless attempts to show you up and upstage you. Which is your favourite – and do you have a favourite retaliation? mattyjj Some of them were very public, but the one where he showed me up the most was in private. We used to live 20 minutes from each other in Berkshire, so for Christmas I bought him a pop-up fridge from Harrods. You pressed a button and there’d be steam and lights and a bottle of champagne. It cost me £600; a lot of money in the 70s. We swapped presents and he said: “Oh very nice, dear, thank you.” He gave me a Rembrandt painting! I’ve never felt so stingy. He’s eternally the most generous person I’ve ever known. I’m not sure what the best one I’ve done on “her” is … he’s usually got one over on me. I can’t bear it. We communicate through the press now, but we love each other. That’s what counts. How long does it take to achieve the full Rod Stewart hair? Punkawallah Two minutes! Get the hairdryer, put a bit of product in it, dry it upside down to make it all stand up, then put a bit of wax on, which didn’t exist when I started this haircut, making it stand up using sugar and water. I started it, so I’m gonna finish it. Your 1977 single I Don’t Want to Talk About It famously kept the Sex Pistols’ God Save the Queen off the No 1 spot. From your understanding of the backroom machinations, was it a fair fight? McScootikins I didn’t really care who came in at No 1 or No 2. [The Pistols’ manager] Malcolm McLaren kicked up a huge fuss and said I was a thieving, lying sod, but if there was any shenanigans I’d own up to it. God Save the Queen was brilliant. I loved the Sex Pistols and thank them for giving Bowie and Elton and me and all the rest of us a good kick up the arse. They showed that music can be made by anybody. I was moved by your rendition of Grace, which tells the story of a leader of the Easter rising marrying in jail just before his execution. Can you say how you came to this song and what it means to you? timothyogrady1 About eight years ago, I heard the Celtic supporters singing it at the Scottish Cup final and just fell in love with it. It’s about Joseph Plunkett and Grace Gifford, who were married in prison in 15 minutes with guards with fixed bayonets either side of them. He was taken out the next morning and shot. I visited Kilmainham jail and all the relevant spots to do with the uprising and I watched a programme on Netflix called Rebellion and gave myself a history lesson. The BBC think it’s an IRA song. Of course it isn’t. There’s nothing in it to offend. It’s one of the most gorgeous love songs I’ve ever sung. When I sing it in places like New York, where there’s a lot of Irish people, you can hear a pin drop. Did you turn down any songs that you wish you had recorded or record any that you wish you hadn’t? MarkStewart The only one I was a bit sad over was That’s What Friends Are For, which was a big hit for Elton and Stevie Wonder [with Dionne Warwick and Gladys Knight], ’cos I did the original. The record company didn’t see it as a single, but then they got hold of it. No hard feelings or anything. Their version was good, but not as good as mine. That bloody Elton John again! [Laughs.] How important was [the British rhythm and blues singer] Long John Baldry to your career? artistian He was everything. Absolutely everything. He not only got me started … He found me drunk, singing on Twickenham railway station, playing harmonica. I’d just been to see his show. He came over and he was a bit like Stephen Fry. Well spoken. Cyril Davies and the All Stars were the key blues band, before the Stones and everything, but Cyril had died and John said: “Young man, I need someone to open the show for me.” I was only 16 or 17 so I said: “You’ll have to ask me mum.” So he came round to see my mum with a bunch of flowers and she loved him. They were playing all the universities and my mum told him I could do it “as long as he’s home by 11 o’clock”. How could I do that if we were playing Newcastle University?! But he was such a polite, well-mannered gentleman that he wooed her over. She loved him. The whole family did. I loved him so much. It’s time I wrote a song about him. Will we see a movie of your life like Queen’s [Bohemian Rhapsody] and Elton’s [Rocket Man]? guy1h1 Well, I’m praying someone will make a biopic. There’s been rumours, but nothing yet. My two sons could play the younger me. They haven’t got the hair, but nowadays the wigs look very normal. Look at Elton’s barnet! What Celtic game gave you the most pleasure and why? Ghilliedhu When they beat Barcelona in the Champions League in Glasgow 2-1, in 2012. I was seen – and you can see it on YouTube – crying my eyes out like a baby. I didn’t know the cameras were on me, but I was just so emotionally overcome. Great questions, readers! A big difference to the usual boring shit. • The Tears of Hercules is out now on Warner RecordsThe number of referrals to the government’s Prevent counter-terrorism programme relating to far-right extremism has exceeded those for Islamist radicalisation for the first time. There were 1,229 referrals owing to concerns related to extreme rightwing radicalisation in the year ending 31 March, and 1,064 because of suspected Islamist radicalisation, according to official figures published on Thursday. The total number of referrals was down by 22% on the previous 12 months, to 4,915 referrals, a fall the Home Office suggested was a result of school and university closures during the coronavirus pandemic. The Prevent programme has been dogged by claims of being a cover to spy on Muslim communities, but police concerns about far-right activity have been rising in recent years, leading to them making up a higher proportion of referrals. Accepted referrals relating to far-right extremism from the early-intervention Prevent programme to Channel, which provides more intensive support, had already outstripped those for Islamist radicalisation in recent years. Last year, the Home Office banned the neo-Nazi group Sonnenkrieg Division (SKD), members of which have been jailed for serious offences, making membership of the group illegal and punishable by up to 10 years in prison. It also recognised the extreme rightwing group System Resistance Network as an alias of the already-proscribed organisation National Action. The highest proportion of referrals to Prevent last year (51%) was for individuals with a mixed, unstable or unclear ideology, followed by those related to rightwing radicalisation (25%) and Islamist referrals (22%). In line with the overall reduction in referrals, there were drops in all three categories, with the biggest percentage fall in Islamist referrals. The number of police referrals to Prevent increased by 31% compared with 2019-20 but those made by the education sector fell by the same percentage to the lowest proportion from schools and universities since comparable figures have been available. The Home Office said it was “likely due to the closure of schools and universities as a result of the Covid-19 pandemic”. Counter-terrorism officials expressed fears that a crucial defence to propaganda was weakened during lockdowns to curb the spread of coronavirus, with young people spending more time online alone and unsupervised as schools and colleges closed. On Monday, the home secretary, Priti Patel, announced the UK’s terror threat level would be raised from substantial to severe, meaning an attack was “highly likely”. It came after a suspected suicide bomber blew himself up with a homemade device outside a maternity hospital in Liverpool, weeks after the Conservative MP David Amess, 69, was killed during a surgery for his constituents. The number of accepted referrals to Channel was 688 last year, four fewer than the previous 12 months. For the third consecutive year, there were more accepted referrals for concerns related to extreme rightwing radicalisation than for Islamist radicalisation (317 to 154). Accepted referrals for rightwing radicalisation increased by 5% compared with 2019-20, while those for Islamist radicalisation fell by 26% and have dropped by 41% since 2015-16. The Prevent and Channel programmes are the subject of a long-awaited government review. In February, a coalition of 17 human rights and community groups, including Liberty, Amnesty International and the Runnymede Trust, said they were boycotting the review because the appointment of Sir William Shawcross to lead it showed it was there to “simply rubber-stamp” the strategy, after he was criticised for previous remarks he had made about Islam. A Home Office spokesperson said: “Prevent remains a vital tool for early intervention and safeguarding. We will not allow extremists or terrorists to spread hate or sow division and Prevent remains an important tool to help divert people away from harm.”The Rugby Football League has approved the game-wide introduction of mouthguards that could detect whether or not a player is at risk of a concussion or head trauma. The guards, which were trialled by Leeds Rhinos this year, will come in next season and could provide greater understanding of when an individual is in danger by measuring through sensors the force of every collision they experience during a match. Super League clubs have unanimously backed the introduction of the guards but the Guardian has now learned that the RFL has made the decision to adopt them more broadly as part of its Tackle initiative. The Women’s Super League, academy rugby and the community game will all benefit from the rollout, which has been developed in conjunction with Leeds Beckett University to try to improve the overall safety of players. Concussion is high on the agenda in rugby league, particularly given the news that a group of former international players are planning legal action against the sport’s authorities over a failure to protect them properly from long-term neurological injuries as a result of playing the game. The former Leeds captain Stevie Ward announced his retirement from the sport at the age of 27 in January because of persistent concussion-related symptoms. “The guards measure head acceleration profile and track impact to the head and rotational force,” Prof Ben Jones, who works for the Rhinos and has helped lead the study, told the Guardian. Other governing bodies such as union’s World Rugby have introduced the mouthguards but Jones insists rugby league is breaking barriers by rolling the concept out across an entire sport, including the professional and amateur games at the same time. Jones added that the mouthguards were “initially going out across Super League but the RFL has committed to roll this out across the whole game. It’s utterly comprehensive. The Super League clubs have helped lead it and they understand the safety of their players is greater than winning a game on the weekend. They should be commended for that. They’ve been through a lot but they understand the welfare and safety of their players is the absolute priority. “I think other big governing bodies will follow off the back of this. Rugby league is making an effort to look after everyone in one go. I would argue that rugby league’s commitment to this is proof that they are determined to look after their players the best they possibly can.” Jones also insisted that as scientific research into concussion and head trauma deepens, further initiatives could become available to offer more protection. “I think rugby league is ahead of where it was, as is all sport in general,” he said. “You can’t just pull evidence out of the air, it has to accumulate over years. Every six months is better than the previous six months. The scientific evidence evolves over time and these guards are proof of that.”During the pandemic many UK offices and workplaces closed, allowing their employees to work from home. We’d like to hear from people who took the opportunity to move out of a UK city. Did you buy a home or rent? Were you happy with your decision? Or have you since decided to return? Tell us all about it below. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A public inquiry is to be launched into the death of a woman killed in the 2018 Wiltshire novichok poisonings, the home secretary has announced. The inquiry into Dawn Sturgess’s death will be able to consider sensitive information in secret and allow the judge leading it to examine the role played by the Russian state. In June 2018, Sturgess, 44, and her partner, Charlie Rowley, were poisoned after he found a fake perfume bottle containing novichok. Rowley recovered but Sturgess died. Sturgess’s family had pushed for her inquest, which is being overseen by the life peer Heather Hallett, to be converted into a public inquiry, believing that this would be the best way to get to the truth of what happened. Dawn’s father, Stan Sturgess, said he was pleased at the development. He said: “We welcome the decision, our legal team has worked tirelessly on our behalf and hopefully in the near future we will finally have closure.” The family had been concerned at a suggestion from Home Office lawyers that the full hearing the poisonings might not be heard until 2023. Sturgess said he was pleased at the prospect of it taking place next year. The home secretary, Priti Patel, said on Thursday: “The government is establishing an inquiry after careful consideration of advice from Lady Hallett that this is necessary to permit all relevant evidence to be heard. This is an important step in ensuring that the family of Dawn Sturgess get the answers they need. The current inquest will be adjourned after the establishment of the inquiry. “The inquiry’s investigations will be a matter for the chair. As the sponsoring department, the Home Office will provide support and ensure that the inquiry has the resources that it needs.” Patel said she was keen to keep the Sturgess family at the heart of the inquiry and has written to them explaining her decision. Rowley also welcomed the move. He said: “We want to find out as much as we can about how and why Dawn died. I’m pleased there’ll be a public inquiry.” Rowley continues to suffer ill health after his exposure to novichok. Patel said the inquiry would undertaken by Hallett alone as chair. In a letter to Hallett, Patel said: “There are a number of administrative and security details our teams will need to resolve, but I hope you will agree that we should aim to establish the inquiry as soon as is reasonably possible in 2022. “My officials will do all they can to support you throughout the course of the inquiry. Like you, I am keen that this inquiry keeps the family of Ms Sturgess at its heart in its pursuit to understand how she died.” Hallett welcomed the announcement and said: “My team will now work through all the necessary arrangements so the inquiry can be set up early in 2022.” The former Russian spy Sergei Skripal was the target of a novichok attack in Salisbury in March 2018. He and his daughter, Yulia, and a police officer, DS Nick Bailey, were poisoned but survived. It is hoped that an inquiry may help to explain the gap between the attack on the Skripals and the poisoning of Sturgess. At a preliminary inquest hearing in September, a Sturgess family lawyer argued that there was a wide public interest in investigating the circumstances, especially after a claim by the senior national coordinator for counter-terrorism policing, Dean Haydon, that thousands of people could have been killed in the poisonings, which the UK government blames on the Russian state.Support for populist sentiment in Europe has fallen sharply over the past three years, according to a major YouGov survey, with markedly fewer people agreeing with key statements designed to measure it. The YouGov-Cambridge Globalism Project’s annual populism tracker, produced with the Guardian, found populist beliefs in broadly sustained decline in 10 European countries, prompting its authors to suggest the wider electoral appeal of some may have peaked. Political scientists said the latest results showed “a clear pattern of decreasing support for populism”, but added that the results could mask a higher degree of radicalisation among populist voters and that the pandemic could be a factor. In France, the percentage of adults who said they believed that “the will of the people should be the highest principle in this country’s politics”, a key populist tenet, fell from 66% in 2019 to 62% in 2020 and 55% in 2021, the survey found. Other EU countries showing the same sharp fall included Germany (66%, 63%, 61%), Denmark (61%, 56%, 50%), Spain (75%, 68%, 65%), Italy (72%, 71%, 64%) and Poland (80%, 71%, 65%), as well – outside the bloc – as Britain (66%, 60%, 56%). Populism, which frames politics as a battle between ordinary people and corrupt elites, has grown rapidly as a political force, with support for populist parties in national elections across Europe surging from 7% to more than 25% in 20 years. Populist leaders mainly on the far right – Italy’s Matteo Salvini, France’s Marine Le Pen, Viktor Orbán in Hungary or Sweden’s Jimmie Åkesson – have flourished, and populist parties are, or have been, in government in several EU countries. Support for view that “my country is divided between ordinary people and the corrupt elites who exploit them” slid from 61% to 49% in France, and was also down in Germany (54%-46%), Sweden (42%-36%), Denmark (29%-15), Spain (70%-65%), Italy (65%-54%), Poland (73%-63%) and the UK (58% to 54%). Agreement with the statement that “a lot of important information is deliberately concealed from the public out of self-interest” was also lower over the three years, by between six and 17 percentage points across the same countries – although it remained high in some, such as Spain (79%). Matthijs Rooduijn, a political sociologist at the University of Amsterdam and expert on populism, said the survey, of more than 24,000 voters in 22 different countries, showed “a clear drop” in support for populist ideas over the past three years. But while it suggested that voters, on average, appeared to be becoming more moderate and less receptive of populist ideas, “the small, very vocal group of people, who vote for populist radical right parties, for instance, may have become more radical – more, rather than less, populist”. Rooduijn also said some of the statements might tap into anti-expert and anti-elite sentiments that had been dampened by the coronavirus pandemic, which – while it had pushed minority groups such as anti-vaxxers to become more extreme – had tended to reinforce trust in science and, to some extent, governments. “That’s already changing,” he said. Despite concerns about the growing prevalence of conspiracy theories during the Covid-19 pandemic, several countries in the study also showed a sustained slump overall in the proportion of people espousing conspiracist sentiments. Support for the belief that “the power of a few special interests prevents our country from making progress”, for example, fell from 72% to 58% in France, also shedding five percentage points in Germany, nine in Sweden, 15 in Denmark, 10 in Spain, 12 in Italy, and 11 in Poland and the UK. While several non-EU countries, including Brazil and Mexico, showed a similar pattern, others, including India, Thailand and most particularly the US – where there was little change in overall levels of agreement with any of the survey’s statements over three years of annual polling – did not. The authors of the survey, which was carried out in August and September, suggested that this may mean “certain forms of anti-establishment discontent” were more solidly entrenched in those countries. But the fact that between 2019 and 2021 no significant trends had emerged that showed populist sentiment heading the other way “perhaps suggests the kudos of populist-style beliefs has already peaked in various parts of the world”, they noted. The survey again found that Denmark stood out as something of a bastion of anti-populist sentiment, with strikingly low levels of agreement with most of the statements compared with other countries. Only 8% of respondents in Denmark, for example, agreed with the statement “you can tell if a person is good or bad from their politics”, 18% with the view that special interests were preventing progress, and 15% with the sentiment that their country was divided into ordinary people and corrupt elites. The survey also showed that when it comes to the practical consequences of a populist approach to politics – such as the UK’s Brexit vote – many Europeans tended to take a more neutral view. Asked how Britain’s departure from the EU had impacted the the economic situation and unity of the bloc, respondents in the 10 European countries (including the UK) that were surveyed mostly said it had made no overall difference either way. Notably, however, they were more likely to take the negative view than positive one. Only 6% in Germany, for example, thought Brexit had made the remaining member states of the EU more united, compared with a fifth (20%) saying it did the opposite. Similarly, 37% in Spain believed that Brexit had hurt the EU economically, compared with just 8% thinking it had left the bloc better off. The survey was carried out between 4 August and 21 September with representative samples of more than 1,000 people in 10 European countries: Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Hungary, Poland, Spain, Sweden, UK, and 17 other countries including Australia, US, Brazil, Mexico, Turkey, Russia, China, Japan and South Africa.We would like to hear from people who decided to get their first tattoo over the age of 65. Why did you decide to get it done? What held you back when you were younger? Does the tattoo have a special meaning? Tell us all about it below. Share your experiences . Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.One of the most peculiar monuments in the UK is about to get a little stranger when it is spectacularly lit up to be seen from as far as 20 miles away and accompanied by a blasting soundtrack including music by the 12th century mystic Hildegard of Bingen. Penshaw Monument is a 20-metre replica of the ancient Greek temple of Hephaestus built by the Victorians on a hill near Sunderland. It was intended to commemorate John Lambton, the first earl of Durham, a Whig politician whose nickname was Radical Jack. This weekend it elegantly commemorates the victims of Covid-19 as part of Lumiere in Durham, the UK’s largest light festival. The work, A Telling of Light, is by artists Elaine Buckholtz and Ian Winters and is a huge technical challenge involving about 140,000 separate points of light, in tribute to the UK death toll from coronavirus. The light show is accompanied by monastic music watched from a field near to the monument, a National Trust property on the border of County Durham. The soundtrack includes music written by Hildegard, considered one of the first identifiable composers in the history of western music who spent most of her life in a hilltop monastery in the Rhineland. Buckholtz said they were offering visitors a place to mourn but also to be inspired. “Sometimes it looks like a chariot in the sky. It feels like it’s not reachable, but it’s there. For me it speaks to the relationship between life and death.” She said the intention had been to create a sublime, communal experience. “No one has been able to mourn together. Everyone has been separate. A lot of people haven’t even had a funeral so we wanted to create a place for people to be together and honour their losses.” Lumiere has been staged in Durham every two years since 2009. It returns on Thursday with 37 works including, for the first time, six dotted across the county. One is Penshaw. Others include Solitude by Finnish artist Kari Kola at Finchale Priory, a place which was essentially a holiday retreat for the medieval monks of Durham. In Seaham marina car park Tim Etchells will delight or infuriate onlookers with a large LED text sculpture that reads “GO WITH THE FLOW/SWIM AGAINST THE TIDE”. The festival is enormously popular even if it is a huge logistical challenge for organisers and organisations in Durham itself. Pedestrians without a ticket will not be able to get in to the centre and everywhere there are signs telling motorists to expect delays. This year there has been divine help with Durham Cathedral moving its evensong to an earlier time to accommodate a vast, beautiful Mexican Day of the Dead-inspired work projected on to its facade. Elsewhere, visitors to the city who need a free ticket – all 160,000 of which were snapped up straight away – might see small pairs of illuminated magpies (two for joy) dotted around the city on lamp-posts and signs; or a disconcerting cluster of enormous hinged desk lamps on the waterside at Framwellgate. “Everyone who looks at them says: ‘I want one,’” said Helen Marriage, director of Artichoke, which puts on Lumiere. Marriage said Lumiere succeeded in exhibiting challenging work to audiences who might not automatically think of going to a gallery. “The community does feel like they own it. If we were to say we’re not doing it any more I think it would be like saying Christmas isn’t coming any more. People expect it now.” Increased security measures have been introduced including bag searches, armed police and steel barriers. The UK terror alert level has been lifted to “severe” after the explosion outside a hospital in Liverpool. The festival costs about £3m but the economic boost to the region is huge. It will also help County Durham’s bid to be the UK city of culture in 2025. Marriage said that at times it felt like a wonderful social experiment. “Can you take a city and put art into its daily life? One thing I’m preoccupied by is who owns public space? Is it only ever for shopping and work and traffic. My contention is that we can do so much more with it and we can bring people together.” Marriage said the lockdowns and everything moving online over the last year had made her worry it might be the death of Lumiere. “Actually I think the reverse is true. People are so desperate for real experiences … I think there will be a resurgence in things people do together.”Courtney Lawes will captain England against South Africa on Saturday in the absence of the injured Owen Farrell while Joe Marchant will make a first appearance of the autumn on the right wing. Eddie Jones has also been forced into selecting a rookie front row with Bevan Rodd and Jamie Blamire making only their second England starts with Joe Marler, who is not due to come out of isolation until later on Thursday after testing positive for Covid-19, named on the bench. Lawes was the favourite for the captaincy, having led the side in the victory over Tonga on 6 November when Farrell was also absent, but Marchant’s selection on the right wing is somewhat of a surprise. As expected, Marcus Smith continues at fly-half with Manu Tuilagi reverting to inside-centre and Henry Slade retaining the No13 jersey. Rather than opt for Adam Radwan or Max Malins on the wing, however, Jones has opted for Marchant, who normally plies his trade at centre, in an echo of last Saturday’s selections for the win over Australia. Blamire was expected to get the nod with Jamie George missing through injury with Nic Dolly in line for a Test debut from the bench. The 23-year-old Newcastle hooker has made just three Premiership starts, however. Though he has six tries from his four England appearances to date, the world champions – who boast a formidable front row – will prove a considerable step up. South Africa significantly outgunned England at the scrum in the 2019 World Cup final and with Rodd also making only his second Test appearance, Jones is having to put his faith in inexperience. It explains why Marler, who will not be able to train with the squad until Friday, has been included among the replacements. Elsewhere, Kyle Sinckler starts at tighthead in the two sides’ first meeting since he was knocked out in the early stages of the 2019 final while Maro Itoje and Jonny Hill continue at lock. The back row is unchanged with Sam Underhill and Tom Curry continuing at blindside. Ben Youngs is once more at scrum-half with Jonny May remaining on the left wing and the in-form Freddie Steward continuing at full-back. Joining Marler, Malins and Dolly on the bench are Will Stuart, Charlie Ewels, Sam Simmonds, Alex Dombrandt and Raffi Quirke. Jones said: “This is our biggest game of the season and the final game of the autumn campaign and we want to finish with a bang. We’ve been really pleased with the preparation this week and how the team has continued to develop over the past month. Now we want to put on our best performance this autumn in front of a capacity 82,000 crowd at Twickenham.”The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, has insisted she does not use her financial power over the BBC to put pressure on the broadcaster’s news coverage, after writing a tweet aimed at the corporation’s political editor, Laura Kuenssberg. Kuenssberg had shared the views of an anonymous Tory MP who said Boris Johnson’s authority was “evaporating” and that he “looked weak and sounded weak” at a meeting of backbenchers. Dorries, the cabinet minister currently negotiating the BBC’s future funding deal, publicly replied on Wednesday night: “Laura, I very much like and respect you, but we both know, that text is ridiculous, although nowhere near as ridiculous as the person – obviously totally desperate for your attention – who sent it.” The Labour MP Jo Stevens raised the issue in the House of Commons on Thursday after other press claims were made that Dorries was unhappy with a recent Today programme interview with Johnson. Stevens said: “Would she agree with me it is highly inappropriate for a government minister overseeing licence negotiations to seek to influence editorial decisions, including how the prime minister was interviewed, and using the threat of reducing BBC licence funding while doing so?” Dorries replied: “I did not rebuke Laura Kuenssberg, someone who is maybe the best in the business … Some members opposite seem to have difficulty understanding a composition of 240 characters. The tweet was completely misinterpreted, I was not rebuking Laura Kuenssberg and never would.” The minister also said she was “close to reaching an agreement” with the BBC over the cost of the licence fee between 2022 and 2027, which is expected to force the public broadcaster to make further cuts. She also reaffirmed that ministers would start to look at a new funding model for the BBC, amid growing expectations that the fee for watching live television will be replaced with a new system from 2027. Dorries also oversees the recruitment process for the chair of the media regulator Ofcom, and will ultimately have the final choice on whether to give the job to the former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre. She batted away criticism from Labour about the individuals on the interview panel and tweaks to the job description, saying: “The appointments process follows a due process and is in line with the governance code for public appointments.”Before Brexit, Jamie Shackell placed about 500 au pairs from mainland Europe with British host families every year. She hasn’t placed a single one since December. She says her agency, Busy Bee Au Pairs , is now essentially “nonexistent”. Shackell – who is also the chair of the British Au Pair Agencies Association (Bapaa ) – says it is the same for other similar agencies. At one point, there were about 30 members . “ Now, there’s only a handful of us left,” she says. “A lot have shut up shop.” Occasionally, someone from the EU with pre-settled status, will look for a placement. “Then we’ve got the agencies that are left scrabbling after her or him, as well as families that are looking independently,” says Shackell. Au pairing is intended to offer a unique cultural exchange. A young person – usually under 27 and, pre-Brexit, overwhelmingly from elsewhere in Europe – is welcomed into the family to provide childcare, while learning English and experiencing British culture. “Why would a British national want to go and live in another British national’s home?” says Shackell. “There’s no benefit for them; there’s no cultural enrichment.” For families who employ au pairs, one of the benefits is having a (hopefully) fun person around to give their children an insight into another country and language. Another is having someone to help with childcare without having to pay the larger salary of a nanny. Au pairs are usually given about £100 a week, on top of food and accommodation. They are often given money towards English lessons, too. In return, they are expected to provide about 30 hours of childcare each week and help with light housework. Some of the families with whom Shackell deals – and she gets calls daily – are “desperate – especially now that many of them have been called back into the office”. Au pairs particularly suit single parents, those without family nearby and those who do shift work (who may find it difficult to arrange regular childcare). “I know one family, with the parents working in the police and the NHS – the mother has had to reduce her working hours,” Shackell says. The loss of au pairs seems to affect working women disproportionately, she adds. There is another knock-on effect. According to a Bapaa survey, there were about 43,000 au pairs in the UK before the pandemic. “They would come to the UK, bringing money with them, and would spend their pocket money here. They would attend language-school courses, and many of those have now closed or reduced courses. People have lost their jobs off the back of that.” She says she has heard of au pairs who enter the country on visitor visas and work for families illegally. She also knows of at least one who, after this was discovered, was held at a detention centre before being deported. Shackell says Bapaa has been campaigning for the government to let in au pairs from the EU, but the government has said it won’t introduce a dedicated au pair route. Including the EU in the Youth Mobility Scheme – which allows young people from countries including Canada, Australia and New Zealand to work in the UK for up to two years – would ease the problem, says Shackell. “It’s already there; it’s not as if they have to create the visa. All they have to do is add European countries to it,” she says. “Because it’s a visa that’s valid for two years, it doesn’t encourage migration, but what it will provide is a time‑limited period for those who want to travel and have the experience.” Coming to the UK to be an au pair is a chance for young people to “travel during their formative years”, says Shackell. But stopping them coming means both parties lose out. “I feel it’s building barriers. The whole existence of au pairing, which started after the second world war, was to improve relationships with Europe. Now, it appears that the government is trying to destroy that.”In the aftermath of Keir Starmer’s first proper conference speech as Labour leader, questions about the party’s resurrection continue to swirl. Nationwide polls on Westminster voting intentions show Labour closing a yawning gap with the Tories, but it’s unclear whether this is indicative of a structural shift in political preferences or simply the result of a scandal-driven news cycle fuelling negative sentiment towards the government. While doubts persist as to whether Starmer has done enough to reconnect with the party’s erstwhile white, working-class base, the party’s troubles extend beyond estrangement from this critical demographic. A mounting body of anecdotal evidence suggests that British Indians – who, along with most other ethnic minorities, have long been core Labour voters – are defecting in sizeable numbers. A shift in the British Indian diaspora’s voting patterns would be significant. Six decades ago, India was the third most common country of birth for people born outside the United Kingdom; by 2011, it had become the most common. The Indian diaspora is young, fast-growing, relatively well educated and one of Britain’s highest-earning ethnic groups. Despite the growing prominence of British Indians, there have been few studies of their political preferences. To better understand their partisan leanings, in partnership with YouGov we have conducted a new, nationally representative survey of nearly 800 British Indian eligible voters. We have found that while British Indians continue to display a preference for Labour, the party’s historical advantage has been eroded. In 2010, a survey identified British Indian support for Labour at 61%, while 24% supported the Tories. Fast forward to today, and our polling suggests that just four in 10 British Indians identify with the Labour party, while three in 10 support the Conservatives, and around one in 10 identify with other parties. If a snap election were held tomorrow, British Indians would be important swing voters. Among the diaspora, Labour would enjoy a 10-point advantage over the Conservatives in a hypothetical general election, but a significant minority (15%) remains undecided. While the Tories have much to cheer, Labour’s decline has not automatically translated into gains for the Conservatives. Indeed, evidence from the British Election Study (BES) suggests that British Indian support for the Conservatives has plateaued. Instead of joining the Tories, a rising share of respondents support other parties or identify as “undecided”. Nevertheless, Labour’s losses among the Indian diaspora are real and unique among south Asian minority communities: BES data do not suggest a corresponding decline in Bangladeshi or Pakistani support for Labour. Of course, the British Indian community is not a monolith any more than any other. Two demographic factors – age and religion – are especially crucial in understanding their partisan preferences. Younger British Indians (between the ages of 18 and 29) are the strongest supporters of Labour, preferring it over the Conservatives by a margin of 54% to 21%. Among those aged 50 and above, however, Labour’s advantage is a mere two points (37% v 35%). Further, British Indians’ views are highly polarised on religious grounds. A majority of Muslim and Sikh respondents would vote Labour in a snap election, but among Christians and Hindus the Conservatives would be the most popular party. Given Hindus’ relative demographic weight, Labour’s problem with British Indians is largely driven by the flight of Hindu voters from its ranks. How does one understand this important shift in British Indian political behaviour? At least three major drivers merit mention: economics, perception of party “brands” and attitudes toward India. British Indians, much like the rest of the country, are preoccupied with the economy and healthcare. Though disappointed with the record of Boris Johnson’s government, many are also critical of Labour policies. Indeed, the most common reason that British Indians do not identify with the Labour party is the perception that it is too influenced by socialism. While respondents do not necessarily perceive a clear partisan bias in the overall representation of British Indian interests, religion again serves as a dividing line. Four in 10 Hindus report that the Conservative party is “closer” to British Indians; similar proportions of Sikhs and Muslims say the same about Labour. In turn, a majority of all respondents readily identify Labour as most proximate to other large south Asian minorities – who also happen to be predominantly Muslim. It’s also likely that the major parties’ stances on India are shaping partisan attitudes. Foreign policy is not an electoral priority for British Indians, and few report UK-India ties or other defence and security issues as major influences on voting. However, foreign policy positions can affect a party’s overall brand. Following the decision of the Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) government to abruptly end Jammu and Kashmir’s constitutional autonomy in 2019, the Labour party passed an emergency motion calling for international observers in the state. The decision divided British Indians, particularly Hindus. It is not a coincidence that British Hindus hold the most unfavourable views of Pakistan, another factor that might bind them to the Tories, who are less reliant on votes from the Pakistani diaspora. Looking ahead, two competing structural trends will determine how the community tilts: generational change and immigration. Given the leftward inclination of young British Indians, as their ranks swell, Labour’s weakening position could improve again. Promoting leadership that resonates with British Indians would help, particularly given the community’s dismal views of Boris Johnson. However, if there is a prime minister-in-waiting poised to entice British Indian voters, our survey suggests it is the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, not Keir Starmer. On the other hand, immigration may counterintuitively hurt Labour’s standing. Many newer arrivals from India and newly naturalised citizens appear to lean Conservative. In this context, India’s polarised political environment – propelled by the BJP’s rising tide of Hindu nationalism – could have impacts beyond the country’s borders, bringing the UK and India together in a most unexpected way. This article was co-written by Devesh Kapur, a professor at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies, and Caroline Duckworth and Milan Vaishnav, who work at the South Asia Program at the Carnegie Endowment for International PeaceThe Arizona senator Kyrsten Sinema, who memorably posted a photo of herself wearing a ring that said “Fuck Off”, thinks it is offensive that the media keeps discussing her sartorial choices. Sinema has become a household name in recent months because of her resistance to Joe Biden’s Build Back Better agenda, but her flamboyant attire and ever-changing style has also helped keep the senator in the news. She’s inspired headlines such as Kyrsten Sinema’s Style Keeps Us Guessing (The New York Times) and Take note, AOC – Kyrsten Sinema’s bad style actually makes a statement (The New York Post). “It’s very inappropriate,” Sinema told Politico on Wednesday. “I wear what I want because I like it. It’s not a news story, and it’s no one’s business. It’s not helpful to have [coverage] be positive or negative. It also implies that somehow women are dressing for someone else.” It doesn’t matter whether you’re a senator or a schoolkid, female clothing is unfairly policed. Professional women often find themselves getting scrutinized for their fashion choices in ways that their male counterparts are not. But does that mean, as Sinema seems to be suggesting, that it is automatically sexist or inappropriate to comment on what a female politician is wearing? Of course not. Fashion has always been used to make political statements and there are plenty of examples where a woman’s clothing or appearance is a legitimate news story. When Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez was sworn in as congresswoman, for example, she wore all-white to honour the suffragettes and Shirley Chisholm. In this instance, she was very much dressing for someone else. Style can have substance. One of the most famous examples of this is Madeleine Albright who used jewelry to communicate her views when she was secretary of state. “I found that jewelry had become part of my personal diplomatic arsenal,” Albright has said. “While President George HW Bush had been known for saying ‘Read my lips’, I began urging colleagues and reporters to ‘Read my pins.’” Sinema, who rarely speaks to reporters, hasn’t explicitly urged anyone to “read her pins”, but it often seems like she wants people to pay attention to her wardrobe. Last year she wore a bright purple wig on the Senate floor; after voting she pointed at her wig, just to make sure everyone knew it was her. “Kyrsten is continuing to call attention to the need for all of us to stay home as much as possible and practice social distancing – which she is diligently practicing, including from her hair salon,” her spokeswoman later said. So are her fashion choices no one’s business, as she told Politico, or is she using them to make a political statement? I’m confused. But that’s the Sinema effect: she’s the former Green party-aligned activist who ran on a progressive policy platform then, as soon as she got into power, became one of the biggest roadblocks to getting any progressive policies passed. She’s nominally a Democrat, but is so chummy with the GOP that the Republican senator John Cornyn has said he “would be surprised if Republicans tried to unseat” Sinema in 2024. (He’s since walked that back a little.) She’s nothing if not inconsistent. One reason that so much attention is paid to the senator’s clothes is that people are desperate to understand what (if anything) she stands for, and clothes seem to be one of the main ways she expresses herself. Sinema seems to have forgotten that she is a public servant and that part of her job is communicating with the people she represents. She doesn’t hold public events for her Arizona constituents; she doesn’t communicate with the local progressive groups who got her elected or even her previous allies; she rarely gives interviews and, when she does speak to the press, says little of substance. The New York Times has described her as “one of the most elusive senators on Capitol Hill”; the Politico piece noted that “even after an extended interview, the first-term Democrat holds onto the air of mystery that’s become a signature part of her political brand”. Sinema owes no one an explanation for how she dresses, but there are plenty of other things she owes us all an explanation for. Like whether all the money big pharma has been sending her way has anything to do with her U-turn on drug prices. Sinema campaigned on lowering drug prices and making healthcare more affordable in her 2018 Senate race; as a senator she had the opportunity to help Biden do just that but instead was instrumental in massively watering down drug pricing reforms. She hasn’t given the public any details regarding this shift – just as she hasn’t given the public any meaningful details on why she is raking in so much money from multilevel marketing businesses (often criticized as pyramid schemes). If Sinema wants people to focus on her work instead of her wigs, then maybe she should remember who she is supposed to be working for. If Sinema starts providing much-needed explanations about what she stands for, there might be rather less talk about the thigh-high boots she’s standing in.People tend to watch Strictly Come Dancing for one of two things: the dancing, or to relish the latest casualties of the “Strictly curse”. But forbidden relationships have taken a backseat this year, with fans instead fixated on the partnership between Rose Ayling-Ellis – the first deaf contestant in the show’s history – and partner Giovanni Pernice. Many viewers needed educating on how the actor would be able to compete without hearing the music. Ayling-Ellis explained that she could hear the beat, as well as feeling the vibrations from the live band through the dancefloor at Elstree studios. And, week after week, she has not only defied expectations but educated the public in ways you might not expect from a sequin-covered, spray-tan-heavy Saturday night TV show. Ayling-Ellis and Pernice – who are currently tipped to win the series – have not only wowed with their skill but also their storytelling. On last week’s show, the pair danced a typically strong routine to Symphony by Clean Bandit and Zara Larsson. Halfway through, Ayling-Ellis covered Pernice’s ears and the music turned to silence as they danced on. From that point on, a technically impressive Strictly routine had become something much more powerful. Rose took Giovanni by the hand and led him into her world – with no sound but, as before, joy. The tribute to the deaf community was praised by viewers and judges alike, landing them a near-perfect score of 39 out of 40. Elsewhere, in week five they performed a Viennese waltz, incorporating sign language into their routine. Searches for sign language increased by 488% as a result and the British Sign Language Courses website saw a 2,844% increase in signups for free trials of their training programmes the following day. Having a deaf contestant on the show has not only broadened the horizons of the viewers, but of those involved with the series, too. The show’s producers have had deaf awareness training and learned some sign language, as have some of the professional dancers (Gorka Marquez was spotted in the early episodes signing “applause” instead of clapping, which was soon adopted by the rest of his co-stars). Ayling-Ellis has a sign-language interpreter present, and on BBC iPlayer there’s now an option to watch the programme with BSL interpretation (previously the only option on the programme was subtitles). And it has been particularly heartwarming to watch resident lothario Pernice have his mind blown in real time at his partner’s determination and infectious positivity. Her growth on the dancefloor is as lovely to watch as his own growth as a person. In many ways, Strictly has been quietly pioneering in terms of representation for some time. Former contestants include Paralympians Jonnie Peacock, Lauren Steadman and Will Bayley, and JJ Chalmers, the TV presenter who was injured in a bomb blast in Afghanistan. In 2018, the ballroom pros danced alongside the Candoco Dance Company, made up of disabled and non-disabled dancers, and use same-sex pairings. Indeed, over the past few years it has begun to fully represent its LGBTQ+ following, too. Last season, former boxer Nicola Adams and her partner Katya Jones made history as the first same-sex couple to take part in the UK series. The same year, an opening number saw Pernice, Marquez and Johannes Radebe perform a Priscilla, Queen of the Desert-inspired dance dressed in drag. The year before, we saw the show’s first same-sex routine, as Radebe and fellow professional Graziano Di Prima danced to Emeli Sandé’s Shine. If for some reason Ayling-Ellis misses out on winning the Glitterball, then consistent high scorers John Whaite and Johannes Radebe – the first male partnership on the show – are certainly contenders. And to think, Whaite initially asked to dance with a woman on the show, fearing backlash from viewers. Representation is important, but Strictly goes a step further by integrating and celebrating its diverse contestants. After their groundbreaking routine, Ayling-Ellis praised Pernice for his choreography. “I feel very thankful for your determination to make this dance the most positive, happy dance it can be, because, being deaf, there’s nothing wrong [with it], it’s such a joy to be deaf,” she said. And oh what a joy she is to watch. • This article was amended on 22 November 2021. An earlier version misnamed Lauren Steadman as “Laura”.Dennis Rodman says visits to gay and drag clubs helped inspire him during a career that ended with five NBA titles and a place in the basketball hall of fame. After winning two NBA titles with the Detroit Pistons, Rodman says he hit a low and considered taking his own life in 1993 after the departure of the team’s coach, Chuck Daly, who he saw as a father figure. A move to the San Antonio Spurs helped and he says it was there that he was helped by meeting people living on their own terms. “In San Antonio I started going to gay clubs,” he told GQ in an interview published online on Thursday. “I started going to drag clubs. I started bringing drag queens to games.” He added: “When you talk to people in the gay community, someone who does drag, something like that, they’re so fucking happy. They hold their head up so high every fucking day, man. They’re not ashamed of shit. They’re not trying to prove anything, they’re just out there living their lives.” Rodman would often attend events in drag himself, and he told GQ that his experiences in San Antonio helped him remember a time when his sisters would dress him in their clothes when he was a boy. “I guess it kind of made me have a sense of awareness of, like, man, I used to dress like this as a kid,” he said. “Wearing a dress made me feel good. You know?” Rodman was thrust into the public spotlight again in 2020 as part of the wildly popular Netflix series, The Last Dance, which profiled Michael Jordan’s final season with the Chicago Bulls. Rodman told GQ he always felt he was a sharp contrast to Jordan. “You got the greatest basketball player on the planet [Jordan], the second greatest in Scottie Pippen, and then you got [me] the devil,” he said. Rodman told GQ he is still friends with the leader of North Korea, Kim Jong-un. He was famously mentioned as a broker between Kim and Donald Trump in the lead-up to their summit in 2018. He told GQ that he did not know about civil rights abuses in North Korea until he first visited. “I thought it was like, well, North Korea, I’m going over there to sign autographs and stuff like that, take pictures,” he said of his visit, which came about due to Kim’s love of the Bulls. “I didn’t know it was all that until I got over there. I was like, ‘Oh, shit.’ Nobody prepared me for that.”One of the biggest landowners in Wales has banned trail hunting after a court ruled that a leading huntsman had encouraged the practice as a smokescreen for illegal foxhunting. Natural Resources Wales (NRW), a government-sponsored body, said it could not be sure that trail hunting was not still being used as a “cover” for illegal activity so had decided to ban it completely. The decision was welcomed by hunt saboteurs and animal rights campaigners who say the conviction in October of Mark Hankinson, the director of the Masters of the Foxhounds Association (MFHA), showed that trail hunting was a “fiction”. Hankinson was found guilty of encouraging or assisting others to commit an offence over his comments in two webinars in front of an audience of more than 100 MFHA members. In trail hunting, devised after the Hunting Act banned the hunting of foxes with dogs, a “trail layer” goes out ahead of the hunt, dragging a rag coated in an animal scent. Huntsmen cast the hounds to this scent, and follow it to the end of the trail. Dominic Driver, the head of land stewardship for NRW, said: “The outcome of the court case against a senior leader of the MFHA has resulted in a loss of confidence in the organisation’s ability to ensure its activities are carried out within the law and terms of its agreement. “In order to assure ourselves properly that trail hunting on our estate wasn’t being used as a cover for illegal activity, we would have to invest in skills and resources that we currently don’t have, to police it properly. “Given what has historically been a minor use of the land we manage, this does not represent good use of our limited resources. All trail hunting activity on the NRW-managed estate will end with immediate effect.” Lee Moon, spokesperson for the Hunt Saboteurs Association, said: “The fallout from the leaked webinars continues and these landowners now realise they’ve been duped by the hunting community. It’s only a matter of time before more large landowners follow suit leading to the loss of millions of acres of land and the total demise of some hunts.” Chris Luffingham, deputy chief executive of the League Against Cruel Sports, said: “For such a major landowner like Natural Resources Wales to permanently end trail hunting on its land is hugely significant.” The League is urging other major landowners such as Forestry England, United Utilities, the Church of England, the crown estate, the Duchy of Cornwall, local authorities, the national parks authorities, and the Ministry of Defence to permanently end hunting on their property. NRW was formed in April 2013, largely taking over the functions of the Countryside Council for Wales, Forestry Commission Wales and the Environment Agency in Wales.An Indian comedian is facing an onslaught of criticism and calls for police to investigate over a comedy monologue that spoke of the country’s contradictions on women’s safety, religion, Covid and politics. The routine performed on a US tour by Vir Das, one of India’s most popular comedians, went viral in India this week after it spoke of “two Indias” - conflicting elements of his own country that, he felt, had an element of the absurd. “I come from an India where we worship women during the day and gang rape them at night,” Das who has had several Netflix specials, told an audience at the sold-out show in Washington DC last Saturday. He went on: “I come from an India where we take pride in being vegetarian, and yet run over the farmers who grow our vegetables.” His routine finished with him speaking of the pride he had for India and asking for the audience to raise a cheer for his motherland. After the video was uploaded to YouTube, it quickly went viral across social media. The polarised responses pointed – just as Das had – to a divided India , where freedom of speech is now regularly clashing with hardline nationalist sentiments, and the space for political comedy is shrinking. Aditya Jha, a spokesperson for the ruling Bharatiya Janata party (BJP), filed a police complaint against Das for “insulting the country”. “These derogatory statements against women and India are inflammatory. They were made in the US and malign the image of our country internationally. I want police to conduct an investigation,” said Jha. The police have not yet registered the case. The Mumbai BJP secretary, Vivekanand Gupta, also contacted Delhi police to request that a case be filed against Das for “hurting the feelings of nationalists”. The BJP chief minister of Madhya Pradesh said that Das was now banned from performing in the state. The outrage was not contained to the BJP. A leader from the opposition Congress party, Abhishek Singhvi, wrote on Twitter that “vilifying the nation as a whole in front of the world is just not done”. Vehemently pro-government Bollywood actor Kangana Ranaut, who is known for rarely holding back, said that “such creative work targeting an entire race is soft terrorism... strict action must be taken against such criminals”. Others, however, celebrated Das’s routine as an incisive and satirical take on India. Congress MP Shashi Tharoor said that Das was “standing up” for the citizens of India. Another opposition MP, Mahua Moitra, thanked Das for exposing the two Indias - “one having a laugh and the other filing complaints with the police”. The outcry prompted Das to issue a clarification on his monologue. “The video is a satire about the duality of two very separate India’s that do different things. Like any nation has light and dark, good and evil within it. None of this is a secret,” he wrote in a statement posted online. He added: “I take great pride in my country and I carry that pride across the world.” For many on India’s comedy circuit, the reaction was a further sign of how comedy is facing the threat of a crackdown – which is now spreading beyond the country’s borders. . While the industry initially emerged in India as a vehemently anti-establishment platform, comedians now spoke of their fears of even touching upon politics and religion in their routine in recent years. “There is no space for political satire in this country anymore,” said Vishesh Arora, a comedy manager and booker who runs tours across India. “Comedians who have any political content are struggling these days, getting two or three shows cancelled every month. Venues are refusing to host certain comedians and comedians are even scared to improvise on stage anymore in case something they say goes viral and they get police cases filed against them.” In January, Munawar Faruqui, a Muslim comedian, was arrested and detained for almost a month for a joke he did not even tell, after he was accused of hurting religious sentiments and insulting Hindu gods. Despite Faruqui’s subsequent release, his shows have repeatedly been cancelled after threats from rightwing groups, including a recent show in Goa where 500 people threatened to set themselves on fire if he was allowed to go on. Arora said it was only in the last three or four years that he had begun to see comedy become a target. “Vir knows India, so I don’t think this reaction would come as a surprise to him,” added Arora. “But he is brave for going out there and saying it anyway.” Das had been one of the few comedians to jump to Faruqui’s defence earlier this year. “The system is not just telling comedians what they can joke about, it’s also telling you what you can laugh at,” wrote Das on Twitter. “The main target isn’t our pen, it’s your throat.”When I heard there was an enormous Animal Crossing update on the way, I was as unnerved as I was excited. I wanted to go back to my island, sure; Kissing was a tiny paradise I’d painstakingly curated, hour by hour, in the depths of last year’s lockdowns – but had been avoiding since January. For the past 11 months I’ve let the place go to seed, missing in-game events and limited-edition items and, most importantly, ignoring the villagers who inhabit Kissing. Dom, the first creature on the land, a sheep who likes sports – how was he? What about Sprinkles, a blue penguin who wants to be a pop star? I’ve been navigating my return to real-life society very slowly, and I know from experience that when left alone for too long, the villagers of Animal Crossing are notorious for laying on the guilt. The update lands. I download it and steel myself for the worst. “You just kinda disappeared.” Sprinkles is happy to see me and angry that I’ve been gone all at once. “Well I guess I’ve finally lost my mind,” begins Gloria, the duck with the bob haircut. “I could swear I see Sarah in front of me.” Ice cold. I am hardly able to take it. My house is full of cockroaches. My island beset by weeds. My animals are furious, alienated or both. But I have work to do, so I dust myself off, offer pumpkins and peaches to my villagers as a mea culpa, and get down to the business of throwing myself entirely into Animal Crossing New Horizons 2.0: Escape from Nook Island. The free update has plenty to discover. The museum now has a coffee shop, The Roost, staffed by the initially stoic Brewster – who grows fond of you the more little coffees you drink with him. You can invite other villagers in for coffee – even characters from Animal Crossing games of the past. Should you have his Amiibo card, Resetti – the furious mole who would call you names if you turned off your console without saving on the GameCube – will sit and drink an espresso as if nothing ever happened. It’s delightful. Speaking of old friends, a personal favourite of mine, Kapp’n, is now offering boat tours to distant islands. Not only can you explore these new spaces but you are taken there on a motorboat by Kapp’n, who will sing you a little song every time. The offshore trips offer a crucial new component of the update: the mining of wriggly little talismans called Gyroids. There are, astonishingly, more than 9,000 new items in the game, of which the Gyroids make up merely a couple of hundred. Harv’s island, previously just a photo studio, is now also a tiny boutique market where the visiting merchants have set up shop permanently. There’s a farming and cooking component, too, meaning I have to fill in my enormous inland lake, thoughtfully decorated with dinosaur skeletons, to turn it into a sugar cane patch. New Horizons has, with this new content, in effect tripled what you can do each day. Every morning, you can perform gentle stretching in the square with your villagers, your shameful 10-month disappearing act forgotten. All of this before we even get offshore, away from the gaze of Thomas Nook and on to a nearby peninsula that marks the start of the paid expansion, (£22.49, or free if you have signed up for the Switch Online Expansion Pass). Happy Home Paradise is a whole different game. The premise is that, in addition to being your island’s resident representative, you have taken on a job offshore in a small, chirpy interior design startup. It is staffed by a manatee called Wardell, a grey langur monkey called Niko and a pink otter called Lottie, your boss. Together you build and design holiday homes for tourists – many, many tourists, each of whom has a specific set of ideas about the kind of holiday home they want. Petri, one of the new villagers, asked me to make him a tea room. He likes science and wears a little lab coat, so I made sure there were IV drips at every chair. Deirdre wants a slice of autumn, so I put up wallpaper that looks like the woods and little heaps of flaming leaves everywhere. Both are so pleased with their holiday homes they clap and cheer. The process of building detailed doll’s houses for the villagers has the potential to be deeply calming, aesthetically pleasing … or deranged. Sometimes it’s all at once, and this cheerful juxtaposition is one of Animal Crossing’s true pleasures. You can give the peninsula a school and a hospital; it uses its own currency and offers unique items to bring back to your own island. This is the perfect sister to Animal Crossing: New Horizons, and there is a delightful interplay between your island and the enormous archipelago on which you eventually become the well-paid, beloved backbone of the Happy Home Paradise enterprise. After a day or two on the archipelago, I returned to Kissing, souvenir chocolates in hand, and found Dom sitting in the sun by the river. I presented him with a chocolate and he immediately asked if he could come and have a holiday home for himself. Not only can we build homes for new villagers, but we can take ours with us, too. It is the perfect example of how Animal Crossing can delight by fusing the familiar with the new. If you, like me, have been holding off on a return to the shores of your island, being mildly shamed by a line or two of dialogue is worth it in the long run. It feels good to be back.The head of Germany’s disease control agency has said the country is heading for a “very bad Christmas season” if drastic measures are not taken to dampen the spread of coronavirus. Lothar Wieler, the head of the Robert Koch Institute (RKI), said that even if measures were taken Germany faced a period of “extremely dismal days” during which hundreds of people would die out of those currently infected. The RKI reported about 65,000 new infections on Thursday, the ninth day in a row that a record for the pandemic has been set. Wieler said the true figure was likely to be at least two or three times as high. He urged Germany to increase its vaccination rate, including of booster doses, ban large gatherings and reduce social contacts. He also recommended the closure of indoor venues such as bars and nightclubs. Angela Merkel, the outgoing chancellor, called the situation “dramatic” earlier in the week, saying the fourth wave was “hitting our country with full force”. Tighter regional regulations have been introduced across Germany in recent days, the most extreme of which limit access to nonessential facilities such as restaurants or fitness centres to people who are vaccinated or can prove they have recovered from the disease. In addition to the documentation, people will have to show a negative test result. In neighbouring Austria, the hardest-hit areas of Upper Austria and Salzburg were preparing for a full-scale lockdown and the government was facing growing calls to extend the move nationally, having introduced a lockdown for just the unvaccinated on Monday. Austria has one of the lowest vaccination rates in Europe, at 66%. France will not follow suit, said president Emmanuel Macron, who argued that the country’s health pass had been successful in curbing the spread of the virus. “Those countries locking down the non-vaccinated are those which have not put in place the [health] pass. Therefore this step is not necessary in France,” Macron told La Voix du Nord newspaper in an interview published late on Thursday. Merkel and the heads of Germany’s 16 states on Thursday agreed to introduce a vaccine mandate for workers in care homes and hospitals. The Bundestag also approved measures that were put forward by the three parties likely to make up the next government requiring people to show proof of vaccination, recovery or a negative Covid test for workplaces and public transport. The three parties, however, decided against extending the legal framework introduced 20 months ago that allowed the federal government to be able to take nationwide action to deal with the pandemic. Instead, Germany’s 16 states will have the power to introduce new protective measures. Critics led by the conservatives (CDU/CSU) of Merkel’s outgoing government said it amounted to a reduction in restrictions, would create a confusing hotchpotch of rules and would give the impression that the virus was under control. The vote was seen as the first big test of the three-way administration’s ability to manage the pandemic when it comes into office next month. In a heated parliamentary debate, the outgoing government was accused of taking its hands off the wheel, particularly over vaccine promotion. Some members of the far-right populist Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) were unable to sit in the main hall of the Bundestag and were required to sit in the public gallery instead as they have refused to show their vaccine or recovery documents or to undergo tests. The rise in cases is put down to a combination of factors including Germany’s vaccine rate of less than 68%, a sluggish booster jab campaign, the Delta variant of the virus and an expeditious return to normal social mixing, as well as to a lack of staff in hospitals, which has led to fewer beds being available on intensive care wards. Swift administration of vaccines to give half of Germans a booster jab by Christmas would mean administering 5.6m doses a week. Under current circumstances, including a lack of vaccine centres, this is viewed as unrealistic. Wieler said ICU units were already close to being overwhelmed, and people needing to be given emergency medical treatment after car accidents, heart attacks and strokes were no longer guaranteed the level of care that would normally be available. “People who won’t get a vaccine need to know this,” he said, adding that 15 million German adults remained unvaccinated. He said those who were being admitted to ICU were far more likely to be unvaccinated and increasingly likely to have to be put on an artificial lung, seen as a last-resort measure. They were also having to stay longer on average compared with earlier in the pandemic, owing to an increase in severity of the disease. “We have never been so unsettled as we are now,” he said. “We’re really facing a very bad Christmas season if we don’t do something about it.” On Thursday the vaccine advisory body Stiko recommended booster jabs for everyone over the age of 18, to be administered six months or less after their last dose. The health ministry said it expected that 9.2 million children between the ages of five and 11 could receive vaccinations before Christmas if, as expected, the Pfizer/BioNTech jab is given approval for that age group from regulatory authorities in the EU and Germany in the coming days.No 10’s plan for tackling MPs’ second jobs has been dismissed as “for the birds” and “not very well thought through” by the head of a cross-party committee looking into the issue. Chris Bryant, the Labour chair of the committee on standards, challenged the deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab’s suggestion that there should be a limit on the amount of hours or money an MP makes. Raab refused to criticise his fellow Tory MP Geoffrey Cox for earning more than £6m as a lawyer since joining parliament, but said the government supported the principle of ensuring politicians do not neglect their constituents. However, Bryant said a proposal passed by the Commons on Wednesday night was a “kneejerk reaction to a crisis created by the prime minister himself”. Downing Street later said that Bryant appeared to have “a misunderstanding of what the prime minister put forward”. Boris Johnson’s spokesperson said: “The committee for standards in public life put forward a set of proposals. What the prime minister did is highlight two which he thought were a viable basis for detailed proposals for further work to be done on a cross-party basis, and that’s now what we’d like to happen.” After weeks of Tory fury at his handling of sleaze allegations, Johnson had sought to draw a line under the issue by finally apologising privately to backbenchers and bowing to pressure to support some form of new rules on MPs’ second jobs. He U-turned after trying to block the suspension of Owen Paterson for an egregious breach of paid lobbying rules. This prompted attention to turn to other MPs with outside financial interests. Cox was found to have received nearly £1m for recent legal work representing the British Virgin Islands over allegations of misgovernance and corruption, and to have taken advantage of Covid rules to cast Commons votes by proxy from the Caribbean. After a public backlash and a dip for the Conservatives in the polls, Johnson backed the Labour leader Keir Starmer’s call for tougher rules on MPs’ second jobs. Starmer said MPs should be barred from taking up any paid work as a parliamentary strategist, adviser or consultant, and put forward a motion proposing this to parliament during an opposition day debate on Wednesday. Johnson tabled an amendment that said MPs should also not take on jobs that prevented them from fulfilling their role serving constituents. Many Tories were privately sceptical of the idea, and Bryant voiced his concern on Thursday morning. “I don’t know what counts as a non-parliamentary duty,” he said, asking whether that would include knocking on doors in an election, or travelling between a constituency and London. He asked “how on earth” the parliamentary standards commissioner would be able to tell if someone had spent too long in another job, suggesting it would be impossible to police. “Every MP should throw themself heart and soul into the business of being an MP,” Bryant said, but he added: “The whole idea that … it’s going to be very easy to come up with some plan in the next few days which says ‘you can do so many hours doing this and so many hours doing that’ is just for the birds, frankly.” Raab, when pressed for details about what limits should be put on the hours worked or money paid for outside jobs, said only that the government had “set out the principles” and that it was up to Bryant’s committee to “firm up the detail”. Bryant’s committee was already nearing the end of a regular review of the rules around second jobs, which are contained in the MPs’ code of conduct. Bryant said an initial report on what changes he and the cross-party committee – which includes Tory MPs and independent lay members – recommend would be produced by the end of November. The draft proposals will then be scrutinised and feedback sought before a final report is produced at the start of next year. • This article was amended on 19 November 2021. Chris Bryant is chair of the committee on standards, not of “the committee for standards in public life” as an earlier version said due to a change made during editing.Japanese treasures acquired by the royal family over almost four centuries are to go on public display for the first time next year in an exhibition at Buckingham Palace. The artefacts included rare examples of “unparalleled Japanese craftsmanship”, including armour, weaponry, porcelain, lacquer, woodcut prints, delicate fans and embroidered screens, said the Royal Collection Trust. Together the items amount to “one of the finest holdings of Japanese works of art in the western world”, charting the relationship between the British and Japanese royal and imperial families from the time of James I. The oldest is a samurai armour, sent to the king by Shōgun Tokugawa Ieyasu, the military leader who governed Japan on behalf of the imperial family. The first contact between England and Japan had been made by John Saris, the captain of a ship which reached Japan in 1613 carrying letters and gifts from James I. Saris returned with the gift and a letter granting the English permission to live and trade in Japan. But the alliance was short-lived: for 220 years from 1630, Japan shut its doors to the west. The royal family continued to collect Japanese lacquer, porcelain and textiles, which found their way to Europe via Holland, the only country that was permitted to trade with the east Asian country. After Japan reopened to the west in 1850, visiting members of the royal family were received at the Imperial Palace, bringing gifts home. In 1910, more than 8 million people visited the Japan-British exhibition in London. The Shōwa Emperor, also known as Hirohito, sent Queen Elizabeth a gift for her coronation in 1953 of a cosmetic box decorated with a heron by the great lacquer artist Shirayama Shōsai. The works on display at next year’s exhibition had been “cherished by members of the British royal family for centuries”, said its curator, Rachel Peat. It was a rare opportunity “to see first-hand the precious materials and intricate techniques which have so profoundly shaped British taste and which helped forge a lasting relationship between the two nations”, she added. • Japan: Courts and Culture opens the Queen’s Gallery, Buckingham Palace on 8 April 2022 until 12 March 2023.In the past decade, the director Dmitri Tcherniakov has become a tireless champion of the operas of Nikolai Rimsky-Korsakov. What the conductor Valery Gergiev did before him with an outstanding series of Rimsky recordings for Philips, Tcherniakov is now continuing on the international stage. His production of Sadko, first seen at the Bolshoi theatre in Moscow in February 2020, is the latest in a series of stagings in opera houses across Europe that began in 2012 with The Legend of the Invisible City of Kitezh in Amsterdam, and has since taken in The Tsar’s Bride, The Snow Maiden, and The Tale of Tsar Saltan. Sadko follows on from Tcherniakov’s outstanding Brussels production of Tsar Saltan by giving pictorial elements from the folksy designs that have been traditional in Russian stagings of Rimsky’s operas for more than a century an up-to-date psychological twist. The three protagonists – Sadko, the travelling gusli player, his wife, Lubava, and the daughter of the “king of the sea”, Volkhova, with whom he falls in love – wear modern casual dress, and in Tcherniakov’s version enter a theme park where they interact with the fantasy characters in role play that is intended to cure their hang-ups. The penultimate scene, in which Sadko descends to the depths of the sea, becomes a fantastical parade of imaginary sea creatures, while, finally, Volkhova is not transformed into a river but just picks up her suitcase and goes, leaving Sadko and his wife to start salvaging their marriage. This treatment preserves the opera’s world of fairytale enchantment, adding an extra layer of seriousness, even if it still can’t disguise some of the dramatic longueurs. It’s all very decently sung, too – Nazhmiddin Mavlyanov is tireless in the title role – though there’s probably a bit more lustre in Rimsky’s scoring than the Bolshoi orchestra finds under Timur Zangiev. This week’s other pick Another production to survive the lockdowns was last October’s staging at the Opéra Comique in Paris of Rameau’s first tragédie en musique, Hippolyte et Aricie, now released on DVD and Blu-ray by Naxos. The stylish staging, credited to Jeanne Candel and Lionel Gonzalez, is a busy mix of ancient and modern, and it’s an outstanding show musically. Elsa Benoit as Aricie sets the vocal standard with her gorgeous opening aria; Reinoud van Mechelen’s Hippolyte and Stéphane Degout’s Thésée match her, while the chorus and period band of Pygmalion under Raphaël Pichon are wonderfully committed, too.Hello, and Happy Thursday, A few months ago, I sat down with my colleagues Alvin Chang and Andrew Witherspoon on the Guardian’s visual team asked to do something that I thought would be exceedingly difficult: could we show what gerrymandering looks like to our readers? While there’s a growing awareness of how gerrymandering “debased” American democracy, in the words of supreme court justice Elena Kagan, articulating exactly how it works can be extremely difficult. The boundaries that make up our political districts are invisible, so when politicians move them every 10 years, voters don’t feel it in their everyday lives. Looking at gerrymandered districts can feel like you’re just looking at a bunch of squiggly lines (trust me, I’ve been there). Over the last few weeks, Andrew put together four maps that overcome this problem. And the final product is, I believe, the best visualization of how gerrymandering works that I’ve seen to date. We zoomed in on four districts – two in North Carolina and two in Texas – that provide some of the clearest examples of how politicians are gerrymandering this cycle. Using the 2020 election results and demographic data, we showed how politicians are transforming districts to virtually lock in election results for the next decade. Just take a look at what happened to the sixth congressional district in the north-central part of North Carolina. It’s currently represented by Democrat Kate Manning, and Joe Biden won the district by 24 points in 2020, a sign that it’s a heavily Democratic area. But when Republicans in the state legislature drew the new lines, they cracked the district into four pieces. The Democratic voters in the sixth district were tossed into four districts that strongly favor the GOP, ensuring Republicans will have a powerful advantage in elections for years to come. All four districts we focused on were drawn by Republicans, who have an immense advantage across the country in drawing district lines this year. But where Democrats do have the upper hand, in places like Oregon and Illinois, they’ve shown a willingness to gerrymander as well. Amid the complexity of redistricting, there’s an important, and often ugly, story about how voters are grouped based on race. In north-eastern North Carolina, for example, we showed how Republicans lowered the share of Black voters in a district, probably making it harder for Black voters there to elect the candidate of their choice. GK Butterfield, a Black Democrat who has represented the district since 2004, is now likely to announce his retirement this week. While courts have historically protected the ability of Black voters to elect the candidate in their choice in the district, that’s now in jeopardy. “I’m fairly certain that this district, if GK were to retire, would be a district that Black voters don’t have the opportunity any longer to elect their candidates of choice,” Allison Riggs, a prominent voting rights attorney at the Southern Coalition for Social Justice in North Carolina, told me last week. We also showed how Hispanic voters in the Democratic-leaning suburbs of Dallas and Fort Worth are being tossed into a largely rural district where Republicans dominate. Civil rights groups are bringing a flood of lawsuits to challenge these maps. But they face a huge uphill battle. In 2019, the US supreme court said for the first time that federal courts can’t address partisan gerrymandering. And while plaintiffs can challenge discriminatory maps on different grounds, those suits can take years to resolve in court, enabling politicians to hold several elections using discriminatory maps. Reader questions Robert writes: With all the talk about eliminating the filibuster, what do you suppose is going to happen to it if Republicans once again achieve a solid majority as now appears likely? Just sayin’. This is a concern that some Democrats who defend the filibuster share. But those who support getting rid of the rule point out that Republicans have distorted the filibuster from a tool that is supposed to forge compromise to one that prevents the majority party from governing at all. And I think there’s also a belief that Republicans might be willing to do away with the filibuster when they get back into the majority, regardless of what Democrats do. Please continue to write to me each week with your questions about elections and voting at sam.levine@theguardian.com or DM me on Twitter at @srl and I’ll try to answer as many as I can. Also worth watching … Ohio Republicans were so secretive in drawing new gerrymandered state legislative maps that they shut out members of their own party. Now, they’re pushing ahead with drawing a gerrymandered congressional map. Georgia Republicans unveiled a new congressional map that heavily favors the GOP. Civil rights groups have filed a challenge to Texas’s new electoral maps.Pro-democracy protesters and Sudan’s military appeared set for a cycle of escalation on both sides after a day in which at least 15 demonstrators were killed by security forces. Despite a heavy-handed crackdown by the military in the capital, Khartoum, and other cities, activists called on Thursday for an escalation of protests against last month’s military coup, a day after the deadliest security clampdown to date on demonstrators demanding the restoration of a civilian government. The cycle of demonstrations and use of lethal force in response seems to be following a similar pattern to the months of civil unrest that led to the fall of the former dictator Omar al-Bashir in April 2019. Protests have been continuing since the top general Abdel Fattah al-Burhan – Sudan’s de facto leader since the ousting of Bashir – detained the civilian leadership and declared a state of emergency on 25 October. The move upended Sudan’s fragile transition to full civilian rule, drawing international condemnation and a flurry of punitive measures and aid cuts. Despite targeting media and activists, and restricting the country’s internet and mobile communications networks, Sudan’s coup leaders have struggled to keep a lid on widespread public opposition to their seizure of power. On Thursday a group of neighbourhood resistance committees coordinating the protest movement in east Khartoum announced in a statement “open escalation” against the coup until its overthrow. The resistance committees played a key role in 2019, organising local protests in their sometimes barricaded neighbourhoods and acting as a focus for larger protests. “Now we are making consultations among the resistance committees about upping the escalation against the coup,” a senior member of the committees in the capital said, speaking on condition of anonymity. Medics aligned with the protest movement said at least 15 people were killed on Wednesday as security forces dispersed protests in Khartoum and other cities with gunfire and teargas. A number of the fatalities appear to have taken place in Khartoum’s northern Bahri area. Maab Salah, 27, a member of the local resistance committee, said: “Almost every neighbourhood in Bahri today has a funeral. What we saw yesterday was something new. “Police forces from different units all took part in the repression and killing yesterday. I even saw the traffic police firing on the protesters yesterday.” Another protester described seeing someone shot down next to her. “His name was Abdul-Karim. I think he was in his 60s. I saw him falling down next to me. We didn’t hear the sound of a bullet but he died immediately, shot in his head,” said the 32-year-old former teacher, who asked not to be named. Others described how doctors at hospitals in Bahri had been arrested as they tried to treat casualties, prompting doctors to treat those injured in private homes. Police, however, said they had recorded only one death among protesters in north Khartoum. Another 30 had suffered breathing difficulties from teargas inhalation. Protesters described the behaviour of police on Wednesday as more aggressive than in the past, the latest sign that the military is looking to entrench its position. The military has said peaceful protests are allowed. The coup upended a power-sharing arrangement between the military and civilian groups, put in place after Bashir’s overthrow. Cuts to internet and phone services since the coup have complicated efforts by activists to mobilise. Still, hundreds of thousands took to the streets on two days of mass protests, and thousands attended more scattered protests on Wednesday. The ambassador of Norway, which together with the US and Britain is in a troika to steer western policy on Sudan, strongly condemned violence against unarmed protesters. “Hindering access to hospitals and disrupting safety and treatment in hospitals is intolerable and illegal. As is the way all communications have been shut down,” Therese Loken Gheziel said in a statement. With unrest continuing, police on Thursday fired teargas to disperse dozens of anti-coup protesters who had stayed on the streets of north Khartoum overnight, witnesses said. Security forces also tore down makeshift barricades the protesters had erected the previous day. “We condemn violence towards peaceful protesters and call for the respect and protection of human rights in Sudan,” the US state department’s Bureau of African Affairs said on Twitter. Last week, Burhan formed a new Sovereign Council, the highest transitional authority, with himself as chief and military figures and ex-rebel leaders keeping their posts. He replaced members from the Forces for Freedom and Change, Sudan’s main civilian bloc, with little-known figures. This week, the US assistant secretary of state for African affairs, Molly Phee, met the generals and the ousted civilian government in an attempt to broker a way out of the crisis. Phee has called for the reinstatement of the ousted prime minister, Abdalla Hamdok, who is effectively under house arrest.Two 18-year-olds have been arrested on suspicion of attempted murder after a man was stabbed at a halls of residence at Warwick University. The man and woman were taken into custody after the 19-year-old victim was found, with police urging members of the public to come forward. The 19-year-old was taken to hospital, and paramedics worked on him throughout the journey. His injuries are now thought not to be life-threatening. Officers were called out on Wednesday afternoon and found him suffering from stab wounds, Warwickshire police said. “This was a serious incident in which a young man has suffered stab wounds. I would appeal to anyone with information about it to contact police,” said DI Cawail Wong. Students were evacuated from the halls after the incident and university authorities moved to reassure them there was no continuing danger. In a statement released after the incident, a university spokesperson said: “We want to reassure those concerned by a continued police presence around Sherbourne that there is no danger to students or staff. “We can confirm an incident has taken place that has since concluded. Police officers remain on site as part of an investigation following the incident, as do members of Warwick staff. If you need any assistance please speak to the community safety team.” Sherbourne residents were given alternative accommodation on Wednesday night and were expected to return to their halls on Thursday. Police said officers were called to the address on Scarman Road in Coventry just after 4.30pm on Wednesday. The force said an 18-year-old man from Kings Langley in Hertfordshire, and an 18-year-old woman from London had both been arrested on suspicion of attempted murder. The force added: “Anyone with information on the incident is asked to contact Warwickshire police on 101 quoting incident 276 of 17 November 2021.” A spokesperson for the West Midlands ambulance service said: “We were called to reports of a stabbing near to Gibbet Hill Road at 4.24pm yesterday. One ambulance, a paramedic officer and the Warwickshire and Northamptonshire air ambulance were sent to the scene. “On arrival, we discovered one male patient, who was treated for serious injuries before being taken to hospital by land ambulance. The aircrew travelled on the back of the ambulance to help continue treatment en route to hospital.”A lab worker at a Merck facility outside Philadelphia found 15 “questionable vials” labeled “smallpox” and “vaccinia” while cleaning out a freezer earlier this week, raising harrowing security concerns. The FBI and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are investigating the discovery, which involves a disease that is believed to have killed more than 300 million people since the dawn of the 20th century. The Pennsylvania facility, which does vaccine research, is no longer on lockdown. The lab worker had on gloves and a face mask when they found the vials, the CDC said. “There is no indication that anyone has been exposed to the small number of frozen vials,” a CDC spokesperson told Yahoo News, adding that their “contents appear intact”. Officially, smallpox can only be stored at two places in the world, located in Atlanta and Russia. Other unauthorized samples should have been transferred or destroyed, the Philadelphia Inquirer reported, though some have popped up elsewhere in recent years. The disease killed roughly three out of 10 people who contracted it, the CDC says, an unimaginable loss of life. But by the late 20th century, it had been defeated globally, a feat many consider “the biggest achievement in international public health”. Smallpox remains one of only two officially eradicated diseases, according to the American Society for Microbiology. Richard Ebright, a professor of chemistry and chemical biology at Rutgers University, suggested to the Inquirer that the vials in Pennsylvania represented a security threat. Someone with bioterrorism plans could have found them and used them. But people should not be afraid that the vials will cause an outbreak, and even the lab worker who discovered them should be safe, he said. “For the general public there is no basis for being worried, even a small amount,” Ebright said.Europe’s energy crisis has sparked a profit surge for National Grid after its subsea power cables connecting the UK to the continent generated greater revenues on the back of record highs in the electricity market. National Grid secured higher prices to transmit electricity through its cables running from the UK to Belgium and France, and also benefited from the early startup of the North Sea Link, the world’s longest subsea power cable, which links the UK to Norway’s hydropower. The FTSE 100 energy company reported first-half profits had increased by 86% to £1.1bn on the same period a year earlier, when Covid-19 lockdowns led to a slowdown in energy markets. The increase was in part helped by record-high electricity prices in the UK in recent months. The half-year results were also buoyed up by National Grid’s acquisition of Western Power Distribution (WPD), the local power grid company running grids for the Midlands, south Wales and south-west England, for £14.2bn in March. The group added that earnings a share for the full year would be “significantly above the top end” of its 5%-7% guidance at the beginning of the year. John Pettigrew, the company’s chief executive, said National Grid’s focus would be on “delivering critical and green investment to enable the decarbonisation of power, transport and heat” to help create a “clean, fair and affordable energy transition” in the UK and US markets. Laura Hoy, an equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said the WPD acquisition had “juiced overall returns” for National Grid, while the early completion of the UK-France network was “the cherry on top”. “National Grid’s planted itself firmly at the centre of the electric revolution,” Hoy said. “It’s not often that a utility offers that kind of growth opportunity, so NG could turn out to be somewhat of a gem within the sector.” National Grid runs the subsea cables and the high voltage transmission networks in England and Wales, as well as the regional WPD electricity network, and plans to sell a majority stake in its gas transmission grid, which covers Great Britain, to help pay for the acquisition. Pettigrew said the sales talks were on track because there was a recognition among potential buyers that “gas will have a role to play” for many years ahead, and the opportunity to invest in solutions to decarbonising the UK’s gas system, for example by blending gas with hydrogen. National Grid also plans to sell the Rhode Island network from its American business, which runs gas and electricity networks in the north-eastern US, by March 2022. Hoy warned that without the proceeds from these sales National Grid’s debt from “could become a crippling burden”, and added that “a lot can go wrong in six months”. The earnings surge from National Grid’s cables running to Belgium, France, the Netherlands and Norway more than offset the shutdown of one of the UK’s most important power cables running from England to France after a fire in September. The blaze at the Sellindge converter station in Kent forced the shutdown as energy markets rocketed to all-time highs amid global energy supply difficulties. National Grid said “extensive work” would be needed to bring the 2,000 megawatt (MW) power link back to full service. Around half the cable’s capacity remains shut, of which 500MW will return from October 2022 and the final 500MW in December 2022.In a restaurant in prosperous western Paris, fans of the EU’s former negotiator on Brexit, Michel Barnier, crowded in to hear their hero speak, cheering the mild-mannered 70-year-old who has gone from rank outsider to potential favourite in the contest to choose a presidential candidate for the right’s Les Républicains. Barnier is one of the big surprises of the unpredictable pre-election season in France. He was known for almost 50 years in right-wing French politics as a centrist, liberal-minded neo-Gaullist, devoted to the European cause. But he has amazed observers by significantly hardening his stance as the rightwing party prepared to decide on its candidate early next month. “There are two conditions for things to get better in France: security and immigration,” Barnier said gravely, to applause. “There is tension, a risk of confrontation – we have to restore calm and bring back quiet to people’s lives. For that, we need an electroshock in terms of security and immigration.” He says it was last Christmas Eve, hours after the post-Brexit agreement was signed with the UK, when he declared that he missed France and wanted to be “useful” in French politics, that he began pondering running for French president to beat Emmanuel Macron and, he says, reunite France’s divided society. Barnier claims that unregulated immigration from outside the EU is weakening France’s sense of identity. He believes the UK’s vote to leave the EU showed how dangerous it can be when divisions in society are allowed to fester. He has promised a French moratorium of three to five years for non-European immigrants, in which even family members joining immigrants will be stopped, and has called for France to regain legal sovereignty from European Union courts. During this immigration moratorium, he said: “we will take measures to review all the procedures that are not working to make them more rigorous and fairer”. His detractors say it is not clear how France, a member of the EU’s Schengen free movement area, could implement this without violating EU law. The left say he’s chasing the far-right Marine Le Pen and another potential candidate, the far-right TV pundit Eric Zemmour. Barnier has dismissed these criticisms as “pathetic” and says he simply wants to improve the way things work. The quest to choose a presidential candidate for Nicolas Sarkozy’s traditional right-wing party Les Républicains has certainly been defined by tough language on immigration and identity. Not just Barnier, but his other key competitors – the former Sarkozy ministers, Valerie Pécresse and Xavier Bertrand – have all veered from their centrist pasts to appeal to more conservative strains of the party membership. Almost 150,000 party members will decide the candidate in an internal vote, with the winner announced on 4 December. The result is impossible to predict, with 69,000 people joining or rejoining the party since September and no profile of how they might vote. But ultimately it is a personality contest, and this is where Barnier has created momentum and surprise. Initially dismissed by some as too bland, he has whipped up a following who believe he is a dependable elder-statesman able to end party in-fighting and understand provincial France. A mountaineer and hiker from the Alps, who built his career in local village politics, he walks in ancient forests and reminds people he loves trees. “You can’t be in politics or become president without loving trees,” he recently told Paris Match. First elected aged 22 as a local councillor in Savoie, he then entered parliament aged only 27 in 1978. He served four times as a government minister and twice as EU commissioner. His supporters point out that he has won every direct vote he has stood for since the age of 22. “I’ve never been a technocrat, I’ve always been a politician,” Barnier said in Paris. A former environment minister, and co-organiser of the 1992 Winter Olympics, he knows climate change is a concern for right-wing rural voters, and makes it personal. “I come from a mountain area where one-third of the economy depends on snow,” he told the restaurant crowd to applause. Famous for his devotion to spread-sheets and dossiers, he is still often seen with a trademark briefing folder wedged under his arm. Antoinette, 74, a retired parliamentary attache in Paris, said: “When we were in our 20s and in parliament, I’d see him at lunch – it was usually sausages – and he just stood out as friendly and decent.” Francis Szpiner, the Les Républicains mayor of the 16th arrondissement of Paris, borrowed a campaign tag from the former Socialist president François Mitterrand, to call Barnier “the quiet force”. Barnier’s main rivals, Bertrand and Pécresse, are higher than him in polls of the general electorate. But both left the party Les Républicains after Macron’s victory in 2017 to work on their own individual political projects. Barnier stayed – something party members take note of. “In politics, loyalty is a virtue,” Szpiner said. At Barnier’s modern, open-plan campaign headquarters near the Elysée Palace, a senior member of his team said: “The next two weeks are about Michel Barnier going out there to meet party members and show them how he can beat Emmanuel Macron next spring: through his standing, and the fact that he would govern differently.” Barnier promises to serve only one term as president. He says he would contrast what he deems Macron’s top-down “solitary” way of decision-making, by instead working with different parts of society and local government. Olivier Rouquan of Paris University’s centre for administrative and political sciences, said of the party membership: “This is an older electorate, they know Barnier and he resembles them in many ways. He has stepped sideways from his European period in Brussels, because a part of this electorate is very focused on questions of security and immigration. That is why he has taken that turn. All the candidates have done the same. Barnier didn’t want to be accused of being too moderate. But he has made an 180 degree turn, proposing to revise the constitution on immigration. Will it work? We don’t know.” Colette, 75, a former hospital scientist and lifelong party member, said: “Frankly, I find him stable and reassuring, and these days that’s what counts.”It is easy to characterise the scrapping of part of HS2 as yet another great Tory betrayal, and for the government’s opponents to make hay of a decision that appears to run precisely counter to the Tories’ key manifesto commitment of “levelling up” the north. Indeed, one can certainly add it to Boris Johnson’s long list of U-turns and obfuscations. And it would be fanciful to think that this new plan was the outcome of a careful assessment of transport needs in the region. Rather, it has emerged because of pressure from two key players: the Treasury, with its innate hatred of big-ticket items, and the Tory backbenchers, whose affection for Jaguars and BMWs is far greater than for newfangled high-speed trains. The result will certainly be a strange hybrid of a railway. On one side of the country, we are to have a high-speed line that almost reaches the great cities of the north-west, and which will be presented as a fantastic boon to the region. Over to the east, on the other hand, there will be a mishmash of new and refurbished tracks that will allow some improvements to train services but will not have the same cachet as the line in the west. Of course, all this has been dictated by expediency. Building on the first section of the line to Birmingham is well under way, with contracts worth well over £10bn already let and legislation for the line up to Crewe passed. Therefore it was the eastern section, up to Sheffield and Leeds, that could still be cut, much to the fury of some local council leaders and MPs in the “red wall”. But hold on a minute. Support for HS2 is not universal in the north. For every laudatory article in the Yorkshire Post, opponents worried about local environmental issues or the massive concentration of resources in one line are quick to come up with an alternative view. The whole concept of HS2 was flawed from the start. It was first characterised as a quicker way of travelling between London and the north and the Midlands, but actually there are already excellent, frequent and fast rail services between London and cities that it is intended to serve, such as Birmingham, Manchester and Leeds. Faced with criticism about the cost not justifying the reduction in journey times, the project then morphed into promises of providing a huge increase in capacity on a railway system that was becoming chronically overcrowded. But HS2 was designed to have very few stations and limited links to the existing network, leading to concern that some towns would end up with an even worse service than at present. And then came the pandemic, which has seen what appears to be a significant shift to home-working and video conferencing, thereby undermining any remaining business case. Prof Paul Salveson of the University of Huddersfield, a former Labour councillor and railway manager and a strong advocate for northern investment, encapsulated the region’s doubts about a project that is often seen as yet another example of the dominance of southern interests when he wrote earlier this week in his blog that: “HS2 was an ill-conceived project that should never have been given such credibility in the first place”. What local “folk” wanted instead, he argued, was “investment in local and regional rail projects, better east-west rail links, and improved bus services”. Salveson also echoed a key point made by Grant Shapps in the Commons: these smaller, simpler projects can be delivered in a time frame that is meaningful to local people (and which may be a factor at the ballot box, as they can materialise before 2030 rather than in 2040 or beyond). It would be a mistake to suggest that there is any strategic thinking behind this revised plan. But there is a hint that some sensible civil servants in the Department for Transport have managed to cobble together a scheme that ultimately may be better than the grandiose concept of a high-speed line all the way up to Leeds, and have saved a few bob on the way. Germany, for example, has plenty of routes that use a mix of dedicated and shared lines; crucially, however, Deutsche Bahn has invested heavily in improving existing routes to a much higher standard than before. The same needs to happen in the north to provide the electric, regular, rapid railway connections that would do far more for its economy than a faster link to London. The key – and don’t believe the government’s talk of £96bn, at least half of which is recycled money – is whether this plan can be delivered, given the huge number of stakeholders, with local, regional and national government as well as the nascent Great British Railways all needing to play a part. Ironically, the spin used to present this scheme may actually be accurate. But given the tenuous relationship between Johnson and the truth, no one is going to believe it. Christian Wolmar is a writer and broadcaster specialising in transportJust minutes after being censured by the US House, the Republican congressman Paul Gosar of Arizona retweeted the violent video that depicts him murdering Democratic congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, US media reported. While Gosar had previously deleted the video, after the House voted to censure him, Gosar retweeted the conservative podcaster Elijah Schaffer’s tweet of the video that was captioned: “Really well done. We love @DrPaulGosar, don’t we folks?” The retweet appears to have since been undone. Gosar also retweeted other Republican politicians and public figures, both on his personal and congressional Twitter accounts, that have called Gosar a political “martyr” and denounced his censure. Gosar has not apologized for the video and called the censure “kabuki theater” and a “hysterical mob” in a series of new tweets published after the vote. Following the censure vote, Gosar also released a statement saying that his censure could incite violence, comparing the censure to the events that led up to the 2015 Charlie Hebdo massacre. “I remind everyone that pretending to be upset over a cartoon is what happened to the Charlie Hebdo magazine in France,” said Gosar. “All right-thinking people condemned that then, and they should condemn the Democrats now for their violation of free speech.” On Wednesday the House voted to censure Gosar, with 223 in favor and 207 against. While the vote occurred mostly along party lines, three Republicans broke with their party line. Congressman Adam Kinzinger of Illinois and Congresswoman Liz Cheney of Wyoming voted in favor of censuring Gosar, and Congressman David Joyce of Ohio voted “present”, the lone Republican member to do so. Republican members have been called out in the past for threatening violence against Democratic representatives, particularly women of color. In February, the House stripped the Georgia congresswoman Marjorie Taylor Greene from her committee assignments after her social media posts were flagged for supporting violence against Ocasio-Cortez, the Minnesota congresswoman Ilhan Omar and Michigan congresswoman Rashida Tlaib.The number of stop and searches carried out by police has risen by 24% to almost 700,000 in a single year, with officers using the tactic on the equivalent of one in five male minority ethnic teenagers, statistics show. Use of the controversial power increased dramatically over the period covering lockdowns, rising to 695,009 instances, according to figures from the Home Office. It states that black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) males aged 15-19 were searched 208 times for every 1,000 people. Of these stops, for which officers require reasonable suspicion, the proportion that resulted in an arrest fell from 13% to 11%. The data, which covers England and Wales in the year ending March 2021, also shows that one in 50 stops resulted in the seizure of an offensive weapon – 15,800 in total – and the tactic led to 79,000 arrests in a year. Black people were seven times more likely to be stopped than white people, compared with nine times more likely the previous year. Police have been unable to explain the enduring disparity between the impact of the tactic on black people compared with people of other races. The Home Office stop and search report said young minority ethnic males experienced the highest rate of stops, with the overall number of searches being the highest for seven years. The data does not make clear whether some individuals were stopped repeatedly, and this year’s figures are the first where the ages and gender of those stopped were recorded alongside ethnicity. The Home Office report said: “Males aged 15-34 from a BAME background account for 32% of stop and search in the year ending March 2021, despite only comprising 2.6% of the population. “The highest rate of stop and search was for males aged 15-19 who belong to a [BAME] group, who were searched at a rate of 208 per 1,000 people, a rate 3.0 times higher than white people of the same age group.” Only BAME males aged under 10 or over 54 accounted for a lower proportion of stop and search than their proportion of the population, the report added. The biggest reason officers gave for stopping someone was for drugs, accounting for 69% of all stops, with the overall number of drug stops rising by 36% in a year. Some forces said intensified action against county lines drug-dealing operations boosted the figures. Few disagree that stop and search can be a vital crime fighting tool, but its alleged misuse by police has led to it being a key flashpoint between law enforcement and communities. The period the figures relate to encompasses pandemic lockdowns when fewer people were on the streets, which afforded the police more time. It also coincided with the mass Black Lives Matter protests across Britain, triggered by the murder of George Floyd by police in the US and concerns about stop and search and racial disparity in the UK. Sgt Andy George, the president of the National Black Police Association, welcomed the fall in disproportionality, but said other figures were startling. He said: “The statistics that one in five young people from ethnic minority backgrounds were stopped is a shocking fact and policing must look at why four out of five searches result in no further action and how the style and tone of some stops may be pushing an entire community away.” Martin Hewitt, the chair of the National Police Chiefs’ Council, who has vowed to improve relations with black communities, said: “There are longstanding and well-documented challenges in our relationship with black communities – the confidence gap of 10% to 20% compared with the national average remains deeply concerning. Racial disparities exist in our service that we still cannot fully explain. “We can’t claim to police by consent if any community or section of society doesn’t trust us and doesn’t believe in what we are doing.” A Home Office spokesperson said 23% of stops resulted in a positive outcome when warnings and community resolutions were added to the arrest figures: “Stop and search is a vital tool for police to protect the public. Tragically, data shows that young black men are disproportionately more likely to be the victims of knife crime. No one should be targeted for stop and search because of their race and there are extensive safeguards in place to prevent this.” Some in policing say disproportionality does not necessarily show a racial bias. They say it reflects the ethnicity of victims and perpetrators of crimes, as well as who is around on the streets in high-crime areas. However, some campaigners see the statistics as showing an endemic unfairness. Katrina Ffrench, the director of Unjust UK, said: “When crime rates declined at a time of a global pandemic, officers decided that increasing searching would be an effective use of resources. “The data doesn’t lie. Black communities are clearly not receiving a fair service and their experiences of being over-policed aren’t imagined or contrived.”“We played the Royal Albert Hall in 1964,” says Charles Lloyd, recollecting his first ever UK performance. “Packed it to the rafters.” He was 26, playing tenor saxophone in Cannonball Adderley’s majestic band and getting his first taste of a world beyond US jazz and blues clubs. “I’m looking forward to returning,” says Lloyd of this weekend’s appearance at the EFG London jazz festival. Now 83, he speaks in a drawl that mixes jazz argot and spiritual entreaties – he says he spent the pandemic “building steps”, meaning to a higher plane rather than a DIY project – and is raring to re-engage with an audience. “I’ve been playing in front of audiences since I was nine. Been a professional musician since I was 12. It’s what I do.” What Lloyd “does” is work alongside more giants of contemporary music than possibly anyone else alive. Born in Memphis, Tennessee, he grew up in a hotbed of jazz, blues and country music: Phineas Newborn and Booker Little, two Memphis jazz prodigies, were his closest teenage associates, but young Charles found playing blues paid best. This was the American south, where “that world of man’s inhumanity to man – racism, segregation – was a game somebody had set up, a botheration”. And yet he says of Memphis: “We were in Mecca, you know? The music was just so powerful. We were bit by the cobra of Bird [Charlie Parker] and Prez [Lester Young], so it was no turning back, but the blues is part of our ethos and those were the gigs that were available to us. Howlin’ Wolf would come to town and say: ‘You play with me, you eat pork chops – you play in other bands, you eat neck bones!’ He could pay about $5 more, $10 more, than the other bands. Naturally, you wanted to play with Wolf. Plus the fact he would shake those buildings when he played. And the ladies, throwing their panties up on the stage and pulling on his pants!” Lloyd left Memphis for Los Angeles, to study Bartók at the University of Southern California: “I think because of his work with his folk themes and folk melodies, it touched us, there was some some kind of simpatico.” A classical student by day, a jazz musician by night in an LA scene dominated by a group of players who would pioneer free jazz. Their leader, Ornette Coleman, became Lloyd’s mentor. He remembers a 1956 jam session. “Billy Higgins, Ornette, Dexter Gordon, a lot of guys were there. I got up to play and, afterwards, Ornette came up and said: ‘Man, you sure can play the saxophone but that don’t have a lot to do with music.’ He was about eight years older than me and, essentially, was saying that I could play but I didn’t have it together yet. We became friends, played and practised a lot together. It was a rich community in California, so I got blessed again.” While working as a school teacher in 1960 he received an offer to join Chico Hamilton’s band in New York. Here Lloyd wrote much of Hamilton’s material before joining Cannonball Adderley; he released his debut solo album, Discovery!, then formed his own quartet in late 1965. Recruiting drummer Jack DeJohnette, bassist Cecil McBee and 21-year-old pianist Keith Jarrett, with jazz industry magus George Avakian as manager, the Charles Lloyd Quartet’s 1966 album Dream Weaver would be a hinge that modern jazz swung upon, winning airplay on the nascent FM rock radio stations. 1967’s Forest Flower: Charles Lloyd at Monterey was the first modern jazz album to sell more than a million copies in the US and helped establish the new crossover between jazz and rock. Other firsts: playing the Fillmore, often alongside the new psychedelic bands (“those guys and gals in San Francisco, they said: ‘The only thing happening is us and Charles Lloyd’”), and taking modern jazz to the Soviet Union. His 1967 live album Love-In – with its psychedelic title and sleeve and performance of a Beatles song – was aimed directly at his youthful fanbase and led to detractors. The New York Times critic, Martin Williams, waspishly noted: “With wildly bushy hair, military jacket, and garishly striped bell bottoms, he looks like a kind of show-biz hippie. He usually sounds like a kind of show-biz John Coltrane.” The quartet imploded acrimoniously in early 1969, with Miles Davis – long envious of Lloyd’s success – hiring DeJohnette and Jarrett for his adventures in fusion. “Miles is very creative, a very special guy – he changed music a bunch of times,” Lloyd says, talking about the trumpeter as if he were still alive. But the friction meant “we can’t get along. He’s extremely talented but he wants all the girls and all the money.” Lloyd might have been famous, but he was desperately unhappy. “You must understand, fame and fortune, it’s like a hog plum – looks real juicy and you bite into it and you break your teeth off because it’s all pit and skin. So, I came to realise the fame and fortune were why I was miserable. They weren’t what they seem. You know, I got all these demands on me: ‘Sign this, do that, be over here …’ Around ’68 things started getting bad: my marriage and the tragic magic.” What, I ask, is the tragic magic? “Some powder that you take in you. You do things with it. And you don’t have any problems, you just need to get your tragic magic each day. I’d go play with the Grateful Dead and they’d put Peru on the table, you know, a big mountain of coke and stuff … When you’re medicating yourself like that, you’re in another zone. At first it was stimulating but, after a while, it was impeding the creative. I decided I better leave New York because I saw many of my peers dying and dropping off. I came to California to heal myself. And that’s what I did.” Frustrated by his Atlantic Records contract, describing it as a “plantation system”, Lloyd stopped performing, so gifting Miles Davis, Weather Report and the UK fusion band Nucleus his former audience. Settling in Malibu, a certain synchronicity found the Beach Boys becoming Lloyd’s saviours. “I didn’t know who the Beach Boys were but, it turned out, they were fans of mine. Mike Love started inviting me up to Brian Wilson’s place – Brian had a house in Bel Air with a studio in it and an engineer, there all the time. Atlantic had blackballed me and I’d run out of bread so they said: ‘You can use this studio.’ Brian would come down from his sandpit upstairs and sit in on the sessions and the band started singing on my records and stuff. It was an enlightened situation.” Lloyd would play on several Beach Boys albums (including Surf’s Up), toured with the band and even formed Celebration, a side project with Love and Al Jardine, in the late 70s. Settling in Big Sur, a spiritual community further up the west coast, Lloyd relaunched his quartet in 1981 after encountering the French jazz pianist Michel Petrucciani. Their performances found Lloyd welcomed back by jazz audiences and critics but, having successfully launched Petrucciani’s career, he retreated back to Big Sur and silence for nearly a decade. A near-death intestinal illness convinced Lloyd to re-engage with jazz. Signing to the German jazz label ECM in 1989 and Blue Note Records in 2015, he has since released 23 albums and toured widely. “I’m a seeker and I’m trying to change the world, right?” says Lloyd of his productivity. “And I’m doing it with sound.” Since being signed by Don Was to Blue Note he continues to work with global musicians – from India, Hungary and Greece – while astute pairings with Norah Jones, Willie Nelson and Lucinda Williams (“She is the real thing!”) have won him new audiences. “Back in Memphis I used to jam with a country band who had a hot pedal steel guitar player so, by playing with Bill Frisell [guitar] and Greg Leisz [pedal steel], I’ve managed to reach after that. I like weird connections because I don’t like to play with one hand behind my back. I got to have a full deck of cards: no restrictions.” Quite the raconteur, the famous names keep popping up. Lloyd notes that, in Memphis, a young truck driver called Elvis used to come and study one of his teenage bands. “Every night, to watch Calvin Newborn, Phineas’s younger brother, because he would be playing guitar and he jumped way up in the air, shaking his legs. Well, Elvis couldn’t do that guitar stuff that Calvin could do, but he could shake his leg, so he watched and got some stuff from those gigs.” He mentions lost recordings with the Dead and plans to record with Jimi Hendrix that were thwarted by his death; he also wanted to record with the Byrds, but his label refused to sanction the collaboration. “They said no, it’s not going to happen – they were still doing racial polarities.” Nevertheless, he has always tried to shrug off any musical divisions (“growing up in the south, cross-pollination was such that musicians didn’t feel those lines of demarcation”) and now often covers songs by old pals Bob Dylan and Brian Wilson, while his superb new album, Tone Poem, has him honouring Ornette Coleman with a recording of the latter’s Ramblin’: “Ornette had his own cosmology because he figured it out – all the tough times he had, all the rows he had, coming from Texas all of the blues he played … Ornette and the blues are always in my sound.” I mention the UK’s fecund jazz scene, something Lloyd is unaware of – “except I met that girl, [Nubya] Garcia, at a festival in the US, she’s a fan of mine” – and I explain how the spiritual jazz sound he helped pioneer is currently very popular in Britain. “If I’d known I was in vogue I’d have raised my fee,” drawls Lloyd, before chuckling. It looks as if lessons learned from Howlin’ Wolf are still being applied today. Tone Poem is out now on Blue Note Records. Charles Lloyd plays the Barbican on 20 November as part of EFG London jazz festival.Nicola Sturgeon has been urged to take a tougher stance on phasing out oil and gas by signing up to a new global alliance that calls for an end date for oil drilling. Scotland’s first minister signalled earlier this week that her government was hardening its position on oil and gas production by confirming she did not believe the new Cambo oilfield off Shetland should be licensed. After months of pressure to take a more radical position on oil drilling, Sturgeon also confirmed her government could join a new coalition of oil- and gas-producing nations that has committed itself to phasing out oil and gas. She said Scotland could join the Beyond Oil and Gas Alliance but as a “friend”, the group’s lowest tier of support, instead of as a full or associate member. That tier does not commit signatories to set an end date for oil production. Sturgeon said she had to act slowly to ensure a “just transition” to renewables for the 100,000 people estimated to be dependent on the oil and gas industry in Scotland. “I do not think that we can go on extracting new oil and gas forever. That is why we have moved away from the policy of maximum economic recovery, and I do not think that we can continue to give the go-ahead to new oilfields, so I do not think that Cambo should get the green light,” she told MSPs. Sturgeon is facing competing pressures over climate policies: her rejection of Cambo has led to fierce criticism from within the Scottish National party but her Scottish Green party allies in government are pressing her to take a more radical stance. Mary Church, a senior climate campaigner with Friends of the Earth Scotland, said it was essential oil-producing nations committed to an end date, in part because it would give industry and the affected communities a clear date for which to plan. She said Scotland had an obligation to show leadership, given its significance as an oil-producing country. “Signing up to the alliance at the highest level would be a clear indication of this necessary new direction of travel for Scottish government energy policy, and an important next step after Cop26,” Church said. “A failure to do so would be a failure to follow through on her government’s recent change of position to no longer support unlimited oil and gas extraction. When you’re in a hole, you have to stop digging. To meet the 1.5C goal, we need to keep all fossil fuels safe in the ground.” The alliance was set up by Denmark and Costa Rica and has France, Ireland, Greenland and Wales, a devolved nation in the UK with fewer powers than Scotland, among its eight full members. That top tier commits its members to ending all new oil production licences and leases, and to set an end date for oil production consistent with the Paris climate agreement’s quest to limit global heating to well under 2C. Ireland, an ally of Sturgeon’s devolved government, relies on its own gas fields for 60% of its domestic supplies. Yet in February, the Irish cabinet, which includes Green party ministers, announced a ban on all new hydrocarbon exploration in Irish waters to force the country to focus on renewable energy and cut its carbon dioxide emissions. Denmark, a small country with a similar population to Scotland that has 55 oil and gas platforms in the North Sea, announced in December 2020 it would no longer license new North Sea fields. California, Portugal and New Zealand are signed up as second-tier associates as states that “have taken significant concrete steps” to reduce oil production, by removing domestic subsidies or ending financial backing for production overseas. The “friend” tier commits its signatories to supporting a “socially just and equitable global transition” and the less onerous goals of “alignment” with the Paris agreement and a member’s own climate neutrality targets. So far only Italy has joined as a friend.A Tory MP who has spearheaded opposition to lockdowns as part of a backbench group trying to influence government policy told investors in the venture capital company he chairs that the unwinding of pandemic restrictions was boosting the company’s business and their investments. Jonathan Djanogly, who is part of the Covid Recovery Group of Tory MPs, wrote to investors in September in his “second job” as chairman of Pembroke VCT plc, a venture capital trust specialising in investment in the hospitality sector. In a prospectus letter sent out to investors as Pembroke launched a new share offer aimed at raising up to £60m, Djanogly wrote: “Whilst the social and economic challenges of Covid‑19 will continue for the medium term, the unwinding of government restrictions have begun to have a positive impact across the company’s portfolio of businesses.” In November last year Djanogly joined the Covid Recovery Group of Tory backbenchers who emerged to oppose future lockdowns and put pressure on Boris Johnson. During a speech in parliament on 4 November 2020, as pressure against a second lockdown was being built up by Tory MPs, Djanogly told of “speaking to businesses”. “We now roll from one lockdown to another, with no vaccine, and no effective track-and-trace system. We need urgently to consider a weighted strategy, our objectives here accepting that whatever happens, lockdown or no lockdown, we are ultimately going to have to learn to live with the virus,” he said. Djanogly said he would not agree with a suggestion, by the Guardian, that he had been vigorously attempting to influence government policy by opposing lockdowns. “I have been assessing proposed Covid legislation on a case-by-case basis and, in the majority of cases, I have supported government proposals,” he said. “Your attempt to connect my voting record to the view taken in the Pembroke VCT prospectus is wrong. Nearly every sector of the economy will benefit from the return to work. That is simply recording a statement of fact and unrelated to my personal views, whatever they may be.” His second job – for which he is being paid £30,000 for 32 hours’ work a year, according to his declaration to the register of members’ financial interests – came under the spotlight at the weekend when it was reported that Pembroke had benefited from NHS Covid contracts. The Daily Mail reported that it had a stake in Thriva, which picked up government contracts worth £186m, according to the data analysts Tussell. He told the Guardian: “As regards Thriva, I can advise you that at no point did I lobby for, or discuss Thriva or any of its contracts with, any ministers or their departments of state.” In 2011, while serving as a justice minister, Djanogly was stripped of his responsibility to regulate firms that “ambulance chase” the public, following a Guardian investigation that revealed how he and his family could profit from controversial changes to legal aid he was piloting in parliament. Djanogly, the heir to a £300m family business, had failed to declare that his then teenage children were minority shareholders in his brother-in-law’s businesses, two firms that advertised claims and were part of an industry that Djanogly regulated in government.No country has managed to meet the basic social needs of its population in the past 30 years without putting undue pressure on the Earth’s supply of natural resources, according to a study. Looking at a sample of 148 nations, research by the University of Leeds found wealthy countries were putting the future of the planet at risk to make minimal gains in human welfare, while poor countries were living within ecological boundaries but underachieving in areas such as life expectancy and access to energy. The report, which follows the conclusion of the Cop26 climate change talks in Glasgow, said that on current trends the next 30 years would see the pattern repeated and called for a rethink of growth-dominated economic models. Its authors said the research was the first attempt to track nation-by-nation progress in achieving environmental and social goals, and that even wealthy countries seen as having good sustainability records – such as Germany and Norway – were using more than their fair share of the world’s resources. The report, which was published in the journal Nature Sustainability, said wealthy countries, including the US, the UK and Canada were achieving minimal social gains despite using resources at a level that was consistent with climate and ecological breakdown. Poorer countries such as Bangladesh, Malawi and Sri Lanka were living within planetary boundaries, but still falling short on meeting many basic human needs. Researchers tracked country performance on 11 social priorities broadly aligned with the 2030 United Nations sustainable development goals. The indicators included life expectancy, nutrition, sanitation and access to education. The study also assessed whether countries were operating within six planetary boundaries, including global heating, excessive fertiliser use and land-system change. Dr Andrew Fanning, the report’s lead author, said: “Everyone needs a sufficient level of resources to be healthy and to participate in their society with dignity, but we also need to ensure global resource use is not so high that we cause climate and ecological breakdown. “We examined country trajectories since the early 1990s and found that most countries are closer to providing basic needs for their residents than they were 30 years ago, which is good news, although important shortfalls remain, especially for collective goals such as equality and democratic quality. “The bad news is that the number of countries that are over-consuming resources is increasing, especially for carbon dioxide emissions and material use. “Worryingly, we found that countries tend to overshoot fair shares of planetary boundaries faster than they achieve minimum social thresholds.”When will tickets go on sale? Early in the new year. Prices are yet to be revealed but a Qatar 2022 spokesperson told the Guardian that tickets would be “affordable for all the family” and in line with recent World Cups. For those with money to burn, executive packages are already available. These start at $950 (£707) per person for a “match club” package, which includes a group stage ticket, “street food” dining, a gift and drinks including beer and wine – while the more extravagant “Pearl Lounge” experience, with fine dining, “mixologists, Champagne selection, sommeliers, and premium spirits” starts at $4,950 a head. Can ordinary fans buy alcohol in the stadium? A decision is yet to be made, although the expectation is that it is more likely than not. In Qatar the sale of alcohol is restricted to a few luxury hotels and is expensive at £10-£15 for beer or wine. However for the World Cup it will be easier to purchase and more affordable. During the 2019 Club World Cup, for instance, the Qataris experimented with a “wet fan zone”, with beer, wine and cider on sale for about £5 – a similar plan is likely to be in place for the 2022 World Cup. How strict are authorities likely to be with boozy fans? Under Qatari law it is an offence to be drunk in public. The hope from organisers is that fans will understand that they are in a conservative country and moderate their behaviour. The sight of England fans conducting an impromptu beer snake along Doha’s Corniche is unlikely to go down well. “This is ultimately a conservative but hospitable country,” says one insider. “So there has to be an understanding on both sides that people should come and have a good time, while also respecting the culture.” How prepared are the Qataris for trouble? With eight stadiums within a 50-mile radius and most fans staying in Doha, there is clearly the potential for trouble. However organisers insist they are rigorously prepared for all eventualities, having attended numerous major tournaments since 2011 to learn how supporters behave at major events. They have also had a partnership with Interpol called Project Stadia since 2012, which they believe will equip them to handle any trouble. “Everything has been done to make sure that it’s a safe experience for fans,” insists one insider. Where will fans stay? Organisers expect more than a million visitors during the 28-day event, but with only 30,000 hotel rooms in the country they are having to rely on other forms of accommodation. Under a deal with Accor the French company will provide staff to manage and operate more than 60,000 rooms in apartments and villas across Qatar. The idea is that fans will get what organisers call “quality accommodation at a fair price” – while Qatar will not be lumbered with thousands of hotel rooms they don’t need after the World Cup. Will it be possible to stay on a cruise ship? Yes. Organisers have hired two huge ships, with swimming pools and spas, which offer a combined capacity of 4,000 cabins. The expectation is that alcohol also will be available – although the supreme committee, responsible for delivery of the tournament, has nervously played down talk of “party ships” and “booze cruises”. Plans to allow fans to stay in luxury tents in the desert are also being worked on. Will rainbow flags be allowed in stadiums? Yes. Qatar has said it will comply with Fifa rules promoting tolerance and inclusion at matches, despite its strict anti-LGBTQ+ laws. As Fifa’s chief social responsibility and education officer, Joyce Cook, puts it: “I’m an openly gay woman in football, so this is personally something I’m close to. We will see a progressive change in all of those aspects, and rainbow flags, T-shirts will all be welcome in the stadium – that’s a given. They understand very well that is our stance.” What about gay supporters? Homosexuality is illegal in Qatar, with a 2004 law stipulating imprisonment between one and three years for sodomy between men. However the Qataris have repeatedly insisted that everyone will be welcome, regardless of nationality, gender and sexual orientation. They also stress that the country has a more conservative culture and fans will be asked to respect local norms – which frowns on public displays of affection. Will it be safe for a gay man and his husband to visit? Yes, according to Paul Amann, the founder of Liverpool fans’ group Kop Outs. Amann, who visited Qatar with his partner during the 2019 Club World Cup, said he was initially worried about going after being invited by organisers. However, what he found surprised him. “It’s got a very horrific law on the statute, don’t get me wrong,” he says. “But my husband and I walked around Doha’s Corniche, and went to the museum and visited the souk at night, we felt entirely safe. But we were respectful of the legal situation over there, which covers both heterosexuals, as well as LGBT+ people. We didn’t make public displays of affection. But then we rarely do in the UK.”Detailed new mapping has pinpointed the carbon-rich forests and peatlands that humanity cannot afford to destroy if climate catastrophe is to be avoided. The vast forests and peatlands of Russia, Canada and the US are vital, researchers found, as are tropical forests in the Amazon, Congo and south-east Asia. Peat bogs in the UK and mangrove swamps and eucalyptus forests in Australia are also on the list. The scientists identified 139bn tonnes (139Gt) of carbon in trees, plants and soils as “irrecoverable”, meaning that natural regeneration could not replace its loss by 2050, the date by which the net global carbon emissions must end to avoid the worst impacts of global heating. In the last decade alone, farming, logging and wildfires have caused the release of at least 4Gt of irrecoverable carbon, the researchers said. Slashing fossil fuel burning is key to ending the climate crisis but ending the razing of forests is also crucial. Major nations including Brazil, China and the US agreed to do this by 2030 at the Cop26 climate summit, although a similar pledge made in 2014 failed. The Earth’s irrecoverable carbon is highly concentrated, the researchers showed. Half of it is found on just 3.3% of the world’s land, making focused conservation projects highly effective. Only half the irrecoverable carbon is currently in protected areas but adding 5.4% of the world’s land to these would secure 75% of irrecoverable carbon, they found. Indigenous peoples are the best protectors of land but only a third of irrecoverable carbon is stored on their recognised territories. Irrecoverable carbon stores overlap strongly with areas of rich wildlife, so protecting them would also tackle the looming mass extinction of wildlife. “We absolutely must protect this irrecoverable carbon to avert climate catastrophe – we must keep it in the ground,” said Monica Noon at Conservation International, the lead author of the study. “These are the areas that really cannot be recovered in our generation – it is our generation’s carbon to protect. But with irrecoverable carbon concentrated in a relatively small area of land, the world could protect the majority of these climate-essential places by 2030.” Prof Pete Smith, at the University of Aberdeen in the UK, said: “This research makes a convincing case for where, and how, to focus efforts for the ‘30 by 30’ initiatives already in existence” to protect 30% of land by 2030. The research, published in the journal Nature Sustainability, found that 57% of irrecoverable carbon was in trees and plants and 43% was in soils, especially peat. Global peatlands store more carbon than tropical and subtropical forests, it concluded. The tropical forests and peatlands of the Amazon are the biggest store of irrecoverable carbon. These were recently reported as emitting more carbon than they absorb. The boreal peatlands and forests of eastern Canada and western Siberia, and the rainforests islands of south-east Asia, are the next largest. The temperate rainforest of north-west North America, mangroves and tidal wetlands around the world, and the Congo basin are also major stores. Russia hosts the biggest store of irrecoverable carbon – 23% – and has been hit by wildfires in recent years. Brazil is second, where Jair Bolsonaro’s government has allowed a sharp rise in deforestation. Canada is third and the US fifth: together these two countries have 14% of the world’s irrecoverable carbon, but they have also lost forests to wildfires, pests and logging. The wetlands of southern Florida are another important store of irrecoverable carbon. Australia is home to 2.5% of the world’s irrecoverable carbon, in its coastal mangroves and seagrasses as well as forests in the south-east and south-west, which were hit by megafires in 2019-20. In the UK, peat bogs cover 2m hectares and have stored 230m tonnes of irrecoverable carbon for millennia, but most are in poor condition. The scientists calculated the amount and location of irrecoverable carbon by first identifying at high resolution those areas where direct human activity could damage natural ecosystems. These included forests and peat wetlands, but excluded permafrost regions and commercial tree plantations. Next the scientists assessed the total amount of carbon stored in the trees, plants and soils in the included areas. Finally, they estimated how much carbon could be recovered by natural regeneration over 30 years if the forests or wetlands were destroyed. The difference between the total carbon and recoverable carbon gave the amount of irrecoverable carbon. Losing this irrecoverable carbon would blow the carbon budget needed to have a two-thirds chance of staying under 1.5C of global heating. Peatlands and mangroves are hotspots of irrecoverable carbon, due to their high carbon density and long recovery times of centuries or more. Tropical forests are less dense in carbon and regrow relatively fast, but remain critical because of the very large areas they cover. The scientists said protecting irrecoverable carbon must involve strengthening the rights of indigenous peoples, ending the policies that enable destruction and expanding protected areas. Rob Field, a conservation scientist at the RSPB in the UK, said: “Protection of irrecoverable carbon, coupled with widespread decarbonisation of the world’s economies, will make a safe climate more likely, at the same time as conserving important areas for biodiversity.”Jane Campion’s psycho-sexual western The Power of the Dog is a tremendous film but it is the power of Kodi Smit-McPhee that really adds bite to its bark. The 25-year-old Australian actor has been a fragile, hypnotic presence, with an eerie knack for stillness and intensity, ever since his earliest performances. At the age of 10, he played a boy coping with the desertion of one parent and the breakdown of the other in Romulus, My Father. At 12, he trudged through a post-apocalyptic hell-scape in The Road, then fell in love with a vampire at 13 in Let Me In, the US remake of the Swedish horror hit Let the Right One In. Even his multiplex movies, such as the X-Men outings (Apocalypse and Dark Phoenix) in which he played the blue-skinned Nightcrawler, have felt that bit stranger thanks to his delicate, androgynous features and those pool-sized anime eyes set far apart on his face. His uncanny quality is crucial to Campion’s movie, which is set in early 2oth-century Montana. Smit-McPhee plays the gangly, effeminate Peter, who spends his days crafting intricate paper flowers and sketching dead animals. His life is destabilised when his mother (Kirsten Dunst), a widowed innkeeper, takes up with a new partner. It is not this stepfather (Jesse Plemons) who poses a threat so much as his sadistic, bullying brother Phil (Benedict Cumberbatch), who taunts Peter and mocks the way he “creeps all over the place, big eyes goggling”. For our video call, the actor is seated in front of an image of the mountain landscape that dominates the film, although his outfit today is more fop than cowboy: a cream roll neck under a beige leather jerkin festooned with flaps and pockets. His answers arrive in a sombre monotone; he sits static and upright, hands folded in his lap. Were his lips not moving, it might seem as if the screen had frozen. Perhaps his posture is a necessary response to the painful inflammatory condition from which he suffers: ankylosing spondylitis. “Shall I just let you try and say it?” he teases after I mangle the pronunciation. Then he changes tack sweetly: “You can just call it AS.” Smit-McPhee was a proponent of the still-waters-run-deep school of acting long before his AS diagnosis at 16. His single-minded concentration is part of what results in such transfixing performances. A case in point is the most glorious scene in The Power of the Dog: Peter’s bouncy, lolloping walk from one end of the haymaking camp to the other, past rows of macho cowboys who are wolf-whistling and cat-calling and hollering homophobic abuse, none of which does anything to arrest his progress or dim his defiance. This apparently undramatic stroll, which occurs roughly halfway through the film, changes the course of the entire story. “I love that,” he says. “I call it the catwalk scene. It shows Peter’s unwavering spirit in the face of all that judgment. He is in an isolated environment so he’s never had to repress anything in front of anyone. Phil hasn’t had that freedom, so he has solidified into this very toxic personality.” I ask how it felt emotionally to perform that walk, but he shoots me down. “I can only tell you how Peter felt. There’s no narrative there of what Kodi’s feeling. If there was, I wouldn’t be in the moment.” Fair enough. Cumberbatch was the one cast member who stayed in character between takes, although that had a trickle-down effect on everyone else. “Phil is so hostile that just being in his presence, we all felt it,” says Smit-McPhee. “That’s the idea behind Benedict going method. He’s an apologetic sweetheart Englishman, and we couldn’t have that guy anywhere near the set. We needed Phil there.” When did he get to meet the real Cumberbatch? “Oh, there were a few times when he would surface with a giggle, then snap back. Also, it was Benedict who was there during the two weeks of rehearsals, as was Kodi.” Smit-McPhee’s use of the third person stops seeming odd eventually, just as you also become accustomed to him referring to himself as an “artist” or mentioning several times his interest in “philosophy, science, quantum physics” and “esoteric hidden knowledge like mythology and alchemy and all that fancy stuff”. On screen, he can come across as ageless or spookily wise: a thin, pale sage. The best in the business have had to raise their game in his presence. Not just Cumberbatch but Eric Bana (in Romulus, My Father), Viggo Mortensen (The Road), Michael Fassbender (Slow West). So it is nice to be reminded in conversation – when he refers to “all the achievements I have under my belt” or “the inspiration I take as an artist from the primordial soup of stories that predate us”– that he is, after all, only 25. “I find parallels between Peter and myself,” he says. “We don’t necessarily fit in the generalised boxes of society, and there are sides to him that I need to reinforce in my own life; his power and his confidence in who he is. He’s not living up to the expectations of what masculinity and strength are to other people.” Some of the pressure that Smit-McPhee has felt about his own masculinity came from looking at his father, the wrestler-turned-actor Andy McPhee, who got him into the industry in the first place. His dad already had a career in Australian television when he encouraged him and his sister to try acting. Once Smit-McPhee’s career began to take off spectacularly, the family decamped to the US. “My dad has always been my coach and my mentor,” he says. “We are so close. But he’s 6ft 6in, he’s got a goatee, he has ridden with outlaw motorcycle clubs most of his life. As I started to approach adolescence, I wondered when I was going to bloom into this masculine thing. Do I have to go to the gym? Do I have to speak a different way? One day there was a bit of a breakthrough and I realised I don’t have to be any of that. I’m an ectomorph. I’m interested in philosophy. I’m an artist, and that’s beautiful. Peter helped me discover that it’s OK not to fit into that masculine box. You can still be strong, no matter how you look and carry yourself.” Has he confronted his father about this? “Yeah. One day we got into a father-son thing, clashing heads a bit, and it just happened that I ended up saying I wasn’t going to be like him. He said he never wanted that; he just wanted me to have street smarts and to protect myself. He broke down a bit and said: ‘You’re my boy, you’re perfect, you don’t have to be anything that I am.’ It was a beautiful transition point for both of us.” There has been another change in his life recently, one which comes up when I ask about the “777” tattoo on his hand. “It’s an angelic number,” he says. “It represents God for many but for me it was to mark a point of transition in my life. I can’t say what because it’s so personal to me but I think everyone can relate to it. You get to that point in your life where you realise you’ve become stagnant. You just need to grow and change, and then you cut off certain people.” Whoa. That sounds brutal. Are we talking about something traumatic? “Not really, it’s just what tends to happen in LA or any big city I guess. I was around many of the same people who maybe seven years ago were necessary to my life, and yet now you find it’s a very surface-level relationship. I’m someone who needs to keep evolving in my craft, my personal life, my health, and I found those people weren’t doing that for me. It’s not to blame them or whatever journey they are on. It’s just about cutting ties in a healthy way.” Anyone who sees The Power of the Dog will recognise this as very Peter-like behaviour. Whomever it was that Kodi Smit-McPhee expunged from his life can at least console themselves that the event was momentous enough to be marked with a commemorative tattoo. No one could accuse him of taking it lightly. Taking things lightly just isn’t his style. • The Power of the Dog is in cinemas from 19 November and on Netflix from 1 December.It is fair to say the standard of the Wednesday five-a-side league has improved of late at Penyrheol Leisure Centre, where Swansea supporters have been duelling with familiar faces, including the head coach, Russell Martin, and the technical coach, Matt Gill. Unsurprisingly, the staff team are top of the league, set up by the longstanding groundsman at the club’s Fairwood training base, Kevin Roberts, who usually assumes the role of referee. “I told off our kit man, Mike, for playing too many Hollywood passes last week,” says Martin, laughing. “‘Just keep it simple!’ He was fuming. We play the Swans way.” Over the years, Roberto Martínez, Brendan Rodgers, Michael Laudrup and Graham Potter set up Swansea to dominate. Martin, too, believes in a possession-based style and fans are enjoying what they are seeing. The team have had a greater share of possession in every Championship game this season – only Potter’s Brighton enjoyed more of the ball against them, in September’s Carabao Cup match – and in victory against Peterborough last month they completed 779 passes. They average 537 short passes a game – almost double the tally of Saturday’s visitors, Blackpool – but Martin knows not everyone agrees with his thinking despite four wins in the past six matches. “If you don’t believe in what we’re doing, no problem, but we really do,” he says. They rank first in the division for forward passes and successful passes into the final third but one of the biggest things, Martin says, is “ball speed” and keeping the ball in play – they have for a league-high 54 minutes, four more than the average. “You always get people who say ‘possession doesn’t mean you win’, but if you have the ball and you have it a long way from your goal, your chances of conceding become much smaller,” says the 35-year-old, the youngest manager in the top four tiers. “For us, it is about taking as much fight out of the game as we can and controlling it with the football.” In March his MK Dons team set a British record, since such records began, for the most consecutive passes leading to a goal, Will Grigg rounding off a 56-pass move. A week later, a video of Martin staunchly reiterating his desire to polish plan A rather than adopt a plan B went viral. “If it doesn’t work and I get sacked, at least I get sacked doing something I believe in. I don’t get sacked regretting that I have bowed on my principles.” The clip has chalked up almost 400,000 views. “It wasn’t a big deal to me – it was just common sense. It helped us build a bit of siege mentality. It was like: ‘Look, no one believes we can do this and no one wants us to be successful doing this.’ It’s the British mentality towards football. Traditionally, it’s been about rolling your sleeves and fighting but, slowly but surely, it’s changing.” His impressive work in League One led Swansea to come calling in the summer. He spoke to Potter and Owain Tudur Jones, with whom he played at Norwich, before moving his family to south Wales. “We’re loving it. I swim in the sea as much as I can, after training or on days off.” His 10-year-old, Reno, has joined Swansea’s academy and his youngest, Leo, is in the pre-academy with the midfielder Korey Smith’s eldest and the former winger Nathan Dyer’s son. “If you’re coaching an under-six, the first thing you want them to do is get them comfortable with the ball. It’s not run, it’s not run the channel, it’s not kick it really far, it’s not ping it or shoot, it’s try and control the ball with two feet. That principle, as basic as it sounds, is the same here.” Martin is engaging company. Conversation spans from asking MK Dons to invest in recycling bins to Marcus Rashford pushing the envelope and Cop26 appearing a box-ticking exercise. “There were two weeks of lots of conversation but without much consequence. It was like: ‘We’ll get together in this room, we’ll chat about it, show people we care and then we’ll just see what happens.’ That tends to be the way of leaders at the minute. When you have the opportunity to try, at least show people you are really trying.” At least it seems football is prepared to tackle big issues, be it the climate crisis, racism or human rights. It is something Martin has tried to tackle on a personal level through his foundation, which uses football to address wider social issues. “Footballers have been told for so long: ‘You’re role models, you have to behave properly.’ But when they put their head above the parapet and say something that some people don’t agree with, it’s like: ‘No, no, no you’re a footballer, put yourself back in your box.’ When the footballers are showing a lot more decency than the prime minister and a lot of the government officials, then there is a bit of a problem. “Talking about politics now, I’m getting angry,” he says, and so conversation turns back to football. After all, there is an 8pm kick-off in the Phil Owen Memorial League on the horizon. This week they won 10-4. “We go one-nil up and keep the ball for ever,” he says. “It can get a bit tasty. But I enjoy it. This is such a good place in terms of the people, how friendly they are, how supportive they have been. I think they can see we’re trying to do something that is really aligned with what the club has done previously, in its modern history.”The stadium that is home to the Los Angeles Lakers is getting a new name: the Crypto.com Arena. The name reflects the arena’s new sponsorship agreement with a Singapore-based cryptocurrency trading platform. That may be good news for cryptocurrency fanatics – but perhaps not so much for another faction within the digital landscape: cryptographers. Look up the word “crypto” in Webster’s dictionary, and you’ll see it refers to cryptography, which in turn is defined as “the computerized encoding and decoding of information”. Search “crypto” on Google, however, and you’ll see a host of top results pointing to cryptocurrencies like bitcoin and ethereum. This lexical shift has weighed heavily on cryptographers, who, over the past few years, have repeated the rallying cry “Crypto means cryptography” on social media. T-shirts and hoodies trumpet the phrase and variations on it; there’s a website dedicated solely to clarifying the issue. “‘Crypto’ for decades has been used as shorthand and as a prefix for things related to cryptography,” said Amie Stepanovich, executive director of Silicon Flatirons Center at the University of Colorado Law School and creator of the pro-cryptography T-shirts, which have become a hit at conferences. “In fact, in the term cryptocurrency, the prefix crypto refers back to cryptography.” It’s often a losing battle, and that appears to have played out in the case of crypto.com itself. Beginning in 1993, as the Verge reported, the crypto.com domain was owned by Matt Blaze, a cryptography expert who repeatedly rejected would-be buyers – even as the rise of cryptocurrency meant he could have made millions of dollars. “I think calling cryptocurrencies ‘crypto’ is a poor choice, with bad consequences for both cryptography and cryptocurrencies,” he tweeted in 2018. Ultimately, however, the domain was sold, and now if you go to Crypto.com you’ll see a giant video of Matt Damon indicating that investing in cryptocurrencies is roughly as courageous as scaling an icy cliff or blasting into space. Yet there remains an internecine feud among the tech savvy about the word. As Parker Higgins of the Freedom of the Press Foundation, who has spent years involved in cryptography activism, pointed out, the cryptography crowd is by nature deeply invested in precision – after all, designing and cracking codes is an endeavor in which, if you get things “a little wrong, it can blow the whole thing up”. There are global debates over both cryptography – for instance, questions over whether chat services should offer “backdoors” that skirt encryption – and the regulation of cryptocurrency. “There is a need to distinguish between those two areas to avoid absolutely foreseeable confusion,” Stepanovich said, a particular issue when it comes to “legislators and regulators who are not always subject matter experts in these areas, even if they are charged with overseeing them”. Higgins agreed. “Crypto as shorthand for cryptography really was in widespread use. You could talk about crypto even on Capitol Hill and people would know what you were talking about – that really did hold a lot of, forgive this, but currency.” And at a time when many still aren’t sure what cryptocurrency is, the confusion over the terms just makes things muddier. “Strong cryptography is a cornerstone of the way that people talk about privacy and security, and it has been under attack for decades” by governments, law enforcement, and “all sorts of bad actors”, Higgins said. For its defenders, confusion over terminology creates yet another challenge. Stepanovich acknowledged the challenge of opposing the trend, but said the weight of history is on her side. “The study of crypto has been around for ever,” she said. “The most famous code is known as the Caesar cipher, referring to Julius Caesar. This is not new.” Cryptocurrency, on the other hand, is a relatively recent development, and she is not ready to concede to “a concept that may or may not survive government regulation”. She remains invested in the linguistic debate because it’s so closely linked to policy. “Allowing people to develop and use encryption is hugely important in protecting human rights, privacy and protecting the basis on which cryptocurrency has been built,” Stepanovich said. “We all have hills we are willing to die on – this might be mine.”The tender, fantastical world of Hilda is easy to get lost in. Based on the graphic novels by British cartoonist Luke Pearson, the gently melancholic animated series follows the titular character, a spirited, blue-haired 11-year-old, on slice-of-life adventures around the town of Trolberg. Pearson’s drawings come to life as Hilda and her mother, Johanna, move from the mountains to the city, and the young girl is forced to integrate into school and socialisation when she’d rather be exploring nature. Prior to moving, her only friends were her pet deer-fox, Twig, a helpful elf, Alfur, and a mysterious neighbour, Wood Man. Upon arrival in Trolberg, she joins the Sparrow Scouts and befriends two human children, the strait-laced Frida and easily frightened David. Each episode is titled as a chapter, but they aren’t particularly sequential – most stand alone as single stories, following Hilda and her friends’ adventures, whether they are looking for a lost library book, capturing baby trolls or learning witchcraft. There are also multi-chapter stories, unfolding like small films that are dazzling in their meticulous world-building. The series pushes the boundaries of storytelling beyond the graphic novels’ world, especially in the second season, which ups the stakes through more daring plotlines. Hilda’s world straddles the supernatural and the ordinary – the show’s magic realism is much of what makes it unique. Much of the first season involves her learning how to exist in a non-magical world, and her friends learning of the existence of magic. Even so, there are discoveries to be made, many of which reveal truths about the world – for instance, when Hilda learns about Nisse, small house spirits that live in unused spaces in every home. Human attitudes towards these creatures resembles racism, but Hilda tries to see the best in everyone and gets to know the Nisse as individuals, forging a friendship with one in particular. As any good children’s television show should be, Hilda is concerned largely with themes of courage, friendship and community, though not in a didactic manner. The character development of the central trio is subtle but clear, particularly in the character of David, who learns to be brave. But, as Hilda tells him, “fear can be good” – there’s no black and white thinking here, encouraging children to embrace all parts of themselves. Hilda herself can be difficult, and her relationship with Johanna becomes more strained as the series goes on (typical of a mother-daughter dynamic when the child enters adolescence) but the love and care between the characters is never in question. There’s also a healthy dose of anti-authoritarianism, as Hilda and her friends find out that adults in positions of power – for example, Hilda’s favourite weather woman, Victoria Van Gale – often have no idea what they’re doing. From there, the kids take matters into their own hands. On an aesthetic level, Hilda is incredibly pleasing. Pearson’s artwork leans heavily on an autumnal palette, breathing life into Hilda’s Scandinavian surrounds – leaves, mountains, trees – with the character’s shock of blue hair providing a beautiful visual foil. The library, a central setting in the show, is one of the most visually compelling animated sets I’ve ever seen, all arches, dim lighting and perfectly aligned books; while a house in the first season – enchanted so the characters can’t escape – has a looping, Escheresque design. Musically, too, the series is a treat, from the glitchy instrumental theme song by Grimes to perfectly soundtracked moments by Ex Hex and Walter Martin and, much to my delight, Melbourne band Twerps’ Back to You. The music of Hilda spans the last decade of indie and electronic (remember Dan Deacon?), lending a nostalgic feel to a show that captures so much of the magic and innocence of childhood. Funny, sweet and moving, Hilda has been a balm in a difficult period and has strong appeal for adults and children alike. We could all be a little more like Hilda – and with a third season and a film on the way, she’s got plenty of time to grow even more.Police forces will put a “relentless focus on perpetrators” in an attempt to tackle soaring levels of violence against women and girls, according to the new national police lead. Speaking at the National Police Chiefs’ Council’s (NPCC) and Association of Police and Crime Commissioners’s joint conference on Thursday, Maggie Blyth, the deputy chief constable of Hampshire police who was appointed into the new role of national police lead for violence against women and girls five weeks ago, acknowledged that trust between women and the police had been “broken through some of the tragic events of the last few weeks and months”. Blyth said she had put together a two-year plan to transform how forces tackle crimes against women and girls, after the deaths of Sabina Nessa, 28, and Sarah Everard, 33, and the conviction of a serving police officer for Everard’s killing. “Our first focus, our first pillar is on the relentless focus of perpetrators and our policing response very much around perpetrators,” she said. The “perpetrator-focused approach is currently being piloted in Avon and Somerset and involves attempting to disrupt and track suspected sex offenders including rapists, instead of focusing on the credibility of victims. Blyth was appointed in September after a highly critical report from the police watchdog, which warned that England and Wales was facing a “national epidemic of violence against women and girls”. She told officers at the conference that police needed to act quickly to rebuild trust and said there were “immediate police improvements that mean that action is needed in the next few weeks straight away”. The police were “very much in listening mode, and that’s really important … because of the dip in trust and confidence,” she said, adding: “We won’t move forward at all in any of our policing work and our wider partnership work on violence against women and girls if we don’t make a change and rebuild that trust that we know has been broken through some of the tragic events of the last few weeks and months.” That work had to focus on “culture and conduct and behaviour”, she added. During a panel discussion on violence against women and girls, which noted that “the murder of Sarah Everard by a serving police officer has prompted widespread concerns about women’s safety and male violence, as well as raising serious questions about culture, vetting and recruitment across the service”, the victims’ commissioner, Dame Vera Baird, made a direct challenge to the assembled officers. She said the treatment of violence against women and girls in the police had “no central direction, no central resourcing, but it does kill a woman every three days”. Baird called for a overhaul in police culture, for more status to be given to officers specialised in tackling violence against women and for VAWG to become a strategic policing priority, like terrorism, to give the issue central direction and extra resources, particularly for specialist officers. “Ask yourselves, after 30 reports and 30 years of women’s voices raised against violence against women and girls: why are you still not policing it properly?” she said. “Don’t you owe it to the public to see that and to change culturally around by 180 degrees and start to lead us out of this epidemic of violence against women and girls?” It comes after a YouGov poll, on behalf of the End Violence Against Women (EVAW) coalition, found 47% of women and 40% of men said their trust in the police had dropped since the conviction of Everard’s killer, Wayne Couzens. About one in three said they continued to trust the police. EVAW’s director, Andrea Simon, told officers: “We are concerned … there has been a comparatively swift leap towards various initiatives which seem aimed at improving public perception of policing, before substantive transformation and improvement in our criminal justice response has taken place.”A man diagnosed with paranoid schizophrenia who killed a 23-year-old man and injured seven others in a violent stabbing spree in Birmingham last year has been sentenced to life in prison with a minimum term of 21 years. Zephaniah McLeod, 28, carried out a series of seemingly random and motiveless knife attacks early on 6 September 2020, killing Jacob Billington, a university worker who was on his way back to his hotel with friends after a night out. Ordering the 28-year-old’s detention, initially at Ashworth hospital, Mr Justice Pepperall said: “Your victims were variously enjoying a night out or returning home from work. They gave you no offence and they were chosen at random. “Wherever possible you aimed your knives at your victims’ necks,” he added. “In the course of your murderous rampage you killed one man, left another man and woman fighting for their lives and wounded five others.” He said: “I have no doubt whatsoever you are a very dangerous man and pose a significant risk to members of the public of serious harm.” Karim Khalil QC, prosecuting, told Birmingham crown court that three days before the attacks McLeod refused to attend a psychiatric assessment and said he was hearing voices “all the time” that were “distressing”. The court heard that for years McLeod had refused to consistently take anti-psychotic medication as he disliked the side-effects, and said he would only take it when he felt he was in crisis. When visited by a mental health nurse on 3 September he said he did not have a prescription for the medication and had instead been “taking his friend’s”. Prior to the visit, mental health services had been unable to locate McLeod for months after his release from a three-year prison term in April 2020. McLeod was released to live in the community unsupervised at the height of the Covid pandemic despite frequently refusing to take medication in prison and having spoken in 2018 of hearing voices that said “kill em, stab, stab em, they’re talking about you”. Kahlil told the sentencing hearing that McLeod had “never before received sustained, effective treatment” for his schizophrenia due to being in and out of prison for previous crimes including assault, supplying drugs and possession of an imitation firearm. McLeod claims to have no memory of July, August and September 2020, including the night of the attacks, but the prosecution argued that evidence that he searched for news coverage of the incident afterwards suggested he was aware to some extent. Giving evidence, Dr Jeremy Kenney-Herbert, a consultant forensic psychiatrist, said McLeod was “very dangerous” and would need “close and lifelong treatment” for his mental illness. McLeod admitted Billington’s manslaughter on the grounds of diminished responsibility, and four counts of attempted murder and three separate offences of wounding with intent to cause grievous bodily harm. Reading out statements in court, Billington’s family expressed frustration that McLeod had not been more closely monitored by mental health services and that he had been convicted of manslaughter rather than murder. “McLeod brought terror to the streets of Birmingham but apparently is not a terrorist. What he is we’ll never know,” said Billington’s father, Keith. “This man has no place in society. He is clearly one of the most dangerous people to have walked the streets of your city.” Joanne Billington, the victim’s mother, said McLeod’s care needed to be properly looked into. “My son bled to death in the street at the hands of someone well known to many agencies,” she said. McLeod, after stabbing three of his victims, went to a takeaway to ask for a knife, and when he was refused he took a taxi to his home in Selly Oak to rearm himself before returning to the city centre. Khalil said McLeod repeatedly aimed for the head and neck in the attacks. “We suggest the fact some victims sustained physical injuries that weren’t as serious was purely by chance, rather than by design,” he said. Billington’s best friend, Michael Callaghan, 24, was stabbed in the neck and suffered a “catastrophic” stroke that left him partly paralysed down his left side. In a victim impact statement, Callaghan said: “As I was bleeding out I was unable to try and help save Jacob. My friend saved my life; what’s to say I wouldn’t have been able to do the same?”The eastern leg of HS2 to Leeds has been scrapped and a full high-speed east-west line linking Manchester to Leeds will not be built, the government has confirmed, as it said faster train journeys would be delivered earlier and cheaper under a £96bn rail plan. The high-speed rail network will go ahead to Manchester but will be curtailed at an existing east Midlands station rather than run from Birmingham to Leeds, while the TransPennine route will be improved mainly through upgrades rather than a new line. The transport secretary, Grant Shapps, told the Commons the changes and investment would bring better rail connections for passengers years earlier in a network that would work for every community. He said the Oakervee review of HS2 had shown a rethink was needed, and a subsequent National Infrastructure Commission report meant “a flexible approach” and “strengthening regional rail would be most economically beneficial”. An additional £54bn will be spent on upgrades and new lines, beyond the £42bn already committed to build the first phases of HS2 from London to Birmingham and Crewe. Shapps said the integrated rail plan published on Thursday was “ambitious and unparalleled” and would speed up intercity connections as well as improving local services. Trains from Manchester to Leeds will eventually take 33 minutes instead of 55 minutes, while Birmingham to Nottingham train journeys will be cut from more than an hour to 26 minutes, according to the Department for Transport. The plan would include a new section of high-speed line from Warrington to Manchester and the western fringes of Yorkshire, Shapps said. High-speed trains will run into the centre of Nottingham and Derby on the eastern leg using a fully electrified Midland mainline – an upgrade scheme that was scrapped by the government in 2017. Shapps said the plan, which includes a new West Yorkshire mass transit system around Leeds, would “fire up economies and level up” at least a decade earlier than building HS2 as originally intended, with some work expected to start by Christmas. The move has been met with anger and disappointment in the north of England and Midlands, with Labour describing the plan as “crumbs off the table” after promises of a full joined-up high speed network. The prime minister, Boris Johnson, said as recently as last month that the government would build Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR), but the route that northern leaders hoped would be at the centre, a new high-speed line from Manchester to Leeds via Bradford, will not be built. Responding in the Commons, the shadow transport secretary, Jim McMahon, said the government “had completely sold out” the north. “We know exactly what Northern Powerhouse Rail means. They had repromised and recommitted 60 times. That opportunity looks set to be lost.” The Conservative MP Huw Merriman, the chair of the transport select committee, said the announcement showed “the danger of selling perpetual sunlight and leaving it to others to explain the moonlight”. He said ministers had long said it was not “either/or” HS2 or NPR, while people in the north would now think they had neither. Sir Edward Leigh, the Conservative MP for Gainsborough, said the north-east had “heard these promises again and again” to improve rail lines. He said while HS2 was “a white elephant”, it was now “a white elephant missing a leg”. The Bradford council leader, Susan Hinchcliffe, said by not routing a new line through the city the government had “missed a golden opportunity to make an investment which would have repaid itself many times over”, and it was “wrong-headed economics for the north and for the country”. She added: “There could hardly be a better test of the government’s commitment to levelling up than Bradford.” Andrew Adonis, the former transport secretary who launched the HS2 project in 2009, said it was “a betrayal of the north” and warned that the “economic geography of England may be seriously deformed” with a high-speed line that only serves the west of the country. However, Stop HS2 campaigners said the cancellation of the eastern leg of the project was “vindication of everything we’ve been saying for a decade”. A spokesperson, Joe Rukin, said: “You can deliver more benefits to more people more quickly for less money without the massive environmental impact by upgrading existing infrastructure, reopening old lines and providing sustainable local transport.” The HS2 line from London to Birmingham and Manchester will still go ahead. Plans for the HS2 station in Manchester may be revised to expand the surface station rather than build underground, potentially saving billions in construction costs. The high-speed line from Birmingham and Leeds will end at East Midlands Parkway rather than a planned new hub at Toton, between Nottingham and Derby. Lilian Greenwood, the Labour MP for Nottingham South, said local authorities had worked for a decade on how to maximise the benefits “and those plans are being thrown into the bin”. Rail experts said going with upgrades instead of new lines risked decades of disruption to services. The engineer and writer Gareth Dennis said it was impossible to deliver both more capacity and faster journeys without segregating high-speed trains. Darren Caplan, the chief executive of the Railway Industry Association, said it was “difficult to see this plan as anything other than a piecemeal approach”, adding that proposed TransPennine upgrades “had been promised time and time again since 2014, with millions of pounds spent on its design and shovels ready to go. These plans being torn up will only add yet more costs and delay work.” The Institution of Civil Engineers director of policy, Chris Richards, said: “It has taken us 12 years to get nowhere – we have to make the next 12 about progress.” It came as Transport for London (TfL) warned that the expiry of its funding from government on 11 December would result in tube and bus services in the capital being slashed by about 20%. Its commissioner, Andy Byford, said the current budget meant the city should prepare for “managed decline”. The London mayor, Sadiq Khan, said “levelling up Britain must not come at the expense of levelling down London ... Unless the government provides the long-term funding needed to maintain our public transport network, there will be no choice but to make significant cuts to services just as demand is growing again.”For many people in the north of England, the integrated rail review heralds less of a rail revolution than a rail betrayal. There will be relief among those whose houses were due to be bulldozed to make way for HS2’s eastern spur, as well as those who always viewed that project as an unforgivable waste of money that would primarily benefit London. But good luck finding many people who welcome the government’s downgrading of Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR), which should have been a new east-west line connecting the north’s key cities. Perhaps it is due to the planners never getting as far as sending compulsory purchase letters to properties obstructing the route or disturbing Peak District bats. But everyone who has had the misfortune of relying on the northern railways will agree that massive investment is needed to improve reliability and journey times. And, crucially, there is a need to increase capacity. Even the petrolheads who would happily tarmac the Pennine Way would probably vote for NPR because it would stop the M62 becoming more of a car park than a motorway during the rush hour. Train lines are already full, with demand projected to increase by between 78% and 200% by 2050. Slow-moving freight trains often hold up passenger services and small local services are severely constrained by sharing track with faster mainline services, which take priority three times an hour. The government is trying to spin the idea that its latest plans are better than the ones it promised years ago, because they will allow passengers to see quicker improvements. But much of the “new” rail review simply exhumes old schemes from the graveyard of broken pledges. Given that it was the Conservative government that cancelled plans to electrify the Midlands mainline and TransPennine route in 2017, breaking 2015 manifesto commitments, it is difficult to see why the north should be grateful to see both projects back on the table. The 2019 manifesto said: “We will build Northern Powerhouse Rail between Leeds and Manchester and then focus on Liverpool, Tees Valley, Hull, Sheffield and Newcastle.” Some may question if ministers can claim to be “building” a new line if all they are doing is constructing a little bit of new track and then carrying out an upgrade that was promised six years ago. And what about poor old Bradford, a city of missed opportunity? The fifth largest metropolitan authority in England, it has a growing population of 542,100. A total of 26.3% of the population are aged under 18, compared with 21.4% nationally, making it the youngest city in the UK. Yet no trains run through Bradford. They all stop and turn around again, at one of the two tiny stations. It is a cul-de-sac of more than half a million people. Currently, the 10-mile journey from Bradford to Leeds takes 20 minutes on the fastest service. But you can travel 38 miles to London from Reading (population: 220,000) in 24 minutes. In fairness, the government never promised Bradford an NPR stop, despite it being a key demand from Transport for the North (TfN), the strategic body set up by the Conservatives to advise the government on the region’s transport needs – and then consistently ignored. It now says simply electrifying the line to Leeds will cut the journey time to a more sensible 12 minutes. It is possible party politics could have come into play. Bradford’s three inner-city MPs are Labour, with two Tories in the outer seats of Shipley and Keighley, represented by the backbenchers Philip Davies and the newcomer Robbie Moore. It is worth bearing in mind an article written by the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, in the Yorkshire Post in 2017, when he was still a backbencher, which said: “London has Crossrail, the Midlands is getting HS2, and now we in the north need the government to back Northern Powerhouse Rail.” Voters should probably know that when the government boasts of investing £360m in smart ticketing, it cancelled Transport for the North’s project to do just that in the north (but for less than half the price) earlier this year. And while it can find no money to fund a modern station in Bradford, it is willing to pay to explore restoring a passenger service to Stocksbridge, a former steel town near Sheffield, which is home to fewer than 10,000 people. It just so happens Stocksbridge returned its first Tory MP since 1935 in the last general election.The Morrison government is preparing to consider legislation to establish an Indigenous voice to parliament, amid calls for the new mechanism to be enacted “as soon as possible”. Guardian Australia understands that the final report of the Indigenous voice co-design panel will be considered by cabinet as early as next week, with sources saying that legislation to fulfil its recommended model is “imminent”. But the issue – and whether to legislate without it being constitutionally enshrined through a referendum – is set to split the Indigenous community, with mixed views about the merits of what some perceive as “incremental” reform. The move from the minister for Indigenous Australians, Ken Wyatt, to have legislation introduced to parliament in this term of government will also face an uphill battle because of time constraints, with only two sitting weeks left before parliament rises for the year. If an election is called in January, the final sitting fortnight of this year is the last opportunity for the government to introduce legislation before the election. The co-chair of the design panel, Tom Calma, told Guardian Australia the design panel, which has been consulting on its recommendations for the model for the Indigenous voice since October 2019 was “very keen to see it happen before the election”. “I am very keen from a personal perspective that this happens as soon as possible. It is important and that is what the community want,” Calma said. The government has ruled out enshrining the voice in the constitution, first proposed in the Uluru Statement from the Heart in 2017, but Wyatt has been working to firm up support for a legislated body as a significant step that avoids the difficult issue of constitutional change that is opposed by many within the Coalition. The Uluru statement recommended a constitutionally enshrined voice to parliament, a Makarrata or truth-telling commission, and an eventual treaty between Indigenous and non-Indigenous Australians. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Calma said the final report did not canvass the possibility of a referendum to enshrine the voice in the constitution, saying the panel had only considered the design of the new voice, as per its terms of reference. He also said that there was pragmatism within the community that enacting the voice through legislation was the swiftest way for it to become a reality. “They believe it needs to be enacted as soon as possible, and as soon as possible is not going to be a referendum,” Calma said. Speaking at a Reconciliation Australia panel this week, Wyatt canvassed the potential of the legislated voice to be constitutionally enshrined when asked about the political landscape for Indigenous Australians in 20 years’ time. “I think we will see by then that Australia will have moved significantly forward. It will be a voice within constitution, and the legislative structures around that will be well and truly entrenched,” Wyatt said. He also pointed to the success of the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Commission (Atsic), which was abolished by the Howard government. “Atsic was fantastic at the regional level – we had a say in what was happening. And then, ultimately, it was abolished. “I just want to see us more involved in every facet of Australian life – that we are equals and we stand as members of parliament, as peers on the floors of their chambers, and we stand as peers within Australian society in every field of endeavour,” Wyatt said. The former Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander social justice commissioner Mick Gooda, who was also on the advisory panel for the national voice, said its establishment would “change the conversation”. “The conversation changes when we are in the room and that’s the same as the national voice to parliament – it will change the conversation because we’re there,” Gooda said at the Reconciliation Australia convention. The panel, co-chaired by Calma and Prof Marcia Langton, handed its final report to Wyatt in August after 18 months of consultation. The final report further refines recommendations made in the interim report released in October last year, which proposed different models of a “National Voice to parliament” to advise on issues affecting Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples. Under the proposals advocated in the interim report, a 16- to 18-member group selected by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples would be established either by direct election, or by drawing on state and regional bodies. The national voice would not administer programs and would not be able to veto laws made by the parliament or overturn Australian government decisions. The panel says the voice would reflect the desire by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples to have a greater say “in the laws of the parliament, policies and Australian government decisions which affect Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples.” “There is a desire to make sure Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people’s distinct perspectives, aspirations and needs are heard. The national voice will be a turning point for the relationship between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and the parliament and Australian government,” the interim report said. A 2018 parliamentary committee recommended the co-design process, with this to be followed “in a deliberate and timely manner, legislative, executive and constitutional options to establish the voice”. Labor supports a constitutionally enshrined voice as a “modest and gracious request” from First Nations people, and has promised to hold a referendum if it wins government. “Our precondition for support is that any proposition has the support of the First Nations people and so we think that the denial of a constitutionally enshrined voice is the denial of the Australian instinct for a fair go,” Anthony Albanese said earlier this year. “If fear of failure is your guiding light, you need never fear success. There has to be a constitutionally recognised voice to parliament.” Speaking in August as part of the Closing the Gap statement, Scott Morrison said the Indigenous voice would “provide avenues at the national, local and regional levels for Indigenous voices to be heard”. “Once a model for the Indigenous voice has been developed, all governments will need to explore how they can work with the voice to ensure that these views are considered,” Morrison said. “Some might want this process to be faster. I want it to be right.”A top Chinese diplomat has likened Australia to “a naughty guy” over the Aukus nuclear submarine deal, saying it jeopardises Australia’s peace-loving reputation and the Australian people “should be more worried”. China’s acting ambassador to Australia, Wang Xining, said Australia would be branded as a “sabre wielder” rather than a “peace defender” as a result of the plan to acquire at least eight nuclear-powered submarines, which would also affect the nuclear non-proliferation system. “There’s zero nuclear capacity, technologically, in Australia, that would guarantee you will be trouble free, you will be incident free,” Wang said. “And if anything happened, are the politicians ready to say sorry to people in Melbourne and in Adelaide?” He also called on Australian politicians to “refrain from doing anything that’s destructive to our relationship” after the defence minister, Peter Dutton, signalled Australia would be likely to participate if the US came to Taiwan’s aid in a conflict with China. In an interview with Guardian Australia, Wang gave no indication Beijing was about to end the freeze on calls between Chinese and Australian ministers, saying speculation about Australia’s engagement in a military conflict was “not a conducive environment” for high-level talks. Amid increasing strains in the relationship between Australia and its top trading partner, Wang said he would not be surprised if Canberra decided to cancel a Chinese company’s long-term lease of the Port of Darwin, but asked: “I wonder whether Australia can afford to break another contract?” Aukus an ‘Anglo-Saxon clique’ Australia cancelled a French contract for 12 diesel-electric submarines in favour of a new security partnership with the US and the UK aimed at acquiring at least eight nuclear-powered submarines – triggering a significant diplomatic backlash from France. The Morrison government says the decision is driven by the deteriorating security situation in the Indo-Pacific, with the Australian ambassador to the US, Arthur Sinodinos, saying the more capable submarines will allow Australia to “project our power further up” from its shores. Wang said the Australian people should be worried about the impact of Aukus on the “nation’s branding”, given Australia portrayed itself as a supporter of the international system. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “By trying to acquire a nuclear-powered submarine, it certainly has an impact on the ongoing non-proliferation system. So are you going to be a naughty guy?” he asked, with a chuckle at the end. Wang said people of his age in China saw Australia as a peace lover, “but nowadays people know that a nuclear-powered submarine is designed to launch long-range attack against a target far away”. “So who are you going to attack? You are no longer a peace lover, a peace defender, you become a sabre wielder in certain form,” he said. China is rapidly modernising its own military force, and already has the largest navy in the world with a battle force of about 355 ships and submarines, according to a Pentagon report last month. China currently operates 12 nuclear-powered submarines and, like the US, is a nuclear weapons state. The Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne, has sought to allay Malaysia and Indonesia’s concerns about Aukus, travelling to south-east Asia earlier this month to say Australia was “one of the world’s strongest proponents of the global non-proliferation regime” and would work with the International Atomic Energy Agency. Payne reassured her south-east Asian counterparts that Aukus would “make us a more capable partner that is better able to contribute to the security and stability of our region”. But Wang described the Aukus deal among Australia, the US and the UK as an “Anglo-Saxon clique”, saying it “shows that certain people in your country still have a mentality of concentric stratification of people according to their cultural and ethnic background”. ‘Scaring away’ Chinese investors Wang has been serving as the chargé d’affaires – the top ranked diplomat – at the Chinese embassy since the beginning of November, after the former ambassador, Cheng Jingye, returned to Beijing at the end of a five-year posting. Wang, who was already in Canberra as the deputy head of mission at the embassy, said he was saddened and disappointed at how the relationship had deteriorated over the past five years. Sitting down for an interview at the ambassador’s residence, Wang blamed “negative policies and actions from Australia against China” that had been implemented in a “ruthless and arbitrary way”. He cited the banning of Chinese company Huawei from the 5G network in 2018, the cancellation of the Victorian Belt and Road Agreement earlier this year, and increased barriers to foreign investment that had “scared away” Chinese investors. The Morrison government will soon consider the future of a Chinese company’s 99-year lease of the Port of Darwin, in a move that could further strain the relationship. Wang said under the existing contract, signed between Landbridge and the Northern Territory government in 2015, the company was planning to expand the capacity of the port. “I wouldn’t be surprised if the [Australian] intelligence and the security apparatus would stretch its hand, again, to a normal business operation,” he said. He said the Chinese government would respond to any decision once announced, just as it had responded to “all the negative moves” to date. “But it seems to me that all these responses have fallen on deaf ears, so nobody in the government seems to be listening carefully about what my government have expressed, and even in certain areas it seems the tensions are still going on.” Australia has accused China of a campaign of “economic coercion” after Beijing imposed tariffs and other trade actions on a range of Australian export sectors over the past 18 months, including coal, barley, wine and seafood. Wang continued to defend those measures on technical grounds, and said there was “inadequate diplomacy that’s been executed by your government in terms of solving these differences”. He said Chinese and Australian officials continued to speak to one another, but ministerial talks would require a better “political atmosphere” and the prospect of “concrete results”. In a more upbeat outlook on the way forward, Wang said China was “still very keen to engage in a very fruitful and constructive dialogue and troubleshooting process to get all these problems solved in the end”. Abbott’s Taiwan trip ‘very unfortunate’ However, one of the most sensitive issues in the relationship is Taiwan, with Australia raising concerns about an increase in Chinese military pressure against the democratically ruled island of 24 million people, amid Beijing’s long-term goal of unification. Dutton told the Australian newspaper last week: “It would be inconceivable that we wouldn’t support the US in an action if the US chose to take that action.” Responding to Dutton, Wang said Australian politicians should “not to do anything that would lead to an even more gloomy state of our relationship”. Wang said the former Australian prime minister Tony Abbott’s visit to Taiwan last month was “very unfortunate”. Abbott – who said he travelled in a private capacity – warned that Beijing might lash out against Taiwan soon, and the US and Australia could not stand idly by. Wang said: “Actually, it is very agonising to see that such a high-level politician would engage in something that doesn’t serve the interests of Australia, because I think it serves the interests of Australia and China to stick to one-China policy and make our relationship as trouble-free as possible.”Former Liberal leader John Hewson has joined Labor veteran Barry Jones to endorse a social media-focused advocacy campaign targeting Scott Morrison’s record on integrity matters and climate action in the lead-up to the federal election. Hewson says the voluntary not-for-profit organisation, the Truth and Integrity project, has some crossover with Climate 200 – an organisation supporting independent candidates focused on the climate crisis to challenge Liberal incumbents in their urban heartland – and with the “voices” community groups modelled on the successful 2013 campaign of independent Cathy McGowan. The integrity project, modelled in part on the Lincoln project in the United States, will not field political candidates, but will target its advocacy through content produced for social media. One of the people involved in the campaign is Australian film producer Bob Weis. Hewson says the organisation intends to fundraise before next year’s federal election campaign “drawing on the fairly significant base of people who will fund this sort of activity, focusing on the big issues that matter to our democracy”. “I think one of the big issues right now that has been building for a lot of different reasons since the last election has been the whole issue of integrity and accountability in government,” Hewson said. The former Liberal leader said the Morrison government had failed to produce a credible model for a federal integrity commission over this parliamentary term. “They are just playing games with that – which is pretty offensive.” Hewson said the prime minister was now facing sustained questioning “about whether he is telling the truth”. He said pre-election contentions the prime minister had made this week about the Labor party increasing the cost of petrol or increasing energy prices lacked factual underpinning. “There is no evidence at all to support any of this stuff,” Hewson said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Climate 200, the group established by the climate activist Simon Holmes à Court, has raised $3.6m over the past few months. With government MPs being targeted by activists in blue ribbon seats, the Liberal senator Andrew Bragg has already written to the Australian Electoral Commission asking for a probe of the “voices” movements that are organising independent campaigns. Hewson said he and Jones had worked with Holmes à Court and “I’ve done a fair bit of work supporting the voices movement”. The former Liberal leader said it was likely the next federal election could result in a hung parliament with independents holding the balance of power. Many independents contesting the election were running on platforms of climate action, integrity and accountability. “It all comes together. That’s the over-arching issue,” he said. “You can see how the independents could hold the balance of power within that over-arching element of integrity and accountability, and the key elements of policies like climate and so on.” “A loose alliance of independents could say to whoever is in government, unless you give us responsible legislation in these areas then we are not going to support you – I think that will drive to better government.” In a statement posted on the group’s website, Jones says he has joined Hewson as a patron of the Truth and Integrity project “because democracy is under serious threat and both the Coalition and the federal ALP have no vision beyond the election of 2022”. “Only an active citizenry can prevent sliding towards authoritarian or populist democracy with its endless appeals to the short term and self-interest,” Jones says.The New South Wales Liberal executive will be pushed on Friday to speed up preselections in the state that could determine the outcome of the next federal election. A number of Liberals are frustrated about the backroom tactics of a key ally of the prime minister – the immigration minister, Alex Hawke. Party sources say Hawke has been deliberately delaying preselections in Morrison’s home state in order to circumvent grassroots plebiscites to install candidates. Guardian Australia understands a motion will go to the state executive on Friday calling for outstanding preselections to be expedited. With a federal election now only months away, the motion is said to have the support of both the hard right and moderate factions. Liberals are worried the backroom brinkmanship is jeopardising the government’s election preparations. Only a handful of preselections have been completed. Exasperated Liberals point out the party currently has no candidate preselected for the electorate of Parramatta – a targeted seat after the departure of the long-serving Labor MP Julie Owens. Some sources say the Warringah conference is particularly agitated about the prolonged delays because there is no Liberal candidate preselected to take on Zali Steggall – the independent who unseated Tony Abbott at the 2019 election. Factional politics in the NSW Liberal party is notoriously brutal. This preselection season is the first time candidates will be selected through a controversial plebiscite model successfully pushed by Abbott. Some of Hawke’s colleagues contend he is using his position as Scott Morrison’s organisational proxy to generate a crisis that can only be solved through central intervention – a tactic that would maximise the position of his own “soft right” faction. The moderate and the hard-right conservative factions have formed a loose alliance in the state to counter the power of Hawke’s centre-right faction. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Liberal party performed strongly in NSW during the 2019 federal election, but the government is under pressure from climate-focused independents rallying in heartland seats, and from political insurgencies on the right, with micro-parties emboldened by government restrictions imposed during the coronavirus pandemic. The latest quarterly polling data from Guardian Essential suggests that Clive Palmer’s United Australia party has picked up steam since August. On primary votes, the UAP is currently a nose in front of Pauline Hanson’s One Nation, led in NSW by the high-profile former Labor politician Mark Latham. The UAP has gone from nothing to grabbing 5% of the primary vote since August. Voter interest is concentrated in regional parts of the country – although the strongest support at the moment seems to be in NSW rather than Queensland. Ahead of the final two parliamentary sitting weeks of the year, Morrison and the Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, have moved into faux campaign mode, with an election due in the first half of 2022.The pharmacy and aged care sectors have called for new penalties for vaccination status fraud including bribery, use of fake certificates or stand-in vaccine recipients getting the Covid-19 jab on behalf of an unvaccinated person. The Pharmacy Guild and Aged and Community Services Australia have warned that anti-vaxxers are using these tactics to escape public health laws including “no jab, no job” provisions in the aged care sector. Services Australia has said there are penalties of up to $6,660 for vaccine providers who forge records, but the submissions to the joint committee on law enforcement’s vaccine-related fraud inquiry point to gaps in existing laws. The Pharmacy Guild said that vaccination certificate fraud was an ongoing concern. The guild noted a “small number of reports” of pharmacists being asked to falsify immunisation records, including being offered a “significant financial inducement” of $1,000. General practitioners have also complained of attempted bribery. The guild said there had also been reports of “individuals other than the person who has made the vaccination booking presenting for vaccination at a pharmacy” so that a third person – such as an anti-vaxxer – could receive a genuine Covid-19 vaccination certificate without having had the jab. It said vaccination status fraud “will likely become more prevalent”, warning that pharmacists should not have to be the ones policing fraud because they could be subjected to harassment and intimidation. “Penalties, akin to those that apply to quarantine breachers and those who ignore mandatory vaccination orders, should also apply to those seeking to bribe a vaccinator to falsify records or to manipulate records, either digitally or by having someone else get vaccinated in their place.” The guild also complained that “no guidance” had been given about whether potential Covid-19 vaccination status fraud needed to be reported, calling for uniform guidelines and a dedicated reporting system. Vaccination passports are the centrepiece of many states’ reopening plan, with residents of New South Wales, Queensland and Victoria needing to demonstrate they are fully vaccinated to access retail and hospitality venues. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Australia also has a nationwide requirement for workers in the aged care sector to be vaccinated, with state-based mandates extending the “no jab, no job” principle to large swathes of the public service and high-risk industries. ACSA expressed “concern over the potential adverse impacts that may arise in the aged care sector from the emergence of fake vaccine certificates”. “Of particular concern is the employment of potentially unvaccinated aged care workers, which would create increased vulnerability for older persons who are consumers of aged care as well as creating risk for providers not meeting public health orders requiring workers to be vaccinated,” it submitted. “To maximise the protection of aged care consumers from Covid-19, the Australian government should introduce penalties for use of fraudulent certificates as a deterrence.” Privacy and security experts have warned that vaccinations certificates displayed through the Medicare and state-based apps can be easily forged. In its submission, Services Australia acknowledged with “the emerging adult vaccine requirements there may be potential risk around forging of vaccination records”. But it claimed “harsh penalties” were already in place, including fines of up to $6,660 if a vaccination provider breaches their obligations and $26,640 and two years in prison for “offences committed relating to protected information”. “The agency is aware of a small number of scams relating to vaccination certificates and allegations of fake certificates. “The agency works closely with the relevant authorities to address and manage those threats appropriately.” The health department submitted that Services Australia was working to “develop a Covid-19 specific immunisation record” that would include “live image detection, such as a shimmering watermark, making the digital record difficult to replicate”.Experts have questioned how a controversial energy technology that doesn’t currently exist in Australia could be earmarked as a major source of cuts to greenhouse gas emissions in the Morrison government’s plan to reach net zero by 2050. According to the government’s modelling report of its “technology not taxes” plan, a technique known as BECCS – bioenergy with carbon capture and storage – would be removing about 15% from the nation’s gross greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. But the approach, which involves burning vegetation or waste for power and then capturing the carbon dioxide and injecting it underground, is not one of the priority technologies the government has picked to support. The government’s modelling report has already come under fire from experts for questionable assumptions and an approach which leaves the gas industry to grow while relying on international offsets. Experts said it was not clear how the government had arrived at the BECCS figure, with some saying the technique itself was unproven, problematic and ecologically risky. BECCS theoretically requires three key elements – the availability of biomass such as trees, vegetation or waste and land and water to grow it; a power plant to burn the biomass and capture the CO2; and then a geological formation underground close by where the CO2 could be injected. There was no mention of BECCS in the government’s latest progress report on its low emissions technology plans, published earlier this month. According to the government’s modelling report, BECCS removes 38m tonnes of CO2 by 2050 under its technology plan, compared to 253Mt of gross emissions from sectors including electricity, transport and agriculture. Other scenarios modelled by the government include even higher levels of BECCS. BECCS is included in many global efforts to map out routes for economies to reach net zero, but remains controversial because of its potential to compete for land and resources currently used to produce food. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Dr Kate Dooley, a researcher at the University of Melbourne and an expert on how land could be used to mitigate climate change, said based on the government’s numbers, about 14m hectares – or about 6% of all Australia’s agricultural land – would be needed to generate emissions reductions at that level. She said: “BECCS is an unproven technology with significant land area requirements which at a global scale have been shown to pose tradeoffs and serious risks for resource use, biodiversity, and food security.” Dooley said while Australia’s size meant there were good opportunities to cut emissions on land, much of this potential came in reducing clearing. She added: “Risky unproven technologies such as BECCS should be avoided in favour of options with greater co-benefits.” Energy and climate change program director at the Grattan Institute, Tony Wood, said including BECCS in the government’s planning at all “would be problematic because the report says it’s based on an assumption the technology is not economically viable in absence of incentives. “But there’s nothing in the report that describes what incentives would trigger such an investment. It’s imposed on the modelling without any justification, but it offsets a substantial amount of emissions. “These are extraordinary numbers to have in a report without any justification of how this would work, how it would happen and what the costs would be.” Tim Baxter, a senior researcher at the Climate Council, said the inclusion of BECCS in the government’s modelling was a “farce”. “The pretence that BECCS will get off the ground at this scale in Australia without careful, intelligent planning is absurd,” he said. Chief executive of Climate Analytics, Bill Hare, said BECCS will “likely work” but wasn’t yet proven at scale anywhere in the world. There has been little research carried out into the potential for BECCS in Australia. One study, published in 2018, did suggest a potential 25Mt of CO2 could be stored a year by 2050 through BECCS. But the research, from the University of Melbourne, was based on sourcing waste biomass “to avoid the ecological uncertainties and social challenges of dedicated energy crops.” A co-author of that study, Prof Peter Cook, who also consults to industry and government on carbon capture and storage (CCS), said he was not aware of any BECCS projects in Australia and only a small number overseas where government incentives were being provided. He said a challenge of combining bioenergy with CCS – which is among the government’s priority technologies – is “you can’t do it everywhere, you need the right rocks or you have to pipe [the CO2] a long way.” He said BECCS was feasible and was among several technologies that would be needed in the future to pull CO2 out of the atmosphere. But he added: “But it’s much better if we stop putting CO2 in the atmosphere in the first place.” On Thursday, the Australian Renewable Energy Agency released a roadmap to show the growth potential for the bioenergy industry in Australia. There was no mention of combining bioenergy with CCS. But the roadmap said growing the bioenergy industry could cut emissions, divert waste from landfill, and improve the nation’s fuel security. Guardian Australia asked emissions reduction minister Angus Taylor how the emissions reductions from BECCS were calculated for the report, why it wasn’t a priority technology, and where the government thought the biomass would be sourced from. A spokesperson for the minister said in a statement: “Consistent with other long term emissions modelling exercises, including work by the [International Energy Agency] and US, the [Global Trade and Environmental Model] includes BECCS. “Analysis by McKinsey does not include BECCS and achieves a similar net emissions outcome to the GTEM model. This illustrates that there are a range of technologies that will contribute to Australia achieving net zero emissions by 2050.”Locals in flood-hit Forbes are demanding the biggest dam project in inland NSW proceeds as the premier commits only to “work through” the process of what one leading expert has dubbed a “kneejerk pork-barrelling project”. The NSW Nationals promised in the run-up to the 2019 elections to raise the Wyangala Dam wall by about 10 metres. The pledge, made near the height of the recent drought, has been dogged by planning delays and a tripling in cost to about more than $2bn, stoking doubts it would ever be implemented. This week, Wyangala spilled billions of litres into the already swollen Lachlan River, exacerbating flooding downstream, and contributing to the millions of dollars in crop damage. Scott Darcy, a wheat and canola farmer outside Forbes, said the flooding proved the project has “got to be done. Our population is getting bigger every year and we need water security.” “It’s going to be shocking for us after this flood. We lose half a million dollars. If you’re a shop owner you lose twenty grand – it hurts,” Darcy said. “For us, it’s machine payments, infrastructure, new fences [as well as] making sure you have enough money for food and paying bills.” NSW premier Dominic Perrottet, who visited flooded regions on Thursday, told Guardian Australia the raising of the dam wall would be “critical infrastructure that keeps communities safe”. Still, it would be necessary to “work through” the cost of the project. The project originally had a price tag of $650m. But as the Guardian reported in 2020, the estimates for building the dam had risen to as much as $1.5bn because of the soaring costs of biodiversity offsets. Earlier this year, the Sydney Morning Herald reported the cost could blow out further to $2.1bn. “Once we’ve got all the reports in front of us we’ll be continuing our discussions with the federal government to get these projects moving,” Perrottet said. Half of the funds are supposed to come from the commonwealth. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Phyllis Miller, the mayor of Forbes, said the raising of the wall should proceed whatever the cost. “We have for many, many years not increased our dam capacity in Australia. It’s about time we did,” Miller said. “We need much more control over the dam.” However, environmental experts believe there are cheaper ways to manage flood risk. Jamie Pittock, professor at the Fenner School of Environment and Society at the Australian National University, said flood “control” infrastructure typically makes flood damage worse, not better. “An egregious Australian example is that the flood control capacity built into the Wivenhoe Dam in Queensland after the 1974 floods was insufficient to prevent extensive damage in the 2011 Brisbane floods because too much development was permitted in the floodplain,” Pittock said. “In general, learning to live with floods is safer than fighting floods and failing.” In the Lachlan River case, impacts have been made worse because the state government had failed to implement its own three Floodplain Management Plans. These recommended against building roads, railways and even irrigation canal embankments in floodplains that diverted flows and made floods worse. One example was the government’s Lachlan River Gooloogong to Jemalong Gap Floodplain Management Plan from 2011 that identified the Forbes/Stockinbingal railway as “a major restriction to flood flows”. Medium-sized floods like the current one also bring important socio-economic and environmental benefits that would be lost if a higher dam captured a lot more water. “Crucially in a dry region, the inundation of the floodplain is vital for recharging aquifers that supply farms and towns with high quality water,” in addition to the benefits inundation brings wetland ecosystems, recreational activities and pastoralists in the area, he said. “The proposal to raise Wyangala Dam is a kneejerk, pork-barrelling proposal that will fail any independent cost-benefit analysis,” Pittock said, adding that with climate change likely to exacerbate the swings between drought and floods, “giving rivers room to flood safely, will provide more benefits to society in the long term”. A spokesperson for NSW’s Minister for Water, Property and Housing, Melinda Pavey, affirmed the government’s commitment to the project. “The Wyangala Dam wall-raising is a critical piece of infrastructure that will support the community for generations to come, so it’s important we invest the time now in planning for its success,” the spokesperson said. “Despite the impact of Covid lockdowns, the government is committed to completing the Final Business Case and Environmental Impact Statement as quickly as possible,” the spokesperson said.The Coalition’s religious discrimination bill could strip states of the power to regulate religious institutions’ hiring practices, equality advocates and the Independent Education Union have warned. Equality Australia and the IEU have said provisions of the bill designed to allow institutions such as schools to hire staff on the basis of faith could interfere with imminent changes in Victoria seeking to limit religious exemptions to equal opportunity law. The federal attorney general, Michaelia Cash, is still yet to publicly release the bill, which will be debated when parliament resumes for the final sitting fortnight on Monday. Despite ditching some of its most controversial provisions on medical practitioners’ ability to refuse certain procedures and the Folau clause on employers’ powers to regulate employees’ speech, the bill still faces stiff resistance. The remaining provisions include protection for statements of religious belief and the right for schools to hire on the basis of faith, which the federal education minister, Alan Tudge, confirmed on Wednesday. In Victoria, the Andrews government is seeking to reform religious exemptions to prevent schools discriminating against students and teachers on the basis of personal characteristics such as sexuality. Under that bill, currently before parliament, schools would only be able to discriminate where “religious belief is an inherent requirement of the job”, meaning it could be a requirement for a school principal but not a maths teacher or cleaner. The changes have been vigorously opposed by the Australian Christian Lobby and Christian Schools Australia. The National Catholic Education Commission has called for the bill to be passed “as quickly as possible” to ensure religious schools’ ability to set their own ethos was protected against state legislation, including Victoria’s proposed reforms. A Victorian government spokesperson said it was continuing to monitor the proposed commonwealth bill and “will carefully review any gaps in protections for Victoria after any commonwealth legislation is enacted”. “We would hope that any changes allow for Victorians to continue to be free to live and work free from discrimination.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The chief executive of Equality Australia, Anna Brown, said the Victorian reform ensured that a religious organisation “can only discriminate against people based on religion when religion is actually relevant to the role.” “This will bring Victorian law into step with 21st century community expectations and the practices of many faith-based organisations that have diverse workforces and seek to treat people with dignity and respect,” Brown said. “Overriding hard-fought protections in Victoria and other states would be an extraordinary act of overreach by the Morrison government.” IEU assistant federal secretary, Anthony Odgers, said it would be concerning if the federal changes on religious institutions were not limited to those where faith is an inherent requirement. “The previous bill proposed to continue what is in section 351 of Fair Work Act, which is a blanket capacity for employers to discriminate,” Odgers said. “If what’s written about the federal proposal is correct, it would scrub the Victorian legislation in its entirety, it would ride right over the top of it.” The IEU is strongly supportive of the Victorian legislation. “We’re opposed to the concept of employers in faith-based schools being granted some sort of preference to only hire people from that faith. We don’t believe the majority of employers are even seeking that capacity.” The bill also protects statements of belief by overriding state laws such as Tasmania’s prohibition on speech that “offends, insults or humiliates” people based on other characteristics such as race, sex, disability or sexuality. Liberal MP Warren Entsch said he was still concerned about elements of the bill, including the potential to override state laws, saying he believed “states and territories have the right to make their own decisions.” “I know there is an argument that the Tasmanian law goes too far, but that is between them and the Tasmanian people,” Entsch said. Entsch welcomed the changes made to the bill so far and also said he was pleased that Cash had made clear the government’s position on children in the letter to the Australian Law Reform Commission regarding the review of discrimination laws. However, when asked if he was prepared to cross the floor, Entsch said: “I don’t make threats, I just do what I believe is right.” “There are some significant steps in the right direction, but I still question the need for it in the first place. “There are elements of it I still need to examine further, and consult further with individuals that I have a huge amount of respect for. “I am not comfortable after spending a huge part of my political life arguing to remove discrimination from some elements of our community to sit back quietly and allow others to have the authority to reinstate some of that discrimination, I am just not comfortable with that.” The statement of belief clause in the new federal laws will include a “reasonable person” test that would allow the statement as long as it was not malicious; or would be seen by a reasonable person to harass, threaten, intimidate or vilify another person or group. The statement of belief will also not be allowed to urge conduct that could result in a criminal offence.Loneliness costs Australia an estimated $2.7bn each year due to adverse health outcomes, and has worsened throughout the Covid pandemic, according to a new report measuring social connectedness. Curtin University researchers have found that Covid-19 restrictions dramatically amplified a steady decline in social connectedness in Australia. Report co-author Astghik Mavisakalyan, an associate professor at the Bankwest Curtin Economics Centre, said lonely people had worse general and mental health outcomes. “They’re more likely to smoke, more likely to drink more and exercise less,” she said. “They see their GP more frequently, as well as visit hospitals more frequently.” The report estimates that the overall average cost associated with each person who becomes lonely in Australia is $1,565 a year. The researchers measured social connectedness based on four key areas: the nature and frequency of people’s social interactions, available social supports, interpersonal trust, and socio-economic advantage. “In the period from 2010 to 2018, there has been a 10% decline in connectedness,” Mavisakalyan said. Social isolation was most prevalent among vulnerable populations, including those who are disabled, socio-economically disadvantaged, or from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds, the report found. There was a worrying link between poverty and loneliness, Mavisakalyan said. The analysis drew comparisons between individuals “who are very, very similar in terms of their host of characteristics but are different in terms of their income”. Even when all other factors were controlled for, the loneliness gap between the richest and the poorest was significant, suggesting “poverty may also lead to the social exclusion of individuals”, Mavisakalyan said. Women scored higher than men on social connectedness across all ages, but also reported being lonelier than men – particularly girls under 17 and women older than 65. “The figure of up to $2.7bn per year associated with loneliness provides a strong economic case for investing into initiatives that mitigate loneliness in our society,” Mavisakalyan said. “Participation in activities that create meaningful connection with others and a common purpose should be a priority.” Unsurprisingly, face-to-face interactions and community participation dropped throughout the pandemic. That Covid-19 has had an outsize effect on young people “comes out very vividly in our analysis”, Mavisakalyan said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Throughout lockdown periods, young women were twice as likely to feel lonely than young men, with 67% finding not being able to see family or friends difficult. “Young women especially are disproportionately more frequently engaging in social media interactions, perhaps as a way of dealing with some of those challenges associated with being isolated,” Mavisakalyan said. The findings come as separate analysis from the Australian National University found that severe psychological distress hit an all-time high in October, despite the majority of Australians believing the worst of the pandemic was over. The survey of nearly 3,500 adults found rates of psychological distress worsened between August and October this year, particularly for 18- to 44-year-olds, and those older than 75. Of the respondents, 12.5% – one in eight – reported experiencing “severe psychological stress”, up from a previous high of 10.6% in April 2020. It was the highest proportion the researchers had noted in nine rounds of Covid-19 impact monitoring. Study co-author Prof Nicholas Biddle, of the ANU, said lockdowns in NSW, the ACT and Victoria – which were only beginning to be eased when the survey took place – were likely contributors to the mental distress of respondents. “The question will be whether, now that things have opened up, there’ll be a return to a pre-Covid baseline,” Biddle said. Just over half of respondents believed that the worst of the pandemic had passed. “There’s real uncertainty about whether the positive trajectory will keep going or whether there’s going to be another return to quite significant mental health shocks and lockdowns,” Biddle said. Fear of infection was four times higher than it was in April, but similar to April 2020 levels: 40% of respondents believed it likely they would contract Covid-19. “The difference between now and last year was that infection then was a more impactful outcome,” Biddle said. “Now, especially for those who’ve been double vaccinated, it clearly is a concern, but it’s nowhere near the same concern as it was last year.”We have made our careers into our cathedrals – a place of validation, identity and flourishing. But there are some signs the flagstones are being dismantled. Burnout, the pandemic, the great resignation in the US, and the circuit breakers of lockdown have led to a fundamental examination of why we work the way we do and whether work should occupy such a central place in our lives. What’s potentially coming for us is a rethinking of not just the system we labour in but the almost spiritual significance we attach to that labour. Do we want work to be the organising principle of our lives? Do we want to shape our identities around our jobs? Is work where we want to spend all our time? Should everything else come second? The New Yorker recently revisited some of the ideas in Tim Ferriss’s 2007 book The 4-Hour Workweek and called the concept prescient. The book said a lot of components of knowledge work – including meetings and email – are just “fake busy”, and we could reduce our work hours dramatically if we just focused on core tasks. With the rest of our time we could build an interesting life that took in hobbies, fitness, family, friends and travel. But in Australia, there is one big factor that is holding back true transformation – and that is our insane house prices. The trade off is stark between work and a life. If you are a first-home buyer in Sydney (and increasingly Melbourne) – and end up with a million-dollar mortgage – you will not be aiming to work four hours a week and learn to tango and travel around the world, like Ferriss did for his 2007 book. (Although you might if you had got into the market early and earned more from your house than you did from your job). If you earn normal money, and want to buy a normal house, you need to saddle yourself with a debt that is so massive that it acts as a boulder, blocking other paths you may have walked down. When you enter a market that will demand such steep and relentless repayments, your choices are going to be long defined by this relentlessness and debt. You are choosing to miss out on the ability to work less, or not work at all; to become a carer, or rest for long periods if you are sick or burned out. You miss out on the opportunity to go back to higher education later in life, or volunteer in your community; to take a sabbatical, or entrepreneurial risks, or travel for long periods of time; to spend more time at home with your children, write a book, put on a play – or any manner of activity that won’t make you much money. In other words, you can’t dismantle the cathedral of work, brick by brick. But at some point – maybe soon, maybe we are already there – young people are going to assess the level of debt needed for an average mortgage and what it will mean for their lives – and just say “no”. People talk about “missing out” when it comes to getting into the overheated property market, but the missing out flows both ways. You might have got a mortgage, but in the process you’ve missed out on having a life. Elsewhere, the workplace revolution continues apace. The quit rate is at an all-time high in the US, for a whole range of reasons, including more competitive salaries in everything from hospitality to management jobs. So while the great resignation mightn’t result in more people working just four hours a week, it is making people reconsider the role work plays in their lives and provides more of an opportunity to move away from toxic and dead end jobs. This shift in how we think about work is also happening in China. The “lying flat” movement, embraced by gen Z, is challenging norms of productivity and worth that are embedded in Chinese culture. In April, a user called Kind-Hearted Traveler shared a post on Chinese search engine Baidu about why he rejected the dominant work culture. I haven’t been working for two years, I have just been hanging around and I don’t see anything wrong with this. Pressure mainly comes from comparisons with your peers and the values of the older generation. These pressures keep popping up … But, we don’t have to abide by these (norms). I can live like Diogenes and sleep inside a wooden bucket, enjoying sunshine. I can live like Heraclitus in a cave, thinking about the “logos.” Since this land has never had a school of thought that upholds human subjectivity, I can develop one on my own. Lying down is my philosophical movement. Only through lying flat can humans become the measure of all things. This passive resistance to work and capitalism has captured the attention of the world’s media, but it remains unseen if it will be truly transformative. After all, rejecting the man is part of a cycle that gets repeated through the generations. In the 1960s young people dropped out and communes flourished. In the 1990s you had slackers. Between 2008 to around 2012 millennials graduating into a recessed economy retreated into their parents’ basements or joined movements such as Occupy. We are entering another one of these cycles again. But will a rethink about work and its place in our lives reach a tipping point or critical mass, where work itself is transformed? Or will this be just another case of tinkering at the edges?There will be nothing but pride at stake when the Wallabies play Wales in Cardiff on Sunday morning, yet it is still important to finish their frustrating tour of Britain with a confidence-boosting victory. After losing to Scotland 15-13 at Murrayfield and then England 32-15 at Twickenham, Australia cannot achieve success in the win-loss column, but they can reclaim their self-esteem with a win against the Six Nations champions. And that would mean a lot to their psyche heading into next season and the penultimate year before the 2023 World Cup in France. Returning to Australia from Britain winless would be a major setback for a Wallabies team who only a few months ago looked as if they were on the road to recovery after five long, lean years. Dave Rennie’s side lifted themselves from seventh in the world – their lowest-ever ranking – to third following their four straight wins against world champions South Africa and Argentina in the Rugby Championship. They embarked on their end-of-year tour of Japan and Britain with tremendous optimism, but are now heading in the wrong direction once again, slipping to fifth in the world. The Wallabies must arrest the slide against Wales before they slip further down the rankings, undermining their self-belief and confidence so close to the World Cup. Once, not so long ago, the Wallabies had the wood on Wales, winning 13 consecutive Tests against the Welsh from 2009 to 2017. But that dominance, and the psychological advantage that went with it, is gone. Wales beat the Wallabies the last two times they met, a 9-6 win in Cardiff in 2018 and a 29-25 victory in Tokyo during the 2019 World Cup, and are now seeking their third straight win against Australia for the first time since 1975. The Welsh are the reigning champions of Europe, but that does not mean Australia are incapable of beating them. Wales also have injuries and are blooding new faces. There was a bit of experimentation Wales’ recent 23-18 loss to South Africa and 38-23 win against Fiji. Notwithstanding the 17-point margin, the Wallabies actually defended fairly well against an England side which dominated possession, but was held to only two tries – one of which was scored on full-time. Most games between Australia and Wales are close affairs, but it is difficult to see the former winning unless they learn to use the ball better than they did against Scotland and England. There was a time when the Wallabies were regarded as one of the most skilful teams in world rugby. Think of names such as Mark Ella, David Campese, Tim Horan and Steve Larkham. Without mercurial playmaker Quade Cooper, who chose to return to his Japanese club rather than tour Britain, the backline is sorely lacking in fundamental catch-pass skills. In fact, the Wallabies look like a completely different team without Cooper and powerful inside-centre Samu Kerevi, who also returned to his Japanese club. Rennie is always exhorting the players to “treasure” the ball, but they continually throw it away – quite literally – with poor passes. The backs struggle to shift the ball from left to right with their weak hands and too often try to force a panicky one-handed offload, which invariably ends up on the ground or in the opposition’s hands. It is as if they are over-anxious trying to keep the attack moving, but dropped balls are having the opposite effect by halting play. Instead of trying to throw a miracle pass, they should be prepared to take the tackle and recycle the ball to continue to attack. The Wallabies have only scored one try in their last two Tests, but if they hold onto the ball and run hard and straight, there is a chance they will eventually wear down the Welsh defence and score enough tries to win the game. But continue to handle the ball as poorly as they did against Scotland and England and it will make it very hard for them to capitalise on opportunities. Of course, the Wallabies must try to achieve victory without their inspirational captain and openside flanker Michael Hooper, who was ruled out with a foot injury. The absence of the workaholic Hooper is certain to have a big impact. Just look at the effect it had on the NSW Waratahs who struggled to play without him last Super Rugby season while he was on sabbatical in Japan. But it is an opportunity for the Wallabies to learn how to cope without Hooper. They must base their game on the strengths of the players on the field, not those off it. Veteran prop James Slipper will lead in Hooper’s absence, but the other senior players in the team, especially the playmakers, must assume greater leadership responsibility to help to take pressure off him. Just a couple of months ago everything seemed to be going swimmingly for the Wallabies, but the Welsh Test is a salvage operation to recover Australia’s sinking pride.Chevron has attacked rival Woodside Petroleum’s decision to sell a floating rig to a smaller company that couldn’t afford to decommission it – a decision that has resulted in the government imposing a levy on the entire offshore oil and gas industry to pay the clean-up bill estimated at $1bn. Woodside sold the floating rig, the Northern Endeavour, and the fields associated with it in the Timor Sea to Northern Oil &amp; Gas Australia (Noga), a company owned and controlled by businessman Angus Karoll, in 2016. In a submission to a parliamentary inquiry into legislation enabling the levy, Chevron said it was obvious that Noga lacked the resources to run and decommission the rig at the time of the sale. It also complained that under the levy it would have to pay more than $200m as its share of the clean-up bill even though it had never had anything to do with the Northern Endeavour or the Timor oilfields. Noga collapsed into administration in September 2019 after the rig was shut down by the National Offshore Petroleum Safety and Environmental Management Authority (Nopsema) over safety concerns. Since then, the Northern Endeavour has been in the hands of the federal government. In May’s budget the resources minister, Keith Pitt, announced the government would impose a levy on the entire oil and gas industry to fund the clean-up. In its submission, Chevron said Woodside’s sale of the Northern Endeavour and the Laminaria-Corallina oilfields produced an outcome “inconsistent with the commonwealth’s regulatory objectives, and the expectations of industry with respect to appropriate stewardship”. “The circumstances under which Noga was permitted to acquire ageing and late-life offshore assets, despite obviously lacking the appropriate technical or financial capability to operate those assets or meet its decommissioning obligations, is concerning,” the company said. “In its current form, the levy punishes Chevron and other responsible resource holders for the failings of others.” It said the fields had produced “billions of dollars in petroleum production”. “Chevron is also being asked to pay via the levy a substantial proportion of the decommissioning costs of the LamCor assets, thereby subsidising the failings of the companies that participated in and benefited from the production of that asset,” the company said. Tim Beshara, manager of policy and strategy at the Wilderness Society, said Woodside had never been held to account for its actions in the sale to Noga. “You can’t get a bigger alarm bell than when even someone like Chevron is willing to call out the ‘concerning’ circumstances where the regulatory system abjectly failed to prevent the irresponsible actions of an industry peer with the Northern Endeavour debacle,” he said. “However, we do support Keith Pitt’s collective punishment approach with an industry-wide levy because we don’t believe that it’s all about one bad apple. “The industry business model is based on selling their late-life assets to more speculative players when the liabilities build up too high. It’s a business model where the taxpayer and the environment bear all the risk and it’s urgent that the regulatory system continues to be reformed to counter this.” Chevron estimated the cost of clean-up at $1bn and said that, as Australia’s largest offshore petroleum producer, it expected it would be levied more than a fifth of the total, or around $200m. “Chevron will be the largest payer of the levy and estimates that it will pay almost 70% more than Woodside, the next largest levy payer,” it said. A Woodside spokesperson said the company’s estimate of decommissioning costs was confidential. “Woodside sold and transitioned the vessel over in good condition and with more than adequate reserves left in the field to cover any restoration obligations that the new owner had,” the spokesperson said. “Woodside would not have sold it if we felt there was insufficient funding available. “The transaction was properly approved by the regulators at the time.”Police presence at music festivals leads some people to “panic overdose” in their attempt to avoid getting caught, an Australian study has found, with experts calling for a change in policing culture at festivals. In the largest survey of its kind, researchers led by St Vincent’s Clinical School at the University of NSW surveyed punters at six major music festivals in NSW between November 2019 and March 2020. The findings were published in the journal Drug and Alcohol Review on Friday. Participants completed an anonymous survey about their intended drug use, and higher-risk behaviours, such as taking all of their drugs prior to entering the festival (known as “preloading”), consuming two or more doses of MDMA at once (known as “double-dropping”), higher-risk alcohol use by consuming 11 or more standard drinks alongside illicit drug use, and mixing stimulants. They were also asked about whether police and police dog presence had an effect on their decision to use drugs. Of the 1,229 survey participants, 372 (or 30%) intended to use drugs or said they had already used drugs that day. MDMA was the most commonly reported drug, with 77% of those who reported using drugs saying they had used it that day or intended to. Other frequently reported drugs used included cocaine, cannabis, LSD/acid and ketamine. When it came to higher-risk behaviours, of the 286 people using MDMA, 48% reported double-dropping. Gender differences were significant, with men more than twice as likely to double-drop than women. Eighty-two (22%) of participants who responded “yes” to using drugs also reported high-risk alcohol use. The researchers found a significant correlation between a fear of policing and preloading drugs. People who said police presence influenced their decision to take drugs were more than twice as likely to say they had preloaded. “This study heightens existing concerns regarding unintended harmful consequences of the policing of drug use at festivals,” the study found. An author of the study and senior research fellow at the University of NSW, Dr Jonathan Brett, said, “There’s a really growing body of evidence now in Australia that police and police dog presence and security strategies at festivals is actually potentially really harmful.” In 2019, the NSW deputy coroner found high-visibility policing tactics such as drug dogs and strip searching at music festivals increased the risks associated with drugs. “I really hope we can have a conversation, not about removing police altogether but potentially about a different approach to policing strategies that isn’t just about criminalising drug users. Everyone wants people to be safer and healthier, so we need to discuss how we can best achieve that.” No drug-related deaths were recorded at any of the six festivals, though several attendees needed to be taken to hospital. Brett said the presence of police was found, through his study as well as previous studies, to make people reluctant to seek medical help. The researchers concluded that as well as a changed approach to policing, more targeted education to prevent risky behaviours such as mixing substances is needed, as well as wider adoption of pill testing. None of the festivals included in the study had a pill testing site. A senior lecturer in addiction at Edith Cowan University, Dr Stephen Bright, said not all policing is the same. He has conducted drugs research at festivals in Western Australia, Victoria and NSW and said there were differences in police approaches between the states. “In Western Australia, the culture seems to be much more about community policing, where they turn a blind eye to trivial substance use and, essentially, the main purpose for them being there is just to make sure everybody’s safe,” he said. “In doing so I feel like at a Western Australian festival, people are more likely to approach not only police services but other support services that are onsite because there’s there’s no fear of getting in trouble. They know that the police are there to help. They’re not there to prosecute them.”Who to invite – and who not to Pick the people where it feels like it’s gonna be an easy night. You don’t fucking need any more stress right now. I’ve started hanging out with newer groups of people via online gaming – they’ve now invited me to a dinner party which I’m really excited about. Invite the people you’ve been communicating with a lot who you just can’t wait to see. I don’t have a real big blacklist. But if you’ve invited someone over who’s a fuckwit who’s gonna start talking shit, then you’ve got a problem. There’s not much you can do about that except kill the party. How much to cook I suppose I’m more known for that level of dinner party where I’ll end up cooking seven different things. I’m also a big ‘plonk it on the table and fucking let it rip’ kinda guy. I’m meticulously fiddling in the kitchen for hours and then I like to just lay that all out. Usually I cook so much that everyone’s got a backpack full on the way home. The all-important sound and lighting I’m a big lighting-obsessed person. If you’ve got fluoros on the ceiling and candles in the cupboard, fuck the fluoros off and get the candles out. It’s gonna look a little bit less like it’s in a 7/Eleven, and a little bit more delicious. I’ve never seen a candle upset someone. I’m always building playlists too. I’m so affected by music around me that if the music’s shit, I’m having a shit time. I can’t deal with you playing sad Coldplay when we’re trying to have a laugh at the table. It does my head in. I’m not ever putting on Nick Cave’s Into My Arms while serving dinner. I don’t need that. I don’t mind a bit of jazz. I’m a bit of a jazz-head. But there’s a certain point at which you feel like you’re in a hotel foyer and not at a dinner party. A bit of 90s hip-hop is always a safe move. Something upbeat. Gets you in the mood for a good laugh. The post-dinner entertainment If you’ve got some champions onside, someone will have had enough wine to go, “All right, let’s clean this shit up.” I love a bit of a team clean-up. Just fuck off into the kitchen, down a couple more drinks, gradually get louder until someone tells you lot to shut the fuck up. I am also big on the YouTube party – I don’t mind a post-dinner “you gotta check this out, how good are all these vids?” We just have a one-for-one on what’s the funniest shit you’ve seen. I’ve got leather skin in that respect. I think my vids are strong. I always go down the expensive car fails or boat fails. I’m never not gonna laugh at those. The main: Vegenator 2 – judgment tray lasagne ‘My mission is to protect you’ from shitty lasagne. The amazing stuff that can go into a vegetable lasagne is awesome – I occasionally prefer a good vegetable one over a meat version because of all the amazing layers of flavours you can get going on. This dish is layer upon layer of action-packed radness. Serves 6-8 800g to 1kg butternut pumpkin 2 tbsp olive oil salt and pepper 1 tsp chilli flakes 2 tsp dried thyme 375 to 400g fresh lasagne sheets, or some pre-cooked un-fresh ones 300g mozzarella, coarsely grated 100g ricotta 50g parmesan, finely grated For the filling 30g butter or ¼ cup extra-virgin olive oil 3 carrots, peeled and diced finely 2 onions, peeled and chopped 3 celery sticks, diced finely 6-8 cloves garlic, peeled and chopped 2 bird’s eye chillies, chopped (optional) 1 sprig rosemary 240ml red wine 400g brown lentils, drained 800g whole peeled tomatoes 2 tbsp tomato paste 1 tbsp brown sugar 480ml vegetable or chicken stock For the spinach ricotta layernator 500g deli basket ricotta – the shit that comes in water in a basket 150ml milk 150g feta 2 bunches (100g) English spinach Handful basil leaves Pinch nutmeg, finely grated Pinch salt Heat your Cybernetic Ovenism to 220C (200 fan-forced) and get terminating the skin from the pumpkin, discarding its seeds and slicing into centimetre-thick slices. Don’t go too thick because otherwise the shit will take too long to cook. Lay on a lined baking tray and drizzle with olive oil, scatter with salt, pepper, a pinch of chilli flakes and 1 teaspoon dried thyme, then bash into the oven for 25 to 30 minutes or until tender-nation can be detected. We need to make some sauce for this mission to be a success, so let’s do it. Heat the butter or oil in a pan over a medium heat. I’m going to need your carrot, your onion, your celery, your garlic, your chilli and your motorcycle … hold the motorcycle. Cook for 10 to 15 minutes until they are nice and soft. Fang in your sprig of rosemary and stir through for another minute, followed by your red wine to deglazenate the pan for three minutes. Then away we go with the lentils, tomatoes, tomato paste, sugar and stock. Simmer gently for 15 to 20 minutes or until reduced so it’s not watery. Bash apart the tomatoes a bit with a wooden spoon as it cooks. This is my favourite layer of the Vegenator: the spinach, feta and ricotta bit. In a large bowl, use a fork to mix the ricotta and milk together, then crumble in the feta. Chop the spinach and basil fairly finely and add to the bowl. Chuck in a little nutmeg and season with salt, and use your hands, a spatula or spoon to give it a good mix. No problemo! Lock and load your baking dish with a third of a base layer of the sauce, and cover with lasagne sheets. (If the sheet arrangements don’t fit in your tray, don’t be scared, just terminate that shit and make it fit.) Next, cover with a layer of the pumpkin. Break the slices of pumpkin up to achieve good coverage over the pasta. Follow this with a third of the sauce and a second layer of lasagna sheets on top. Now goes in that incredible spinach, feta and ricotta weaponry. Top with a layer of pasta sheets. Evenly distribute the rest of the sauce over them and cover with mozzarella, crumble over the ricotta and a good shaving of parmesan, and sprinkle with the remaining teaspoon of dried thyme leaves. Reduce the Cybernetic Ovenism to 200C (180C fan-forced), cover that judgment tray in aluminium armour and place in the oven. Terminate it for 35-40 minutes, then remove its armour and say out loud, “I’ll be back … in 10 minutes,” or until bubbling and nicely golden on top. Remove from the oven and let it rest for five minutes, which makes it easier to serve. And if you don’t it will likely flame thrower the roof of your mouth off trying to eat it without letting it chill for a sec. Good luck getting the first fucken slice out; the rest is easy from there. Hasta la vista, champions. The side: Rad salad Haven’t we all suffered a plethora of heinous salads in our lives that either tasted as if they crawled out of a lawn mower’s arse or like someone tipped five tonnes of airline food-level vinaigrette on a tree. Let’s change the game up and make a salad that doesn’t make you want to put your head in your hands and wish you’d made almost anything else on earth. Serves 3-4 75g pine nuts 150g rocket leaves 2 Lebanese cucumbers, sliced thinly 1 peach, de-stoned and chopped 150g goat’s cheese, crumbled 1 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil 1 avocado, sliced For the dressing 1–2 tbsp warm water ⅔ tbsp Dijon mustard 1 tbsp balsamic vinegar 50ml extra-virgin olive oil Pinch of salt and pepper Get yourself a nice flat-bottomed frying pan, and bung it over a medium–high heat. Now, don’t put any oil in the thing because this bit of the recipe doesn’t even need it. Once the pan is warm, fang in the pine nuts and roll them around until they just start to turn a touch brown. They should smell insanely rad too, which is great because this is a rad salad. Once you’ve hit that point of semi-toasted-ness, turn the heat off, tip them from the pan into a bowl and set aside. This salad has enough going on that you shouldn’t need to drown the fuck out of it with four litres of dressing – if I wanted to go for a swim I would be wearing my Speedos right now. Add a pinch of nice salt flakes and a crack of pepper to a glass, a jam jar or a small bowl. Now, use a tablespoon or two of warm water to dissolve the salt and pepper, kicking it about with a teaspoon, then add your Dijon and balsamic vinegar. Water sounds like a weird ingredient, but it’s actually a cool way to keep it light and get all the flavours to hang together before you add your oil. This is a cool little trick my dad showed me. Leave the olive oil for last – only once everything else is combined do you want to fang that in as well. Doesn’t hurt to have a good quality extra-virgin olive oil on hand, as obviously the better the olive oil, the better the end result will taste. Cheaper stuff can totally taste awesome too, so don’t stress if you can’t afford super fancy stuff. Once that’s all stirred together, set it aside and get salad bowling. Tear your rocket leaves into it and add slices of cucumber and peach along with broken-apart goat’s cheese. Lastly, in goes the avocado you’ve lovingly deseeded and sliced. Before you go full extra turbo lord on the salad tossing routine, let me just say that the less you toss it about, the better. The avo will turn to guacamole if you throw the salad around like a dickhead, so go easy, champ. Give the dressing a little stir with your teaspoon and tip it gently into the salad, then toss together either with your hands, or a cool trick is to pass the whole lot from one bowl to another to lightly combine the ingredients without over-mixing them. Then chuck those exxy AF pine nuts on top and get stuck into the least shit salad you’ve had all year. The dessert: Wake and don’t bake orange and lemon cheesecake I have memories of eating cheesecake at a shitty shopping-centre cafe as a kid and trying to forget the word “cheese” while I ate it. Definitely a little confused as to how it had actual “cheese” in it? I mean, it does, but it’s not the kind of cheese I was thinking of back then. I think I pictured a Kraft Single with sprinkles on it and a lit candle popped on top, or something. I’ve since learned how the magic happens there and I’m sure it helps that I’m not seven years old anymore. The shit is so easy to make, particularly my way. I mean it when I say “don’t bake”. Serves 8 1 orange – juice of half, zest of whole one 2 lemons – juice of two, zest of one 200g Scotch Finger or Digestive bickies 100g butter, plus extra for greasing 500g cream cheese, at room temperature (block form, not spreadable) 140g caster sugar 240ml thickened cream 1 tsp ground Dutch cinnamon, or just normal shit Doesn’t hurt to get your zest sorted before anything else here. Zest the orange and one of the lemons into a bowl, and keep just a pinch of them to one side in its own spesh bowl. There are a few ways we can start this party. We need to bust up the bickies into a breadcrumb consistency somehow. A food processor pulsing them apart does a champagne job of it, as does bunging them in a clean tea towel and bashing them to breadcrumb-sized bits with a rolling pin. Dad suggested I back over them in the car, which I think he has actually done. I use a food processor, which is a flex. Grab most of the citrus zest and add it to the crushed bickies. We need to melt that butter next in a small saucepan over a low heat, but don’t heat the bajeezuz out of it – just melt it. It needs to be cool enough to mix thoroughly into the biscuit mix as well. Grease up the cake tin with butter and, if you can be fucked, cut a piece of baking paper to fit the base – it can help make serving it a little bit neater, but it’s not a crucial move. Tip the buttery, zesty, biscuity mixture into the tin. Now press that biscuit orange butter flat across the base. It can help to use something that has a super flat top on it to help press it down; the back of a spoon might work, or even your hands, eh? Give it a good press flat and whack it in the fridge for a moment while we make the other shit. Grab a bowl and an electric mixer if you have one (though a whisk is fine too), and work the cream cheese apart as you add the sugar and kinda make it into a heavy paste. In a second bowl you’re gonna need to whip the cream. Beat or whisk until the cream is getting nice and thick, at which point the cinnamon goes in along with the cream cheese, orange and lemon juices. Give it a good mix together until it’s really bloody thick yet smooth enough to be able to spread across the base. Grab that cake tin out of the fridge and spoon in the mixture evenly across it with a spatula or a spoon or, I dunno, the back of your Nokia 3210 because it seems like it was super popular at the same time cheesecake was and they would get along great. Sprinkle over the orange and lemon zest you set aside from earlier. Back in the fridge we go and now we wait … for as long as you can kinda be fucked. We want it to get super cool and set together nicely. The truth is, overnight is the best, but four hours might be enough if you’re in a pinch. There it is, legends. What a classic. It takes about as long as it does to program your own annoying polyphonic ringtone into a 3210, but this is definitely a way more pleasant experience as a final product. This is an edited extract from Death to Jar Sauce by Nat’s What I Reckon, published by Penguin Australia (RRP$34.99). Illustrations by Glenno, Bunkwaa, Warrick McMiles and Onnie O’LearyA teenage girl who mysteriously disappears; a dark and disturbed youth who might be worshipping Satan; a paranoid community; a vengeful father; a man with everything to lose. Wild Place has all the ingredients of a classic page-turner. The third novel by author and screenwriter Christian White (who co-created the Netflix hit Clickbait and co-wrote horror film Relic) is set in the small community of Camp Hill on Victoria’s Mornington Peninsula (the area where the author also lives). Taking place in the final weeks of 1989, we meet Tracie briefly before she vanishes. She’s seemingly as innocent as the driven snow. The police and detectives tell her parents that it’s likely she’s run away. Is it because of their divorce, or has she escaped the confines of small-town existence with a boy? Tom Witter, a lifelong resident of Camp Hill and teacher at the local high school, becomes obsessed with solving the riddle of her disappearance. As he discovers more about Tracie and the other residents of Camp Hill, we see that – unsurprisingly – all is not as rosy as it might seem. Families are struggling: teenagers will be teenagers, and adults are only just managing to cope with the demands of everyday life. Tom is an interesting choice for the detective. Withholding Tom’s true motive for most of the narrative, White offers perhaps the most biting social critique contained in Wild Place – problematic gender dynamics and the insidious nature of toxic masculinity. While he is by far the most realised character in a book mostly populated by two-dimensional stereotypes, I found that key aspects of Tom’s personality, such as his compulsive twitching – for which he was mercilessly bullied in school – in the end come to very little. Without giving anything away about the end of Wild Place, not enough was made of how Tom’s nervous state relates to the social structures that enable domestic violence and sexual abuse to take place, and be covered up. Sean, the young man who Tom suspects may be behind Tracie’s disappearance, is at first crudely drawn. He smokes, dresses in all black, treats his mother terribly, and listens to heavy metal. He’s got a tattoo of a pentagram, a sign of the devil. As the novel progresses we are given more insight into Sean’s motivations – perhaps he’s the most real, sympathetic character in the novel, someone many readers might be able to identify with. Aside from being a fast-paced and engagingly written story, Wild Place’s strength lies with White’s reflections on masculinity and violence. Tom’s investigation brings him to his own son, Marty. It’s revealed that he has been in love with Tracie. “For a while, I didn’t even notice her … then suddenly I couldn’t stop noticing her. I’d never experienced anything like it. It snuck up on me, like one of those nature documentaries where the lion stalks the gazelle.” Teen emotions are one thing, but the language we use to articulate them, and the power dynamics they create, are another. This image of the lion and the gazelle speaks to the core of Wild Place. White goes to considerable lengths to evoke a literal Wild Place – a mysterious piece of land around which many of the houses of Camp Hill are built. Wild Place is a slightly unsettling (and unsettled) “heart of darkness” in the middle of White’s suburban safe space. I loved how he had his characters voyeuristically spy on each other from the transgressive darkness of the bushland. But the absence of any reference to Indigenous history was at times grating. Somehow White’s Camp Hill and Wild Place have seemingly avoided being haunted by the violence of Australia’s past. It is ironic when a character reflects: “It feels like there’s plenty of evil in the real world to be worried about.” There is evil, and it is historical and present, as well as domestic. In the author’s note at the end of the book, White mentions the resonances he sees between the “Satanic panic – the wave of hysteria and moral outrage that swept the world in the 1980s and 90s” – and the current flowering of conspiracy theories spawned by the Covid 19-pandemic. The common denominator in both situations is, for White, fear. While Wild Place does lean too heavily on some tired genre tropes, the novel does offer an absorbing portrait of how communities can be blinded by what they think are malevolent outside forces. In fact, the greatest danger comes from the people we know. Wild Place by Christian White is out now through Affirm Press (RRP$32.99)When Ruwangi Fernando arrived in Australia from Sri Lanka to undertake her PhD, she was struck by the barriers faced by migrants and women of colour working in the Stem fields of science, engineering, technology and mathematics. “I found that a lot of people, even those with PhDs, were unable to get into the workforce,” Fernando says. “This made me ask why. “They are finding their qualifications are not enough. Many of them change their names to appear more western, just to submit their CV or get a job interview.” The statistics support her claims. The rate of unemployment for overseas-born, university-qualified Stem women who arrived in Australia after 2006 is 14.1%, compared with just 3.3% for Australian-born, university-qualified Stem women, according to the Australian Stem Workforce Report released in 2020 by the office of the chief scientist of Australia. “Gender and racial bias play an integral role in this inequality, and act as barriers to the growth of women in colour in Stem,” says Fernando, who studies at Victoria University’s Institute for Sustainable Industries and Liveable Cities. “A lot of these women are lacking confidence in how they look and are perceived.” In 2017 Fernando established Stem Sisters to support and celebrate female international students and migrants working in Stem. She now runs a host of initiatives ranging from mentoring programs and workshops to an online community and magazine. The latest of these is Dress to Impress, a digital panel discussion on Saturday as part of Melbourne fashion week. Its goal is to challenge fashion norms migrants and women of colour are expected to follow in male-dominated Stem industries. As it stands now, trousers, long sleeves, dark colours and minimal adornment are the standard dress codes to which women in Stem are expected to conform. “People try not to wear skirts or bright colours, and generally dress in black or office suits, not to draw any more attention to themselves,” Fernando says. “As a migrant or woman of colour in Stem you are already highlighted because you are that one person in the boardroom, so in your personal style you don’t want to stand out any further. We are trying to give women their confidence back to express their true selves because when you feel confident … you don’t have to turn yourself into someone else.” For some women, fitting in means renouncing traditional cultural garments, as an environmental engineer, Najah Onn, did when she arrived in Australia from Malaysia. “I’m Muslim but I no longer wear the hijab because when I arrived here Dad said, ‘If you go to uni you have to take it off,’” Onn says. “I understood why he asked me to do that, but I lost part of my identity in order to fit in.” For women arriving from India, saris and bindis are another issue to be negotiated. “Some people don’t want to give up wearing a bindi and a sari, so how do you make them feel more confident and comfortable doing so?” ask a chemical engineer, Priya Subramanian. Bella To, a stylist who is speaking on the Dress to Impress panel, says nationwide lockdowns have gone some way to addressing this issue. “Working from home during Covid-19 definitely makes people embrace their own personal styles more, particularly for women of colour, as we no longer have to conform to the usual office dress code,” To says. “Since returning to the office I feel many women want to make more of an effort to show off our unique selves without compromising. I have definitely found myself embracing bolder and braver styles with more of an individual fashion sense.” Fernando says acquiring an office-appropriate wardrobe can be a significant hurdle for some women. “They … struggle to find attire for their first job or interview, because they feel they need to be even more presentable because they are women of colour, and they don’t necessarily have the finances to buy a lot of new clothing.” To this end she will also be launching a workwear clothes swapping program, Swap with Stem Sis. At the Dress to Impress panel, Fernando hopes to build on this new confidence for lasting change. “We can empower each other together,” she says.The chaos and crowd trouble at July’s Euro 2020 final have harmed but “not put the kibosh” on the combined British and Irish bid for the 2030 World Cup, the sports minister, Nigel Huddleston, has insisted. However Huddleston’s claims were rejected by Julian Knight MP, chair of the digital, culture, media and sport select committee, who said that the government’s plans to spend £11m on a feasibility study before bidding for the 2030 tournament was “utter nonsense”. “Give me the money if you want, I can just tell you that we’re never going to win it,” Knight told Huddleston, pointing to the disastrous 2018 World Cup bid and the disturbances at the European Championship final between England and Italy as huge barriers to a successful attempt. Huddleston said he did not share Knight’s pessimism because he believed Fifa’s bidding process had fundamentally changed. He also said that while the fighting and disturbances that ensued when ticketless fans gained entry to Wembley had “harmed” the bid, it was not reflective of a wider problem. “As you know last time we were made promises behind closed doors and those World Cup votes did not transpire,” he said. “The process has changed. If it hadn’t, I would share your scepticism.” Last month, Uefa’s disciplinary panel gave England a two-match stadium ban, with one of those suspended for two years, and a €100,000 (£84,500) fine. Huddleston admitted the disturbances had “harmed” the bid. “Everybody saw that on TV screens around the world. It was not great,” he said. “I blame those who participated in this unruly and despicable behaviour for undermining our national game, and actually potentially undermining our ability to put a credible pitch forward to Uefa and Fifa for the World Cup. “That said, in the conversations we’ve had so far it’s recognised that it was exceptional and we actually can hold events very well. And I don’t believe that the events at Wembley, in and of themselves, are going to put the kibosh on our bid. In fact, not at all.”The clearest indicator of how Boris Johnson’s standing has fallen within his own party came on Wednesday at prime minister’s questions. It wasn’t anything he said – even if his bad-tempered performance rang alarm bells with parliamentary colleagues, and one of his former ministers implied that northern voters might have been wrong to trust him. It was how few MPs bothered to show up to support him. After a bruising few weeks of Tory sleaze accusations, there could have been an attempt to put on a united front. Instead, large patches of green leather were visible. It was a stark illustration that the Conservative party is divided, and that Johnson’s MPs currently feel little loyalty towards their leader. His decision to spend the initial stages of the two-week-old row refusing to apologise as his MPs faced questions over their outside interests went down like a cup of cold sick with colleagues who had simply been following his orders by backing ex-MP Owen Paterson. Given that many felt left hung out to dry in a crisis of No 10’s own making, it’s unsurprising that they are now reluctant to turn up on demand. “He’s been missing in action when we’ve been getting criticism,” says one MP. It’s hard to overstate how damaging the past fortnight has been for the prime minister. Since Johnson’s botched attempt to spare Paterson a 30-day suspension over a breach of lobbying rules, events have spiralled out of his control. Labour has taken the lead in the polls for the first time since January – though with at least two years to go until the next election, it’s not the polls that should worry Johnson most but the damage his handling of the crisis has caused with his parliamentary party. “People have gone ballistic,” says one member of the payroll. “The wounds are quite deep. They won’t immediately heal.” Even Johnson’s attempt to bring the row to an end by throwing his support behind a clampdown on outside consultancy has led to a Tory backlash. First, there is a split in the parliamentary party on outside work, that has seen the younger MPs turn on the old-timers. Many of the new 2019 intake can’t understand why their older colleagues view the £82,000 MP salary as so low, and worry that the row plays towards the “Tory toff” stereotype. In turn, those MPs who have been in parliament longer see their outside work as necessary to their household finances and are appalled that Johnson’s bungling means this could end. But the bigger issue relates to how Downing Street operates. What was seen in No 10 as a way of drawing a line over a scandal has only been seen to confirm MPs’ worst fears: Johnson doesn’t have a strategy. “It’s just another example of Downing Street not consulting us,” says a member of the 2019 intake. “That’s what’s got us into the mess in the first place and no one seems to be learning that lesson.” When Johnson addressed MPs at the 1922 Committee of Tory backbenchers last night, the unease in the party was clear. The prime minister’s voice barely held out as he offered what one MP describes as a half apology – telling colleagues he crashed “the car into a ditch” but that he would get it out. “He kept trying to crack jokes but most of us have heard them before and were not laughing,” says a senior Tory. “The joke is wearing thin.” When he said “we got Brexit done” – normally one of his most reliable applause lines – only a handful of MPs cheered. The question MPs are starting to ask is: who is in charge? In the past week, MPs have started trying to work out who exactly does what in Downing Street. Finding answers isn’t easy. What all this points to is the fact that Johnson’s authority is diminished. MPs – particularly the new intake – had been broadly happy until now to take the prime minister at his word and presume that, as an election winner, his calls are the right ones. This is beginning to change. MPs are openly discussing whether they should bother listening to orders from the whips’ office, given that there is no certainty they won’t change the next day. Even ministers are starting to doubt whether it’s a wise idea to listen to the prime minister’s call for radical reform. Johnson is developing such a reputation for U-turns that they worry they could find themselves having to walk back any radical measure. As for what this means for Johnson in the long term: while his relationship with his party is transactional, no one is seriously talking about replacing him anytime soon. MPs are upset with their leader but they are not about to abandon him completely. Instead, Johnson’s job has just become harder – his party is openly doubting him. It’s part of the reason Downing Street and the whips’s office are embarking on an effort to love-bomb MPs. This began on Monday with a Downing Street drinks reception for the new intake – the first time for such a gathering since the 2019 election victory – where Johnson urged them to “stick with us”. In the new year, there will be a parliamentary two-day trip in the Midlands – “think The Thick Of It but worse”, says one sceptical Tory. But the wider way in which Johnson will win back the support of his MPs is by bringing order back to his government. “We need a few wins between now and Christmas in order to steady the ship,” says one minister. Johnson needs to prove to his party that he isn’t just making decisions on the hoof. It’s this that will ultimately decide his future. Katy Balls is deputy political editor of the SpectatorAn Irish defendant among 24 aid workers accused of espionage in Greece has said he has been left in a legal “limbo” after their trial was postponed, prolonging an ordeal that has highlighted growing hostility towards NGOs involved in migrant solidarity work. A three-member panel of judges on the Aegean island of Lesbos, where the alleged crimes are said to have occurred, referred the case to a court of appeals citing lack of jurisdiction. It is unclear when the higher tribunal will convene. “I’m very angry and very disappointed,” 27-year-old law student Sean Binder told the Guardian after a chaotic hearing on Thursday from which the media were banned. “This just means months of more limbo as we wait for justice. I may not have been found guilty today but effectively I’m still not free. The criminalisation of humanitarianism continues.” The aid workers, almost all volunteers, included Greek and foreigners who had participated in search and rescue work on Lesbos, the Aegean island at the frontline of the refugee crisis. In addition to spying, they stand accused of forgery and unlawfully intercepting radio frequencies – crimes punishable by up to eight years in prison. Binder, a trained rescue diver who moved to Lesbos in 2017, also faces charges of human trafficking, money laundering and fraud. The latter is based on allegations that he had used a military Jeep with stolen number plates to enter restricted areas while working for the now defunct NGO Emergency Response Centre International (ERCI). Sarah Mardini, a competitive swimmer who had helped saved 18 fellow Syrians from drowning when their dinghy sunk off Turkey, stands accused of the same crimes while also volunteering for ERCI. She would have been tried in absentia because of a ban on her entering the country. The pair spent 106 days in pre-trial detention, with Mardini being incarcerated in Athens’ high-security Korydallos prison. Now 25, she has been granted asylum in Germany. If ultimately convicted both could face 25 years in prison. Amid calls for the charges to be dropped, supporters had taken to the streets in cities across Europe. Ahead of Thursday’s trial, the European parliament had condemned the prosecution case as the biggest criminalisation of solidarity work underway on the continent. Human rights groups called the charges “farcical”. Outside Lesbos’ neoclassical court building, protesters held banners reading “saving lives is not a crime”. “Today’s decision adds to the ordeal of the defendants and compounds the violation of their human rights,” said Giorgos Kosmopoulos, Amnesty International’s senior campaigner on migration, who was monitoring the court hearing. “Sarah and Sean have already paid a huge personal price and it’s time for the charges to be dropped.” The case is viewed as emblematic for migrant solidarity workers now under unparalleled scrutiny in Europe, with 180 people involved in NGO work across 13 countries currently facing criminalisation. In Athens, the centre right government of the prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, has been heavily criticised for what rights groups have decried as its hostile rhetoric towards refugees and NGOs, accentuated by violent expulsions of asylum seekers at Greece’s land and sea borders. Mitsotakis has angrily denied the alleged pushbacks arguing that Greek patrols “intercept” migrant boats, as EU law allows, until Turkish coastguard vessels collect them – part of a deal, he says, that Brussels and Ankara reached five years ago to stem migrant flows. But he has accepted his government pursues “a tough but fair” migrant policy as purveyor of south-east Europe’s external borders. “Unless you manage to send a clear signal that you protect your borders, more people will try to enter illegally,” he told the TV show Good Morning Britain on Tuesday. Humanitarians have complained of mounting harassment as Fortress Europe’s frontiers have become ever more securitised and militarised. This week, Yanis Varoufakis, who heads the leftwing MeRA 25 opposition party, told the Greek parliament the charges against Binder and Mardini had brought the country international disrepute, saying in “less harsh times” the young activists would be rewarded for their idealism, not prosecuted. “We did what was legally and morally right, saving people in distress at sea,” Binder said. “There’s not a shred of evidence against us because we did nothing wrong. It makes no sense. Sarah was detained in prison for three months because she was deemed a flight risk and when the trial happens she is not even allowed to attend it.” Zacharias Kesses, the criminal lawyer representing the activists, said while there was no knowing when the case would next be heard, there was room for optimism. “The judges at a higher three-member court are more experienced,” he said. “That gives us confidence that we’ll have the chance to be heard and our arguments evaluated properly although none of this should ever have come to court in the first place.”Giovanni van Bronckhorst has been confirmed as the new Rangers manager, succeeding Steven Gerrard at the club he played for from 1998 and 2001. The former Netherlands international has been out of work since leaving his post as head coach of Guangzhou City in China last December. He managed Feyenoord from 2015 to 2019, winning the Dutch Cup twice and the club’s first Eredivisie title in 18 years. Van Bronckhorst, who won 106 caps during a highly successful playing career which included spells at Arsenal and Barcelona, met Rangers officials in Amsterdam this week after initial talks in London. The club said the deal was subject to a work permit. “I am absolutely delighted to be returning to Rangers as the club’s new manager,” Van Bronckhorst said. “I feel so lucky to be going to work with a squad which is in a great position on all fronts and largely has that experience of being winners … I cannot wait to meet the club’s incredible supporters again and begin this new era for us all.” Rangers play a League Cup semi-final against Hibs on Sunday and are at home to Sparta Prague in the Europa League next Thursday. Gerrard left to take over as manager of Aston Villa. The Rangers sporting director, Ross Wilson, said of Van Bronckhorst: “I can see how excited he is. I am looking forward to introducing him to the squad soon. Gio has been part of a long list of managers we have been tracking for a period of time to ensure we are always ready.”Seth Meyers Seth Meyers tore into Chris Christie’s cable news image rehabilitation tour on Wednesday evening, following numerous appearances by the former governor of New Jersey on such networks as CNN and MSNBC. “Cable is so desperate to fill time that CNN even aired a ludicrous special focused entirely on Christie called Being Chris Christie,” the Late Night host explained. “Is it called that because being is the only title he has left? Governor? No, he left office with a dismal approval rating. Candidate? Oh no, he crashed and burned hard in the GOP primary. But he is still technically a being. “I’m sorry, is there a mystery to being Chris Christie?” he continued. “You guys are acting like he’s some weird lifestyle-having guy that everyone wants to know about. He’s not Harry Styles or Banksy, he’s a loudmouth from New Jersey. If you want to know what he’s thinking you don’t need CNN. You just need to be within earshot, which is for him I think like a mile? “In fact, if this show was authentic New Jersey, it wouldn’t be called Being Chris Christie, it would be called This Fuckin Guy,” he added. Christie has appeared on-air to promote his book Republican Rescue, “casting himself as some sort of straight shooter when it comes to the 2020 election”, Meyers noted, recalling how the former Republican presidential candidate became one of the first prominent GOP figures to endorse Trump in 2016, and advised him on debate prep during the 2020 election. “I guess at this point, any Republican who’s willing to say the election wasn’t stolen deserves a shred of credit, which tells you just how far the GOP has fallen,” he said. “Why are we taking Chris Christie, of all people, seriously? He stood by this obviously monstrous man for years, and he still refuses to say whether he’d support Trump again in 2024.” Asked by CNN’s Dana Bash if he would support the former president in 2024, Christie answered: “Let’s see what happens when he does, and let’s see who he is, and what he says, and how he conducts himself.” “Oh yes, let’s see which Donald Trump will show up,” Meyers mocked. “Will it be the well-spoken and serious statesman, or will it be the one who exists?” Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah dug into Representative Paul Gosar of Arizona, who became the first lawmaker in more than a decade to be censured by the House this week for tweeting an anime video depicting him killing progressive Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. “Seeing something like this from Paul Gosar is not surprising because over the years, Gosar has made a name for himself as possibly the most controversial person in all of Congress,” Noah said, “which is actually impressive, when you think about it.” Formerly a dentist, a profession he frequently invokes for no reason, Gosar ran for Congress as part of the Tea Party movement in 2010. And “it turns out there was one part that Gosar did bring to Congress: teeth whitening. Except instead of whitening teeth, he’s trying to whiten America.” Gosar, whose five siblings publicly opposed his run for office, has been known to associate with anti-Muslim and white nationalist hate groups. “Someone this awful, they shouldn’t be running anything in government,” Noah concluded. “And I don’t say this as a talkshow host. I say this as someone who’s been to the dentist.” Samantha Bee Samantha Bee offered good news and bad news on Full Frontal: “the good news is that the pandemic is getting better. The bad news? Your ass is going home for the holidays.” “Unfortunately for those of us who loved having an all-pie Thanksgiving alone, this year, we might be able to enjoy a relatively normal Turkey Day,” Bee said. “In terms of Covid, things are safer than they were last year,” though health experts are still urging some precautions, such as knowing the vaccination status of guests and ventilating the space. “You should also take further precautions if any of your guests are immunocompromised or if they’re young children who haven’t received the vaccine,” Bee added. “For example, since children under five aren’t yet able to get vaccinated, you might want to leave them in the car with the window open a crack. And before someone complains – yes, I know, you also need to leave them an iPad. Jesus Christ, I’m not a monster! “For the rest of you non-bleach drinkers who believed in science and have been vaxxed all along, it’s my most sincere regret to wish you a happy semi-back to normal Thanksgiving this year,” she concluded. “Suck it up, stay safe, and maybe next year we’ll get lucky and be wiped out by an asteroid.” Stephen Colbert And on the Late Show, Stephen Colbert also looked ahead to the normal-ish holidays. The FDA has planned to authorize booster shots for all American adults this week, as many are seeking extra protection for Thanksgiving gatherings. “You need extra protection for the holidays, especially for your feelings,” Colbert said. “There is no vaccine for that moment the Friday after Thanksgiving when the party bus shows up to take your younger brother out with his high school friends and you spend the night watching Manifest with Grandma.” In New York City, health officials have been advised to give booster shots to all adults who want them. “Any chance we could expand that to adults who don’t want them?” said Colbert. “Because they’re the problem. Just deputize the Times Square Elmos to jab anyone who comes within tickling distance.”There is still too much we don’t know about the Liverpool bomber, who died in a burning taxi outside a women’s hospital on Remembrance Sunday. We know that Emad al-Swealmeen had been assembling bomb ingredients since April, and that he had suffered episodes of mental illness. But police still aren’t sure whether a hospital full of mothers and their newborn babies was really his intended target, or what twisted motivations drove him. We know he tried and failed to claim asylum, exhausting his rights to appeal reportedly in early 2017, but it’s unclear how he managed to avoid being deported after that. And we know that terror attacks in the past have caused spikes in hate crime, which is why Liverpool politicians appealed for calm in the emotionally charged aftermath of the attack. The home secretary, however, seemingly had other ideas. Briefing reporters on a flight to Washington, Priti Patel announced that the case was “a complete reflection of how dysfunctional, how broken, the system has been in the past”. Note that vague “in the past”, from a politician whose party has been in power for 11 years now. But then she added: “It’s a complete merry-go-round, and it has been exploited … There’s a whole industry that thinks it’s right to defend these individuals that cause the most appalling crimes against British citizens … and that is completely wrong.” Whether deliberately chosen or clumsy, those words were only ever going to be read as casually conflating asylum seekers more broadly with dangerous criminals, while frantically shovelling blame away from her department. One Home Office source even accused churches of failing to stop asylum seekers converting to Christianity, as al-Swealmeen reportedly did, to bolster their cases. A Conservative government willing to throw vicars under the bus is a rattled government indeed. What’s most shocking is that Patel has been warned before about the risks of stoking such emotions. Last autumn a London law firm raised concerns that a speech she gave, accusing “activist lawyers” of obstructing deportations, may have helped inspire a knife attack on one of its solicitors. (Lefty lawyers supposedly frustrating the popular will are a favourite Tory target, not least since it’s thought some of the dirt rubs off on ex-barrister Keir Starmer.) But the more details emerge about this particular case, the more cynical that statement looks. The Liverpool bomber was reportedly refused asylum in 2014 (when he apparently claimed to be Syrian, although a relative now says he was born in Iraq) and, after losing an appeal in the lower courts, had his attempt to appeal to the higher courts rejected. When asked how he had seemingly managed to stay in the country, the best a Home Office source could offer was that there were “many varied reasons”. Patel has not, at the time of writing, come either to the House of Commons or to Liverpool to explain her thinking. But the home secretary was already under intense political pressure over the growing numbers of migrant boats crossing the Channel, and it has become painfully clear of late that neither threatening to push dinghies physically back to France nor picking fights with her French counterparts was working. She will know she now risks being outflanked on immigration from the right, which is what she was sent to the Home Office to avoid. The GB News presenter Dan Wootton is already frothing about a supposed “establishment conspiracy of silence” over immigration, language calculated to irritate people who voted for Brexit expecting to regain control of Britain’s borders. His fellow presenter Nigel Farage, circling vulture-like over a troubled government, evidently sees a chance to get back in the political game. “Is this Boris Johnson’s definition of being ‘vigilant’ against security threats?” he tweeted recently, over pictures of a laden lifeboat purportedly arriving at Dover. A better government would have the moral authority to challenge this kind of bile, which feeds the dangerous notion of refugees being a threat to the countries that take them in. But this administration has seemingly chosen to follow him down into the mire. Some might feel a kind of grim satisfaction in watching the Home Office get hoist by its own petard, but this sort of politics produces absolutely no winners. People will keep on drowning at sea, even as the Home Office floats desperate-sounding stories about deterring cross-Channel migrants by sending them to be processed in Albania (something that Albania has angrily denied). Voters will become yet more cynical about what politicians promise versus what actually happens. Some people will go more fearfully about their daily business in the coming days just because of the colour of their skin, while as the human rights barrister Adam Wagner tweeted, “lawyers will get targeted by angry members of the public”. And few will explore what’s really wrong with a creaking asylum system. By chance, this week the Commons human rights committee was taking evidence on the government’s nationality and borders bill, intended to speed up the asylum process amid evidence of a backlog of cases piling up, as well as stiffening the sentences for people smuggling. According to the committee’s chair, Harriet Harman, it heard asylum seekers were now waiting on average a year even to hear back on their applications, during which time most cannot work and their lives are hanging in limbo. Zoe Gardner, of the Joint Council for the Welfare of Immigrants, told Harman’s committee it was seeing “people completely broken down who have become a shell, years later, asking when they will hear”. The sclerotic and under-funded system she describes sounds broken too, but in a very different way from Patel’s assessment. What, if anything, all this might have to do with events in Liverpool remains to be seen, and the policing minister Kit Malthouse was notably more cautious than his boss when fielding questions on it in parliament. He will doubtless be aware that the terror threat Britain has faced in recent years has come mostly from homegrown terrorists, including those behind the bombing of an Ariana Grande gig in Manchester or the brutal murder of PC Keith Palmer as he was guarding parliament. The national lead for counter-terrorism policing, Matt Jukes, confirmed this week that the vast majority of those thought to be plotting attacks were not foreign nationals but born or raised here. The Liverpool bomber’s case is clearly different, and it isn’t unreasonable for people to ask why he was still in the country, any more than it’s unreasonable to ask why he wasn’t on the security services’ radar or perhaps whether mental health services could have picked up on the threat he posed. But questions like this deserve honest and careful answers, not rattled politicians lashing out or rabble-rousers playing with matches. Tough talk alone will never keep us safe. And worse than that, it risks throwing some of us to the wolves. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnistAlbania has strenuously denied it is willing to process people crossing the Channel to Britain, after the UK deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, confirmed that the government is exploring ways of processing asylum seekers abroad. Edi Rama, the prime minister, said he would “never receive refugees for richer countries”, after a report in the Times suggested Albania would be willing to host an offshore processing centre for people arriving in the UK from France in small boats. Priti Patel, the home secretary, opened talks on the proposal when she signed an agreement in July for Albania to take back criminals deported from the UK. Ministers see Australian-style offshore processing centres – to which migrants would be flown within seven days of arriving in the UK – as a key potential deterrent to stem the record surge in Channel crossings. The Home Office is due to confirm that more than 1,000 reached the UK on Tuesday. However, Rama told Albania’s Top Channel: “Albania will never be a country where very rich countries will set up camps for their refugees. Never.” Earlier, Albania’s foreign minister, Olta Xhaçka, and its ambassador to the UK, Qirjako Qirko, dismissed the report as a “fake news” . Raab appeared to give credence to the report by telling Times Radio: “We are looking at international partnerships that can take the processing out of the UK in order to try and reduce the pull factor which means people think they can successfully take advantage of these routes.” On Sky News later, when Raab was asked if people seeking asylum in the UK would be flown to Albania, he said: “Well that’s one country, but we are willing to look with partners at whether it’s possible to do this international processing.” But Tirana reacted angrily to the report. Xhaçka tweeted an image of the front page of the Times and said: “Same old fake news this time in the front page of a respected paper as The Times! And btw I am not a ‘he’ but a ‘she’ who has always admired the quality of British media. Sad.” Qirko said he was “furious” about the report because on Wednesday he had told the Times “at least 10 times that Albania will never, ever agree to this kind of approach regarding immigrants coming from France”. Speaking to the Guardian, he said: “It is totally fake. They don’t mention a single word regarding the reality and they write what they prefer. “I’m a lawyer. Albania has no jurisdiction to decide if an immigrant is legal or illegal. The international convention has arranged everything in detail regarding the process of assessing asylum seekers. The British courts will decide, not the Albanian courts.” In letter of complaint to the Times, Qirko said: “There are no bilateral talks between Albanian and British government officials regarding processing centres for illegal immigrants crossing the English Channel.” It added: “The Albanian government will never agree to [the] opening of such processing centres for illegal immigrants as this is an act violates the international law.” Processing asylum seekers abroad was started by Australia, first in Papua New Guinea and now on the Pacific island of Nauru. Raab, who is also the justice secretary, defended the UK exploring similar ideas. He told Sky: “I think it’s right, there’s practice around the world in relation to this, to look at these the possibilities of international partnerships for international processing of some of these claims.” He said the government was trying to stop people crossing the Channel in boats. Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, condemned the offshore processing plan as “desperate measure” that was cruel and likely to be ineffective.In the run-up to the Conservative conference, senior Tory sources briefed that it was the moment to relaunch Boris Johnson as the “delivery man” – a prime minister who had pushed through an extraordinary vaccine rollout and would now take the same scale of ambition to his domestic agenda. But in the weeks that have followed, could the wheels be coming off the delivery van? Labour have crept ahead in the polls after a fortnight of Tory sleaze headlines that have left MPs annoyed and frustrated as the the prime minister repeatedly discharged bullets into his own foot. In private, ministers and MPs believe the real test of Johnson’s leadership and of their electoral fortunes lie in two of the other big stories of the week. First is the deep disappointment and, in some cases, cold fury that have greeted the long trailed integrated rail plan that radically scales back on promises to towns and cities across northern England. The second is an announcement, quietly slipped out overnight, that places a huge additional burden on poorer households for care costs, one to exacerbate the north-south divide when it comes to passing on assets to children. Both of those stories, if they gain more momentum and if Labour can successfully turn them into a narrative, suggest a prime minister overpromising and underdelivering on two of the most important planks of his domestic agenda. After all, he had promised to level up the country. “Boris has never had support because people believe in his ideology or think he’s a decent bloke,” one Tory minister said. “It’s because they think he can win and that he can get things done.” The Conservative chair of the transport committee, Huw Merriman, said it even more bluntly to the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, on Thursday: “This is the danger of selling perpetual sunlight and then leaving it to others to explain the arrival of moonlight.” The criticism that will sting the most is from Johnson’s own northern MPs. Jake Berry, the chair of the northern Tory caucus, quoting the prime minister’s promise on the third day of his premiership of a new line between Manchester and Leeds, asked Johnson directly whether “voters of the north [were] right to take the PM at his word?” Robbie Moore, the newly elected Conservative MP for Keighley who holds a slim 2,000 majority over Labour, which had previously gained the seat in 2017, said he was “deeply disappointed” by the slimmed-down announcement. “The Bradford district has been completely short-changed,” he said. There is an argument to say that delivery, of a different kind, is likely to have been one of the things that persuaded Johnson to accept the scaled-down but sped-up rail plans, though it is clear Rishi Sunak’s Treasury would have had a hand in forcing some of the changes amid wider concern about the costs of HS2. The changes aim to bring some faster connections a decade earlier than if more ambitious changes had gone ahead. Johnson is gambling that commuters start to feel the difference in time to deliver electoral benefits. Social care is another area that could see his support crumble from a bulwark of MPs who backed him over the national insurance rise on the proviso that a plan to fix the dire social care crisis was a prize worth capturing. Many of those MPs also came from non-traditional seats with less well-off voters. Those are the voters likely to be the ones hit by details revealed on Wednesday night that means-tested council funding would not count towards the new cap on care costs. It will effectively mean pensioners in £1m homes in Hertfordshire who do not qualify for early help have the vast majority of their assets protected, but in northern towns such as Workington or Hartlepool, elderly people who qualified for means-tested help could eventually lose up to the entire value of their homes. There is another big test in the pipeline: the long-awaited levelling up white paper promised by the end of the year, authored by the Tory MP Neil O’Brien. Under Michael Gove at the new levelling up department, DLUHC (which Gove has told officials to pronounce as “deluxe”), the white paper will be the flagship announcement on Johnson’s foremost government priority. The promise is that the paper will deliver on improving living standards, growing the private sector and increasing and spreading opportunity across the nation, touching almost all aspects of government. O’Brien has a deep understanding of the issue, as one of the co-founders of the thinktank Onward, which coined the term “Workington Man” for the new kind of voter the Tories should be seeking. Stakes are high for what the paper will promise to deliver. Johnson’s speech this summer on his vision for levelling up was criticised by experts for containing scant new policy or even any astute analysis. “We know it didn’t land,” one No 10 source said this week. One minister said this week the PM had talked about wanting to avoid creating another “big society” – the David Cameron slogan that caught public attention – but came to be derided by his own MPs as meaningless. That will hinge on whether he can salvage his social care and infrastructure disappointments – and what this autumn’s white paper can tangibly deliver.A one-year-old child from Syria has died in a forest in Poland near the border with Belarus, according to Polish medical workers, becoming the youngest known victim of the crisis on the eastern edge of the European Union. Thousands of people attempting to reach the EU are still stranded in freezing conditions, amid a standoff between the bloc and Belarus, which has been accused of deliberately creating the crisis by flying in people from the Middle East and facilitating their travel to the border. The Polish Emergency Medical Team PCPM, an NGO, said the child was the son of a Syrian couple who it had assisted in the early hours of Thursday. “Around 2:26 am we received a report that at least one person needed medical assistance,” PCPM said on Twitter. “When we arrived on the spot, it turned out that three people were injured. They had been in the forest for 1.5 months.” PCPM said its staff had come across a young man with severe abdominal pain who was hungry and dehydrated, and a Syrian couple. “The man had a lacerated wound to his arm, and the woman had a stab wound to her lower leg,” the group tweeted. “Their one-year-old child died in the forest.” The cause of the boy’s death was not yet established. At least 13 people have died in the area in recent weeks, most due to exposure. In the last few days, the local Muslim community of Bohoniki, a village in north-east Poland, has held the funerals of two victims. On Monday, residents streamed to his family via Skype the funeral of 19-year-old Syrian Ahmad al-Hasan, who was found dead in the Bug river in eastern Poland on 19 October. According to witnesses, Ahmad, who could not swim, was pushed by a Belarusian soldier to enter the water. The family of Ferhad, a man from Kobane in Syria who died in a car accident in October while fleeing the Polish police, said they were still waiting for his body. “He left Syria, like many others, to reach Europe,” said Ferhad’s cousin Rashwan Nabo, a Syrian humanitarian worker. Ferhad had boarded a direct flight to Minsk from Erbil, in northern Iraq. “In Raqqa, Damascus and Aleppo, word has been spreading for months that the easiest and fastest way to reach Europe is a direct flight to Belarus,” Nabo said. Alexander Lukashenko, the president of Belarus, has been accused of deliberately provoking the refugee crisis in revenge for EU sanctions on his authoritarian regime. According to charities, in recent days, more and more people have managed to cross the barbed wire separating Poland from Belarus. Requests for help received by charities and doctors from asylum seekers in the forest around the secure zone have increased. According to doctors, most common medical emergencies they have treated are injuries from beatings, dehydration and hypothermia. Aid workers are urging the Polish government to create a humanitarian bridge for those trapped at the border to allow them to enter Polish territory. With temperatures dropping to below freezing in recent days, charities fear more people will die without the necessary medical assistance. Anna Chmielewska, the coordinator of the Help Center for Foreigners, said: “It is a matter of time when we will be getting more and more tragic news like this.”FIVERCOIN™, ANYONE? What to give those who have everything? Football’s answer is, as ever, more money. And there’s a new cash cow in town, the wonderful world of cryptocurrency and non-fungible tokens. Everyone’s involved, from Paul Pogba’s dragon eggs to “Messiverse” crypto-art collections. Top, top Social Media Disgrace star Plain Old John Terry is an advocate and last week applauded Wayne Rooney for “making moves in the NFT [non-fungible token – Fiver Big Tech Ed] world”. Rooney features in a collection that also includes boxing legend Muhammad Ali, rugger legend Jonah Lomu, swedging legend Michael Bisping and ice hockey bloke Alex Ovechkin. What does it all mean? Don’t ask us. The Fiver still keeps cash under a mildewed MFI mattress and, if payday is looming, writes a cheque to pay for the weekend’s supply of Tin. You can stick your Switch card, or that waving-a-mobile-phone-at-a-sensor you see The Kids do when they pay for their expensive IPAs and avocado and mung bean salads. Things become very confusing when press releases like this from Manchester City drop through the Fiver Towers letterbox. “We are excited to partner with 3Key in their journey to simplify the decentralised finance (DeFi) trading analysis user experience through the power of football to engage with our fans with a range of content and activations,” roared Stephen Cieplik, City Football Group’s senior vice-suit of Global Partnership Sales last week. Even harder to comprehend is the news that 3Key do not appear to have something called a digital footprint. This is apparently a bad thing, though it sounds akin to what Weird Uncle Fiver has been trying to achieve for some years. After some canny internet sleuths did some digging, City suits have had to confirm they will not activate any products or services connected to the partnership unless all relevant regulations have been met. Meanwhile, the NFT graphics that football stars ask fans to pay for often resemble the type of cartoonish doodles you see on the graffiti wall of the school art department. They supposedly have a value in cryptocurrency terms that can be traded, even if you can right-click and save the jpeg yourself, in an echo of those halcyon days of Napster and “home taping is killing music”. In short, football has found a new revenue stream. Timely, as sources of old money are sapped by the pandemic with inflation on the rise. Betting sponsorship may soon be drying up as a result of heavier regulation. And crypto by nature is unregulated. This is the Wild West stage of crypto wibble. As club football returns this weekend you will find a crypto website sponsoring VAR in Serie A, clubs flogging “fan tokens” and more ropey jpegs on players’ various Social Media Disgrace feeds. What could possibly go wrong? LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE Join Luke McLaughlin for MBM coverage of Chelsea 7-0 Servette in their Women’s Big Cup clash (8pm GMT). QUOTE OF THE DAY “We wish to state categorically that the allegations are frivolous, baseless and lack merit and should be treated with all the contempt [they] deserve … [we] call on the South African FA to responsibly accept defeat and show respect to the Black Stars’ achievement on the field. This is not the first time Ghana has defeated South Africa and this will not be the last time” – a few choice highlights from the Ghanaian FA’s 1,100-word response, after South Africa had called for their Human Rights World Cup qualifier to be replayed. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Football Weekly Extra is here! Join Max and co as they chat Wales, Stockport County and the impending, inevitable return of the Premier League. FIVER LETTERS “There’s a Fiver Lazy Stereotype Editor now [Wednesday’s Fiver]? They are going to be very busy – they’ll need to work faster than a Fiver hack trying to gulp down the last of his [Snip! – Fiver Lazy Stereotype Editor] at closing time” – Dan Davis. “Back at the start of the millennium Charlton played Mark Fish, Jorge Costa and John Fortune in the same defence. Sadly they didn’t pick Luke Young to make up the back line” – Dan Ashley. “We thank you for recognising Canada’s football existence – our victory at the Edmonton Iceteca was preceded by a win over Panama that featured a goal that is unlike any other goal ever scored” – Clive Jones. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Clive Jones. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Chelsea goalkeeper Édouard Mendy and his cousin, Real Madrid’s Ferland Mendy, have both complained that media outlets have used images of them to accompany stories about Benjamin Mendy. “These ‘mistakes’ of photos appear anecdotal, but actually they are quite the opposite, they are highly symbolic,” said Édouard on Social Media Disgrace Instagram. $tevie Mbe has wasted no time setting standards at Aston Villa. “The players have to have the right mentality. Go above and beyond. They need to strive to be elite,” he said about, er, banning ketchup from the canteen. $tevie also channeled his inner PJ and Duncan [just us? – Fiver Ed] by insisting Villa were not a stepping stone back to Liverpool. The Pope’s O’Rangers have appointed Giovanni van Bronckhorst as Gerrard’s successor. “I feel so lucky … I cannot wait to meet the club’s incredible supporters again and begin this new era for us all,” cheered the former O’Rangers player. Britain and Ireland’s 2030 World Cup bid is still in with a chance despite the pwopah nawty scenes around Wembley during the Euro Not 2020 final – according to the sports minister, Nigel Huddleston, anyway. Jack Rodwell – remember him? – has signed for Western Sydney Wanderers of the A-League Men, and could barely contain his excitement. “With my wife being from western Sydney, the Wanderers was the perfect destination,” Rodwell gushed. Not every FA comprises supine suits. Denmark’s, for example, has vowed to draw attention to human rights abuses in Qatar – admittedly, while playing in the Human Rights World Cup, but we are where we are. Reading have agreed a six-point deduction with the EFL, after owners that the EFL apparently deemed suitable custodians of the club breached the EFL’s profit and sustainability rules. And in the kind of foul-up you might expect to see on the touchline at Fiver FC, Exeter will have to replay their FA Cup tie with Bradford after sending on six substitutes. RECOMMENDED BOOKING No Christmas party again this year? Then you’re cordially invited to Football Weekly’s very own one on … checks notes … 30 November. Tickets are available now. STILL WANT MORE? “Although never a showy writer, Lacey was held in special esteem and affection by peers and rivals who recognised his blend of wit, craftsmanship and knowledge of the game. The quality and integrity of his work allowed him to stand aloof from the frantic chase for a scoop” – Richard Williams pays tribute to the Guardian’s former football correspondent, David Lacey, who has died aged 83. “I told off our kit man, Mike, for playing too many Hollywood passes last week. He was fuming. We play the Swans way” – the Swansea manager, Russell Martin, gets his chat on with Ben Fisher about the passing approach he employs at the Liberty – and with his five-a-side team. The Human Rights World Cup is just over a year away – read this series on where workers stand in Qatar and the legacy of abuse that overshadows the tournament. Treat your ears to some classic football theme tunes in this top 40 rundown. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! THE FIVER: AFTER DARKThe former Formula One team owner Eddie Jordan is part of a consortium considering making a £3bn offer for Playtech, as the London-listed gambling software supplier becomes the focus of a potential bidding war. Last month, Playtech’s board recommended shareholders accept a £2.7bn takeover offer from Aristocrat, the Australian slot machine developer, and a rival offer from its second-biggest shareholder Gopher Investments. JKO Play, the consortium set up by Jordan and Keith O’Loughlin, who formerly ran the sports betting operation of the Nasdaq-listed Scientific Games, confirmed it was “evaluating making a competing offer for Playtech”. JKO is in talks with the US-based investment firm Centerbridge, among other potential partners, to finance a cash and shares offer for the business. Playtech confirmed its board of directors had “received a preliminary approach from JKO Play seeking access to certain due diligence information, in order to explore terms on which an offer for all of the issued and to be issued share capital of Playtech might be made”. Jordan’s role leading JKO Play is just the latest stage in a career that has ranged from motor racing driver and F1 team owner to TV pundit and entrepreneur. After winning the Irish Kart Championship in 1971, he went to race in Formula Three and Formula Two throughout the 70s. After suffering a number of major accidents, he set up his eponymous racing team in 1980 and had significant success in Formula Three and Formula 3000 before setting up a Formula One team in 1990. Drivers who owed their break to Jordan include Michael Schumacher and Eddie Irvine, while Damon Hill, Nigel Mansell and Ayrton Senna (his favourite driver) also drove for him. After selling a struggling Jordan Grand Prix in 1995 he became a pundit for the BBC’s Formula One coverage from 2009 to 2015, subsequently moving to Channel 4. Through his family office Jordan has invested in a wide range of businesses in recent years, from Celtic football club to gaming firm Entain. Earlier this year he set up JKO Capital to seek investments in gaming and entertainment businesses. Besides the approach from JKO Play, Playtech is also reportedly in talks with Caliente, a gambling business that predominantly operates in Mexico, about a potential joint venture through a public merger with a special purpose acquisition company (Spac), according to Sky News, which first reported Jordan’s potential move on Playtech. Aristocrat said it was forging ahead with regulatory approval relating to its own offer for Playtech, had financing facilities in place and had completed an equity raise of A$1.3bn (£700m) with “strong take-up from Aristocrat shareholders”. During its full-year results presentation on Thursday, Trevor Croker, Aristocrat’s chief executive, said it had also received irrevocable commitments and letters of intent supporting the takeover from a Playtech investor who represented 16.5% of the London-listed company’s shareholder base. The next step in the potential bidding war will be the UK Takeover Panel announcing a deadline for when JKO Play and Gopher must “clarify their intentions” in relation to Playtech.Stargazers across North America can expect to be dazzled by a red-hued “beaver” full moon on Thursday night and into Friday morning, during the longest partial lunar eclipse in almost six centuries. Lunar eclipses happen when Earth blocks the sun’s light, which usually illuminates the moon. Early on Friday, more than 97% of the full moon’s diameter will be covered by Earth’s shadow, according to Space.com. The partial eclipse will take more than six hours, the longest of its kind in 580 years, according to Space.com. Because the moon is nearing apogee, its farthest point from Earth, it is moving particularly slowly in orbit. All of North America will bear witness to the phenomenon, the Washington Post reported. Parts of Polynesia, Asia, South America and Australia may also catch a glimpse, Nasa said. Lunar eclipses are easier to prepare for than solar eclipses, in that there is no need for special glasses. But you may need to rearrange your sleep schedule. The moon is expected to enter the penumbra – the Earth’s outer shadow – around 1.02am ET, though the initial effect will be pretty faint. Eventually the moon will enter the umbra, the Earth’s dark inner shadow. This should happen around 2.18am ET. By around 4am ET, night owls and early birds will be able to catch the near-total eclipse – “the best viewing” of the night, according to Nasa. The moon will probably be cast in an eerie red, “the combined light of all the sunrises and sunsets that ring our world at this particular moment”, as Space.com put it. If you don’t feel like pulling an all-nighter, there’s no need to fret. Two total lunar eclipses are on the way, in May and November next year. November’s full moon is sometimes called a “beaver moon”, a name Nasa suggests may allude to the time when people would set beaver traps, or when beavers were especially active, getting ready for winter. It’s also known to some as a frost, frosty or snow moon, a reference to the change in weather.Owen Farrell is a doubt for the start of the Six Nations after it emerged the England captain requires surgery on his injured ankle. He limped out of last Saturday’s victory against Australia when making his 100th Test appearance and following surgery on Friday is set to be sidelined for up to 12 weeks. It means Farrell is doubtful for England’s Six Nations opener away to Scotland on 5 February – in 11 weeks’ time – when Eddie Jones’s side seek to avenge this year’s 11-6 Twickenham defeat. Farrell’s absence would also deprive Jones of his influential leader as England set about atoning for their dismal 2021 Six Nations campaign in which they finished fifth. Furthermore, it would put on ice Farrell’s fledgling 10-12 partnership with Marcus Smith. Jamie George, who sustained a knee injury against the Wallabies, is also set to be out of action for up to 10 weeks and faces a battle to prove his fitness for the Scotland match. He and Farrell would hope to play some part in England’s Six Nations campaign but there is the danger of history repeating itself, with a lack of game time for the Saracens contingent following their relegation for salary-cap breaches highlighted as a key reason why Jones’s side underperformed in this year’s tournament. Indeed, Jones recently said of his captain’s loss of form last season: “His team was in the Championship, they had spasmodic training sessions, he didn’t get high‑quality games.” George, meanwhile, has been in excellent form for Saracens since he was left out of Jones’s training squad in September and fought back to claim the No 2 jersey in the absence of Luke Cowan-Dickie. The Exeter hooker is set to be fit for the Six Nations, however, leaving George up against it to reclaim his place. Ultimately it is Saracens who will suffer the most, with Farrell also in fine fettle for the club in their first season back in the Premiership.Scott Sayare (What lies beneath: the secrets of France’s top serial killer expert, 9 November) is wrong to suggest that “the serial killer was not yet a cultural vogue in France” when Stéphane Bourgoin held forth on the subject at a dinner party in the early 1990s. By coincidence, Sayare’s article appeared during the centenary of the trial of Henri Désiré Landru, the French serial killer who eventually inspired a wildly inaccurate 1963 film by the voguish director Claude Chabrol from a script by the avant-garde novelist Françoise Sagan. Chabrol and Sagan’s cinematic atrocity tapped into a French cultural fascination with serial killers that goes back to Bluebeard, the mythical medieval nobleman who slaughtered his wives. Revealingly, the French press dubbed the bearded Landru the “Bluebeard of Gambais”, after one of the villages near Paris where 10 of his fiancees had vanished. At Landru’s trial, Colette was among the press pack who struggled to make sense of this lethally deranged misogynist, whom the prosecution alleged had made “romantic contact” with 283 women during the war (a provable underestimate). She reported that she had “searched in vain for any sign of cruelty in his deeply entrenched eyes”. Colette was writing for a mass French readership that was already familiar with infamous serial killer cases from abroad, via newspapers and dozens of true crime magazines. Seen in this historical light, Stéphane Bourgoin was not a trailblazer, even on his own terms. He was selling his tales of interviews with US serial killers to a public which was already steeped in the subject. Richard Tomlinson Author, Landru’s Secret: The Deadly Seductions of France’s Lonely Hearts Serial KillerFifa will not intervene in the case of Abdullah Ibhais, a former employee of Qatar’s World Cup committee who is on hunger strike after being detained by police in Doha. Football’s governing body said it would not be taking any action but would “continue to follow this matter closely”, after Ibhais was arrested at his house on Monday. Ibhais held the position of deputy communications director for the Supreme Committee, the Qatari body responsible for the delivery of next year’s World Cup. He was removed from the role in 2019 after being accused of fraud over a contract to produce social media content for the tournament. A trial in Doha ended with Ibhais being sent to jail for five years, before he was released on bail pending an appeal earlier this year. Ibhais, who is of Palestinian descent and holds a Jordanian passport, has always denied the charges. He says he has been singled out by Qatar because of his support for migrant workers in the country. Ibhais’s latest arrest followed the publication of an article by the investigative website Josimar, which detailed WhatsApp messages apparently from the ‘Crisis Comms’ group of the Supreme Committee during a strike by migrant workers in 2019. In those messages the head of the Supreme Committee, Hassan al-Thawadi, is seen to argue that the communications team should avoid referring to World Cup workers being part of the strike and that the team should “put a narrative” on delays which had seen workers go without pay for months. Ibhais then says “we can’t say that there were no WC workers striking”. In a separate conversation with the executive director of communications, Fatima al-Nuaimi, Ibhais says of the strike: “We need to fix it then do the PR part. Lying is not Qatar’s way and should not be.” These conversations took place on 4 August 2019. On 12 November Ibhais was arrested on suspicion of fraud. On Wednesday Ibhais’s family released a statement accusing Fifa of “turning a blind eye” to his fate and said he had not been given a fair trial, an accusation supported by representatives of Human Rights Watch. “We demand a serious, prompt and meaningful action from Fifa to stop the extreme injustice put upon Abdullah by the authorities of the country they chose to host the World Cup,” the family said, “[and] to press for a fair trial for Abdullah and for his immediate release – as there is no justification for his detention.” Ibhais says he was denied access to legal representation during his interrogation by police and signed a confession that was false. Qatari authorities, meanwhile, argue they have audio and visual evidence of criminal activity on his part. On Thursday Fifa responded publicly for the first time. In a statement released to the Guardian, it said it had spoken with Ibhais “several times” and “carefully reviewed” the available information. “It is Fifa’s position that any person deserves a trial that is fair and where due process is observed and respected,” it said. “Fifa has duly received the complaint from Mr Ibhais and replied to the complaint in writing, having carefully reviewed the available information about his case. We have since been in touch with our Qatari counterparts and on several occasions with Mr Ibhais. Fifa will continue to follow this matter closely.” In a statement released to the Guardian, the Supreme Committee for Delivery &amp; Legacy said: “Abdullah Ibhais’ claim that he was targeted for taking a position on a labour-related matter is a fabrication and a lie. “The allegations presented by Ibhais have no credibility. The case against Ibhais is rooted in evidence [of alleged manipulation and misuse of state funds], and has absolutely nothing to do with personal opinions or actions on labour-related matters. “The reality was that no World Cup workers were involved in the strike. Any suggestion that the use of the words ‘narrative’ and ‘spin’ indicates a desire to cover-up is wholly false.” On Friday Amnesty International added to the voices calling for action on Ibhais’s detention. “Abdullah Ibhais was arrested just days after he spoke publicly about his case, in what appears to amount to arbitrary detention in retaliation for speaking out about his experiences,” said Lynn Maalouf, deputy director for the Middle East and North Africa. “Qatari authorities must immediately launch an independent investigation into Abdullah’s claims of ill-treatment, and quash his conviction and sentence if they are found to have been based on a coerced ‘confession’. Qatar must ensure fair trial standards are upheld in all cases, including ensuring all defendants are provided with legal representation from the moment of their arrest.”Urging drivers to merge in helpful fashion when approaching roadworks (I have become what I hate – the driver who pushes into a lane at the last minute, 17 November), Adrian Chiles adds that he is ordering a T-shirt bearing the legend “Merge Like A Zip, Not Like A C*nt”. Whether or not we want to encourage the use of a word for female genitalia as an insult, if sexual imagery is to be used then I suggest that the wording is misleading. It is often a male organ that pushes in. Michele Roberts London • I am always pedantically bothered by the instruction “Use both lanes”, which I see the centre-line hoggers doing, when “Use either lane” would be a more reasonable suggestion. Harold Somers Chorlton, Manchester • I read with some amusement and concern about the chair of Network Rail issuing warnings to HGV drivers to “look out for road signs warning of oncoming bridges” (Report, 16 November). Are they supposed to reverse out of their way? Richard Griffin Dolwyddelan, Conwy • With regard to Alan Woodley’s letter on Weetabix consumption (16 November), how lovely would they be served with 30g of raspberries, the zest of one lemon and a teaspoon of mulberry pekmez (Letters, passim). Siobhán Ní Chuanaigh Dublin, Ireland • Re Barney Ronay’s article (Azeem Rafiq’s courage shows Yorkshire and ECB what a real leader looks like, 16 November), the BBC Sports Personality of the Year award should go to Azeem Rafiq for his leadership, bravery, honesty and extreme grace under fire. Lucy Owen Adstone, Northamptonshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.We cannot allow Richard Ratcliffe’s ending of his courageous 21-day hunger strike to be the end of publicity urging the government to pay its long-owed debt so that Nazanin and the other hostages return home. Thus many of us across the country are on a hunger strike in his place (for limited days), to keep this injustice in the spotlight. I am now into my third day and in my 90th year. I can’t see what else I can do. Margaret Owen London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.When Tara Wellard bought her three-bedroom house on Mexborough’s Shimmer estate in 2012, it was a dream come true. As a single parent of two small girls, she finally had a brand new home she could make her own in the South Yorkshire town. But in summer 2016 the dream became a nightmare when she received a letter saying that her home needed to be demolished to make way for high-speed rail. She sold up to HS2 after trying to remortgage and being told it was valued at zero on the open market, and moved into a smaller, more expensive property in 2018. She still feels sad every time she passes what she thought would be her forever home. On Thursday she was reeling from the news that the government had changed its mind. HS2 is not now going to reach Yorkshire and will stop 50 miles south of Mexborough, at East Midlands Parkway. She had uprooted her daughters’ lives for nothing and had a simple question: “Do you think they will let me have my home back?” Any optimism was soon dispelled via an email sent to local councillors from HS2’s engagement manager, Michael Haughton. Dispatched shortly after Grant Shapps, the transport secretary, delivered the integrated rail plan to a jeering parliament, it said: “Safeguarding remains in place along the full route, as does access to the range of HS2 property schemes. At this time, we do not expect any changes to safeguarding, or to eligibility for these schemes, unless and until different plans are confirmed.” In other words, the Shimmer estate remains blighted. No one will be able to get a mortgage if they want to move in. The three local councillors from the independent Mexborough First party were furious. “Tossers,” said Bev Chapman, in one of their more printable comments. The saga of the Shimmer estate is one of the more farcical chapters of the HS2 story. When the route of the eastern spur was made public in 2016, it emerged that the designers had worked off old maps which were made before 2011, when construction on Shimmer’s 212 houses began. “The engineers told us they had no idea the houses were here,” said councillor Andrew Pickering. All the designers could see was an electricity substation they planned to relocate so they could plonk an 18-metre-high viaduct on top. Shimmer was supposed to be one of the most aspirational estates in Doncaster. No one seems to know why it got its unusual name, but Chapman hypothesises that it may be a reference to the way the sun catches the light of the neighbouring River Don. Many of the homes were snapped up off-plan, with owners picking out their own kitchens and bathrooms, and adding their own luxuries such as underfloor heating and external uplighters. “Some of them were like palaces,” remembers Chapman. In July 2016 residents received hand-delivered letters at 6am one morning informing them that the government would need to acquire “some or all” of their land if new proposals for the South Yorkshire route were approved. So began a process which saw almost all owners sell up to HS2. Many of them say they were required to sign non-disclosure agreements to prevent them telling their neighbours the sale price, according to local councillors. “It was a disgraceful state of affairs,” said Pickering. Amid the enforced secrecy, there was outrage in 2017 when the surveyors, Carter Jonas, left confidential home valuations on a train. These days, the estate is still not finished. A half-completed playground remains fenced off and the road and kerbs are in poor condition. Almost all of the occupied homes are now rented out by HS2, with rents significantly under the market rate – one couple said they paid just £600 a month to rent their three-storey townhouse, very like the dream home Wellard was forced to sell. “We only know of two of the original owners who stayed put,” said councillor Sean Gibbons. “People have suffered massively through the stress of this. There’s people who’ve had breakdowns, they’re on medication, and then they turn on the TV and see MPs laughing and shouting about all of this in the House of Commons. It’s a disgrace.”The shelving of the eastern leg of HS2 (Report, 18 November) should lead to questions about the viability of the entire scheme, particularly the western leg to Manchester, but also the white elephant of the Curzon Street terminus in Birmingham, isolating HS2 from the rest of the network and badly connected with the city’s existing rail network. The north of England needs urgent investment in the regional and interregional networks, not this ill-conceived scheme that could well do more harm than good to the north’s economy, sucking wealth to the south-east. Contrary to what Labour and some “red wall” Tory MPs seem to think, HS2 is hugely unpopular in the north and its demise will be welcomed. What’s needed is further electrification, capacity improvements (which HS2 will not deliver, contrary to the hype) and selective reopenings of lines and stations across the north. Prof Paul Salveson Bolton, Greater Manchester • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Rebecca Solnit’s inspiring long read (Ten ways to confront the climate crisis without losing hope, 18 November) correctly emphasised the need to maintain hope when tackling the climate crisis by acting collectively, being tenacious through constant campaigning, despite setbacks, and listening to those whom the climate crisis most directly affects. However, she left out the one factor crucial to achieving the systemic change required to protect the planet: to campaign to make clear how to pay for the enormous upfront costs required for such a fundamental transition. This was addressed at Cop26 in Glasgow by Mia Amor Mottley, the prime minister of Barbados, which is under threat from rising sea levels. She made this critical but shamefully underreported argument: “The central banks of the wealthiest countries engaged in $25tn of quantitative easing in the last 13 years. Of that, $9tn was spent in the last 18 months to fight the pandemic. Had we used that $25tn to finance the energy transition, we would now be reaching that 1.5 degrees limit that is so vital to us.” Everyone recognises that civil society’s next step must be to keep its hopes up and keep the goal of 1.5C alive in the run-up to the next Cop in Egypt in a year’s time. Since funding will be central to its success, activists really must make Mottley’s call for “climate quantitative easing” central to their campaigns over the next year. Colin Hines Convener, UK Green New Deal Group, Richard Murphy Professor of accounting, Sheffield University Management School • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Much as I long for Zoe Williams to be right (Has the nation finally had enough of Tory scandals? 16 November), she may have underestimated the taste for a supposedly unappetising party. That is because the “sleaze” in the headlines is not just an expression of old-fashioned greed. It shares an origin in the ideologically driven, righteous acquisitiveness that is an article of faith for the average Tory voter. It is also a tendency that has for too long been dignified by the myth of meritocracy. Together these have spawned the belief that those with their snouts in the trough have probably earned the right to do so. A surprisingly influential expression of this tendency spilled from an unlikely source in 1998, Labour’s Peter Mandelson, who was “intensely relaxed about people getting filthy rich”. The fact that his caveat “as long as they pay their taxes” tends to be forgotten indicates how well and how far this attitude resonated with those eager to justify their own avarice. It helped create a tipping point in public attitudes to excess, fuelling the rapacious materialism that was rampant until checked, briefly, by the financial crisis of 2007-08. Thus, while the current scandal “hits the nation’s gag reflex”, arguably this may have less to do with what we’re being asked to swallow than simply the gargantuan size of the helpings. As soon as the Tories renounce their current grotesque excesses and revert to mere overindulgence, I fear the nation will again find them palatable. It has before. Paul McGilchrist Colchester, Essex • The question is not for how many hours MPs work at outside organisations, it’s who they work for (Boris Johnson plan on ‘second jobs’ would hit fewer than 10 MPs, 187 November) Here in Brighton, we have two MPs, Caroline Lucas and Lloyd Russell-Moyle, who work with organisations concerned with the environment, climate change, the arms trade, Brexit, the Middle East, electoral reform and so on. Most of this work is unpaid. They bring this experience to parliament; that’s rather better for us all than the Tories’ much-vaunted “business experience” that has led us into a mire of sleaze and dodgy dealing. David Sang Brighton, East Sussex • So far, the anger against sleaze has focused on income from consultancy, lobbying and contracts given to Tory donors. But can the Guardian also publish full lists of MPs and peers whose shareholdings mean that they stand to gain wealth from decisions made by this government? For instance, it would be illuminating to see full, updated lists of parliamentarians with investments in private health, the pharmaceutical industry and any other businesses benefiting from Covid-related contracts and the government’s privatisation agenda. And how about a full list of those investing in fossil fuel companies? Lin Clark Bristol • MPs also employed elsewhere? Isn’t it now time to rationalise the timing of sittings of the House? Very simply, make it a proper 9 to 5 job. Open the doors at 8am and lock them out at 6pm. This would remove access to the subsidised restaurants and bars for privileged conversations out of hours, and to journalist-free offices, where second-job activity can go unnoticed by the public. Even better would be to adopt the regime of the House of Lords, where payment is dependent on attendance. Anne Cruise Swindon, Wiltshire • Hands up MPs who run Girl Guide units, Scout troops, youth clubs and junior football teams, or organise charity collections in their neighbourhoods? These are the second jobs their constituents do. Alan Doel Bristol • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Days after Azeem Rafiq revealed the torment he faced as an Asian player, the situation at Yorkshire cricket club looks no better. His account, of being ostracised, of being referred to by the P-word and by names he knew to be racist codes, of the complicity of teammates, of managers, of the tawdry attempts by prominent figures to discredit him, now lives as a shameful historical testament. Years from now, it may be the moment eyes were opened and things got better; rather that than as a missed opportunity. Giving evidence in parliament, Lord Patel, the new chair of the club, said it should echo the impact of the Stephen Lawrence case and its aftermath. Some have questioned that statement, wondering whether it makes a false equivalence. Lawrence was brutally murdered by racist street thugs. Rafiq, for all his travails, is alive to tell his tale and denounce his abusers. But it’s not a false equivalence. As a reporter, I sat through the Stephen Lawrence inquiry and covered the aftermath; and what I felt was an overwhelming relief that at last there was no hiding place for those who sought to dismiss or denigrate the experience of being black in Britain. A Britain that offered shamefully unequal services, protection and life chances to people who looked like me. The covers were off, the dirty linen exposed to sunlight. I imagine, after Rafiq – an elite sportsman who found that all the skill and talent in the world couldn’t compensate for the fact that his skin is brown – told of what happened to him, fellow Asians today feel a bit like I felt then. At last, there is our truth: in Technicolor, in public, and seared on to the public record. A Lawrence moment indeed. Roger Hutton, Lord Patel’s predecessor as chair, said events prove Yorkshire cricket club worthy of the label institutionally racist. I’d go further. I would say that what we have here is a textbook example of what happens when an institution fails in its duty to its employees and wider society. Handing down his definition of institutional racism after the Lawrence inquiry, William Macpherson referenced collective failure and “processes, attitudes and behaviours which amount to discrimination through unwitting prejudice, ignorance, thoughtlessness and racist stereotyping which disadvantages minority ethnic people”. At Yorkshire, there was a prevailing culture, unwelcoming and exclusionary to those born outside the county – and to cricket-mad minorities within the county itself – to the point that Asian players felt they had to set up their own clubs and own leagues. There was a neglectful culture which allowed one strong individual to set the tone. I have covered similar cases of discrimination in the armed forces, where there was usually a middle-ranking figure, perhaps a sergeant, whose racist behaviour calibrated attitudes within the unit. Others would follow this overtly racist lead, either because they were of like mind or for their own advancement or self-preservation. Within that prevailing culture, some individuals may have been privately supportive of the victims of discrimination but were also wary of taking a vocal stance. Apply that to Yorkshire. Consider the role within that rotten neglectful structure of an abusive and senior protagonist, Gary Ballance, who became captain in 2016, at which point Rafiq says his problems truly escalated. Ballance has since apologised for at least some of his alleged behaviour. Consider the accounts of players who were there at the time, when Rafiq says abuse was open and prevalent. Some, like England’s Joe Root, say they cannot recall any abuse. Rafiq says they are good men, but so normal was the abuse that it probably did not register with them. People “didn’t think it was wrong”. That chimes. Racist institutions are rarely clouded in smoke; more often they are filled with air of invisible toxicity. Consider the way Yorkshire, facing formal complaints, initially investigated and downplayed their severity, and sought to exonerate itself, just like Scotland Yard used to do. Worth remembering that part of the discriminatory process highlighted in Macpherson’s definition involves the institution ferociously defending the status quo and turning its guns on those who seek to change it. Among the figures called out by Rafiq were media commentators who sought to undermine him, to lessen the impact of his complaints. I once had a figure close to the Ministry of Defence privately caution me against writing any supportive stories about one black soldier who had complained of discrimination on the basis that, “entre nous”, he was not a victim, just a moaner and incompetent. That’s funny, I said: then why was he promoted, lauded and used to boost recruitment? There ended that negative spin operation. Those who have spun against Rafiq have fared no better. Clearly the game of cricket has to take a long hard look at its structures. But let’s not pretend this is just about cricket. Here we see elite sportsmen in elite structures behaving with no more decency than yobs in a high street. Talk to minorities in all manner of professions, at all levels, and they’ll tell you that those who marginalise them often sit in courtrooms, boardrooms, salesrooms and newsrooms. Rafiq is no paragon of virtue, but for all his acknowledged faults, he is a man who got to the top of his profession and found that even there the air was toxic. Think too about the building of teams. In sport, teamwork is crucial, but the same is true of commerce and industry. What’s clear is that at Yorkshire, the successful building of a team meant not the bringing together of diverse talents and backgrounds, but instilling physical and or cultural homogeneity. To be selected and accepted, you do what we do. Thus it is no surprise that, at age 15, teammates forcibly poured red wine down this young Muslim’s throat. He subsequently drank with teammates because he felt he had to. How many other minorities, in other fields, find they have to contort themselves, perhaps lose themselves a bit, to be part of the team? At Yorkshire, alleged abusers have been named and shamed. Already more allegations in other teams are emerging. But if this is to be a watershed moment, surely it is important to recognise that the pattern of behaviour described by Rafiq is not only about cricket, or Yorkshire, or sportsmen behaving badly. It is about what still lies beneath in our society. Rafiq held up a mirror. The task now is to decide how to change what we see. Hugh Muir is a Guardian columnistSir Michael Rutter’s insights into the positive impact of good parenting of children who have suffered deprivation and abuse in early infancy have been hugely valuable in the fields of adoption and fostering in the UK. Not only in the orphanages of Romania in the 90s have children experienced neglectful and shameful care. His work gives hope to practitioners and carers looking after children who have never felt secure or loved.Sanjeev Gupta’s GFG Alliance has sold two aluminium parts factories after Jaguar Land Rover (JLR) stepped in to secure a vital part of its supply chain. Evtec, an automotive supplier based in Coventry, will take over Liberty Aluminium Technologies casting plants in Coventry and Kidderminster in the West Midlands, saving 170 jobs. However, GFG is closing a site in Witham, Essex, with the loss of 64 jobs. GFG has gone through months of restructuring since the collapse of its key lender, Greensill Capital, in March. The collapse prompted Gupta to rush to find new lenders to finance his businesses, while also looking at asset sales and dealing with potential criminal investigations in the UK and France. It is understood Evtec paid more than £10m for the two sites. JLR, the UK’s biggest automotive manufacturing employer, intervened to ask Evtec to take on the sites because of concerns over whether Liberty’s travails would threaten supplies of key components. The Midlands sites produce lightweight aluminium parts mainly for car powertrains. However, the Essex plant had struggled after it lost business from Ford, which produces engines at Dagenham. British automotive suppliers are struggling with reduced sales as the global shortage of computer chips causes carmakers to slow production of their models. At the same time, many smaller suppliers are also facing the prospect of major investments or else going out of business if they do not switch from making parts for internal combustion engines to electric vehicles. Evtec, which is pushing into making parts for electric cars, earlier this year rescued another of JLR’s ailing suppliers, Arlington Automotive. David Roberts, Evtec’s owner, said: “I’m thrilled that we’ve managed to save some high-quality jobs. Somebody has to invest in the supply chain of automotive or else we won’t have one.” A GFG Alliance spokesperson said: “Liberty Aluminium Technologies (LAT) has been under significant commercial pressure in recent years as a result of structural changes to the automotive sector which have created very challenging conditions for customers, particularly [carmakers].” The spokesman added that the company had to “regretfully announce” that the Essex plant would close, and thanked workers their dedication “during a period of uncertainty”.Leon Black, the US billionaire who quit his investment firm Apollo Global Management after an inquiry into his ties to the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein, is buying a £21m home in central London. Black is understood to have agreed to buy 93 Eaton Square in Belgravia in the past few days, and to be paying £2m less than the £23m asking price. The six-bedroom property, which was used by Margaret Thatcher after her departure from Downing Street in 1990, was originally the home of the three-time Conservative prime minister Stanley Baldwin. It later passed into the hands of Henry Ford II, the eldest grandson of the founder of the car company bearing his name. Beauchamp Estates, the selling agents who had been marketing the Grade II* listed property since July, declined to comment on the deal, which was first reported in the Financial Times, saying the transaction remained confidential. 93 Eaton Square is one of a number of luxury homes that have been sold despite the Covid-19 pandemic and Brexit, but in monetary terms ranks far below the “giga-prime” London properties worth £100m or more. According to the estate agent Wetherell, there are about 20 such £100m-plus mansions or penthouses in the wealthy neighbourhoods of Mayfair, Belgravia and Knightsbridge. The deal comes at a difficult time for Black, who in 1990 co-founded Apollo, one of Wall Street’s most prominent investment firms. In March, the 70-year-old stepped down early from his position as chief executive and also announced he would not be keeping his role as chair. His exit followed an independent investigation into his business links with Epstein. The review, which was commissioned by Apollo, revealed Black had paid the late financier and convicted sex offender a total of $148m (£110m) for his financial advising services and donated $10m to Epstein’s charity between 2012 and 2017, years after the latter man had pleaded guilty to a state prostitution charge in Florida in 2008. Black severed ties with Epstein in 2018 after a financial dispute. While the review concluded there was no evidence that Black was involved with Epstein’s criminal activities, which largely involved the sex-trafficking of underage girls, Black’s once close ties with Epstein alarmed Apollo’s investors. In a statement after the release of the report, Black said he deeply regretted having had any involvement with Epstein. 93 Eaton Square consists of a four-bedroom main residence and an interconnecting two-bedroom mews house. It has three reception rooms, six bedroom suites, a modern family kitchen, mews kitchen, eight bathrooms and spacious patio garden and garage. The property is part of a white-stucco terrace originally built in 1827-28 by the master builder Thomas Cubitt, who also worked on Buckingham Palace. The house was previously owned by Ford and his wife, Kathleen DuRoss Ford. When she died in May 2020, control of the property passed to her lawyer and caregiver, Frank Chopin. In the year leading to her death, Ford’s children unsuccessfully sued Chopin. In the early part of the past century, 93 Eaton Square was Baldwin’s London home. It was where he entertained his cousin, the author Rudyard Kipling, politicians including Winston Churchill and Neville Chamberlain, as well as the Prince of Wales, later King Edward VIII, in the main reception room, which has a 14ft high ceiling and Regency features.There’s a default facial expression that those of us who commute by train around Yorkshire and the rest of the north regularly wear. It’s one of grim resignation, which on particularly bad days hardens into scowling resentment at being packed so tightly into monstrously overcrowded carriages on journeys that proceed glacially slowly. So slowly, in fact, that a friend of mine who is heavily into railway memorabilia discovered that some trains between Leeds and Manchester make the journey only 10 minutes faster than in the days when young men from the industrial north were marching off to fight in the first world war. Another notorious route is Leeds to Sheffield, which can take well over an hour to cover just 35 miles. This sort of performance wouldn’t be tolerated in the commuter belt around London. There would be questions in the Commons about why longsuffering passengers had to put up with it, and business would demand improvements, arguing that lousy train services hold the economy back. This would be listened to and acted upon. Yet the same demands from vast swaths of the north are not. Worse, they are ignored – and commuters and business leaders alike are fobbed off with more empty pledges on rail improvements that do not withstand detailed scrutiny. So it was with a familiar, and well-practised, sense of grim resignation that many in the north will have greeted the government pulling the rug on plans for high-speed rail. Yorkshire, in particular, has been badly let down. No HS2 line to Sheffield and Leeds; no northern powerhouse rail to bring journey times across the Pennines into the 21st century; and nothing to finally rid Bradford of the unenviable distinction of being Britain’s worst-connected big city. Anger and disappointment greeted the announcement by transport secretary Grant Shapps, but there was no real surprise. This has been a let-down – and a betrayal of promises by Boris Johnson on both HS2 and northern powerhouse rail – but in Yorkshire we’ve seen this approaching with the ponderousness of a packed commuter train pulling into a station. Years of prevarication pointed clearly towards yesterday’s announcement. Doubts first emerged when the government ignored calls to start simultaneously building HS2 from its northern and southern endpoints, that is, Manchester and Leeds as well as London, which would have ensured the fastest progress towards completion. The grab-bag of rail improvements that Shapps unveiled won’t do anything to dilute the sense that the north has been short-changed, even though Manchester will eventually get its HS2 link. The familiar government spin of presenting funds already announced as new money undermines the claim that it has a comprehensive plan to improve services. It has nothing of the sort, only a set of piecemeal projects attempting to squeeze a bit more capacity out of an essentially Victorian railway network, which weary commuters know will make little difference. Whether Johnson and Shapps realise it, high-speed rail in the north was about much more than transport. It was about the entire credibility of government promises to a region that is home to almost a quarter of the country’s population. In the “red wall” seats that the Tories won from Labour in 2019 – several of which, like Dewsbury, Colne Valley and Keighley, lie along exceptionally poor rail routes – there has been mounting cynicism about the government’s “levelling-up” agenda, which has put better rail services at its heart. “It’s total bullshit,” one leading industrialist in West Yorkshire with longstanding links to the Conservatives told me. “They know it, and we know it. What’s starting to worry them is that they know we know it.” This businessman is torn between loyalty to the government and the needs of the area where he and his employees live and work; an area which is simply not seeing any improvements coming its way, despite Johnson’s trumpeting about transforming the north’s fortunes. Where’s the evidence? Or the money? Those are the questions being asked in the big cities of Leeds, Bradford, Sheffield and Hull, and in the former mill towns of West Yorkshire or the mining communities of South Yorkshire. They are also being asked by Tory activists I know in red wall constituency associations, who were bouncing about like Duracell bunnies after the 2019 election but are rather less animated now. Each visit by Johnson – and there have been many, as he seeks to convince northerners he is their friend – brings promises, but little in the way of action. It seems certain he’ll pay a price at the next election in the red wall seats. Leaving us stuck on a slow train is about more than railways. It’s a matter of the government losing credibility among voters it needs to hang on to. To the north, let down so often by successive governments over investment, broken promises are worse than no action at all. Andrew Vine is a freelance journalist and author based in YorkshireThe London stockbroker FinnCap will effectively give its employees unlimited holiday from next year with a requirement to take at least four weeks off, in an effort to prevent staff burnout. After a bumper year for financial dealmaking that led to staff working longer hours, the corporate advisory and brokerage firm decided to change its policy to allow workers to take as much leave as they need. In a development first reported by Bloomberg, the company is asking its investment bankers, salespeople and back office staff to take at least four weeks’ holiday a year and two or three days a quarter. “Everyone is really exhausted from the last two years, and it isn’t fixed with a quick holiday,” FinnCap’s chief executive Sam Smith told the Guardian. She said the problem was people were not taking enough holiday because they felt guilty about taking time off. “We will turn it on its head and we are not going to have a holiday maximum, we’re going to have a minimum you must take.” A number of US businesses, in particular technology firms, have introduced similar unlimited holiday policies but it is an unusual move among financial companies. Earlier this year, Nike, LinkedIn and the dating app Bumble gave their workers a paid week off, to relieve stress caused by the pandemic and working from home. CitiGroup said in March it would have “Zoom-free Fridays” while PricewaterhouseCooper and Deloitte said staff could decide when, where and how they worked. However, there is evidence of staff being reluctant to take advantage of the extra leave as they do not want to be seen as being the first do so within their companies. The software firm CharlieHR ended up revoking a similar holiday policy in favour of alternative perks because it produced “a huge amount of anxiety”. Its chief executive, Ben Gately, told the BBC: “A bunch of our team came to us and said: ‘Actually we’d love to know where the line is. Is it OK to take 35 days? Is it OK to take 25 days? Where should I draw the line?’ Because the reality is that it’s not actually unlimited.” Smith, who set up FinnCap in 2007 becoming the first female chief executive of a City stockbroking firm, said the important thing was for staff to take regular breaks “every quarter … a couple of days so you’re not full pelt on deals all the time” to look after their mental health and prevent burnout. If FinCapp employees end up working while they are on holiday, they should be able to take an extra day to make up for it, she said. Or if they need time off to take their pet to the vet or call out a plumber, that should not count towards their holidays. The move is designed to ease the pressure on the broker’s 155 staff. It has recruited more than 30 people since January as business has boomed, especially in its mergers &amp; acquisitions division, but it is also expanding its debt and sector research teams and hiring more back office staff. It provides financial and advisory services to financial institutions as well as wealthy individuals. The company reported record half-year revenues on Thursday, up 55% to £31.7m in the six months to 30 September. It made an adjusted pre-tax profit of £7.2m, a 67% rise on the same period last year.So Boris Johnson didn’t break the promises he had made shortly after becoming prime minister in July 2019, in his election manifesto later that year and on more than 50 other occasions. At least not in parliament. He got Grant Shapps to do it instead. And who better? Because Shapps is exactly the sort of person that this prime minister needs to get him out of a hole. Someone who knows he is authentically shallow: that there is even less to him than meets the eye. Someone who bizarrely considers his bogus alias of Michael Green to be a sign of cunning. And who – like everyone else – still can’t quite believe his luck at being made a cabinet minister and is determined to enjoy every minute he gets to stay in the job. For any other minister, being forced to make a Commons statement to announce the government was reneging on its commitments both to build the eastern leg of HS2 to Leeds and a high-speed “Northern Powerhouse Rail” track between Manchester and Leeds might have been a stressful gig. But for the transport minister it was just a day like any other day. A chance to get out of the office and look busy. Grant’s great gift is that he will do precisely as he is told without complaining. The slightly cheesy smile is his default expression and he would have been just as happy making a statement in which the government kept its promises as he was with one that broke them. Shapps began by breezily outlining the basics of the new integrated rail plan. It was going to cost £96bn and level up the north and the midlands. Various bits would be electrified, Leeds would get a mass transit system and everything was going to be far better than it was now. He wasn’t entirely sure how as it was all fiendishly complicated but it would be very helpful if everyone in the chamber took him at his word rather than asked him any difficult questions. The shadow transport secretary, Jim McMahon, was understandably sceptical. Why had the government kept making promises on HS2 and NPR if it had no intention of keeping them? Surely it must be obvious to everyone that this watered down version was going to be a severe disappointment to all those who had believed the government was going to revolutionise the transport network in the north. What had clearly happened was that Boris had only let Rishi Sunak know how much it was all going to cost at the last minute, and the chancellor had pulled the plug on the most expensive bits because – like most of the prime minister’s ideas – it was prohibitively expensive. So what was left was something that would satisfy only a few people and make the government look weak and clueless. And, by the way, it wasn’t a £96bn project. It was a £56bn scheme because £40bn had already been announced or spent on parts of HS2 that were going ahead. Like Prince Andrew, Grant didn’t break sweat. If anything his smile grew wider. Now he was in his element because this was the time for maximum bullshit. “It’s definitely a £96bn project,” he declared, double-downing on the numbers. In fact it could have been a great deal more – maybe up to £500bn – given the amount of time the same money had been re-announced. But anyway, the main point was this. The government may appear to have broken a few promises, but it had done so not because it couldn’t be trusted but because it was trying to give northerners an even better transport system than one they could have thought up for themselves. Journey times were going to come down. Apart from ones like London to Leeds that would be 32 minutes slower than in the original plan. And the really good news was that the work would definitely, definitely be finished in under 10 years – some hope. Better still, Tory MPs with seats where there would have been a lot of construction disruption with little obvious gain from HS2 would be able to tell their constituents they had got their old lives back. Peace and quiet all round. All that was left to do was for red wall Tory MPs who had spent the last two years telling their constituents the government could be relied on to keep its word to tell them they were being levelled up in a different way. As in down. This actually went down rather better than it might have done. Labour predictably went hard on the broken promises and the obvious shortcomings of the IRP that increasingly looked like it had been written on the back of a cigarette packet, but most of the few dozen Tory MPs in the chamber chose not to pick a fight and instead thanked Shapps for what he had done for their constituencies. Perhaps they were under orders not to make a fuss in public – there’s been enough of that in the last few weeks – and were saving their anger for behind closed doors. Even so, some Tory MPs did break ranks. Huw Merriman, the Conservative chair of the transport committee, openly attacked the government for not keeping its word. Robbie Moore, Kevin Hollinrake and Craig Tracey also expressed their displeasure. Cities like Bradford, Sheffield, Newcastle and Hull had been completely shafted. There was bugger all in the plan for them. And on the lines that were being built, there was little extra capacity. So passengers would just have to stand up, as they got somewhere a lot less quickly than they would have done under the original proposals, which would also have guaranteed them a seat. Not that Shapps was bothered. He had done his bit. He may have been transport secretary but he certainly wasn’t in charge: he was just a gofer. It would be Boris’s arse that was on the line. Makes a change from leaves. John Crace and Zoe Williams will be live on stage in London at a Guardian Live event on 13 December. Join the conversation in-person or online - book tickets here A Farewell to Calm by John Crace (Guardian Faber, £9.99). To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Daniel Křetínský has made a fortune snapping up leftovers from the old economy. The Czech billionaire owns a clutch of coal companies, and in recent years he has made waves with investments in pillars of the old economy such as high street retailers, supermarkets and newspapers. Křetínský holds his cards so close to his chest that he gained the moniker of the “Czech Sphinx” from a Polish magazine. The nickname has stuck, but the businessman’s profile outside his homeland has grown after a spree of acquisitions. That has included football clubs – the surest way for a wealthy businessman to be noticed – starting with Sparta Prague in 2004 and followed by West Ham last week. The West Ham stake, reportedly worth between £180m and £200m for 27%, has already roused hopes from the club’s supporters of big-money signings, although neither Křetínský nor the club have revealed any details of their plans. On the stock market, Křetínský has also gone for household names, building up big positions in Sainsbury’s and Royal Mail, whose executives confirmed that he has discussed strategy with them. His bets on both appear to have paid off handsomely already: since his investment vehicle Vesa Equity Investment increased its stake in Sainsbury’s to 9.9% in April, the supermarket’s share price has risen by a fifth, giving paper gains of well over £100m. Royal Mail’s share price has almost tripled since Vesa first bought in. On Thursday, Royal Mail delivered a £200m dividend, from which Vesa should garner about £38m, based on a 19% shareholding that is now worth more than £900m. Křetínský declined to be interviewed. A spokesperson said that “he is not afraid to go against the tide – when others sell, he buys and vice versa”. Vesa considers itself to be a strategic, long-term investor, the spokesperson added. In the US, Křetínský has bought stakes in the department store Macy’s and the trainer retailer Foot Locker, while in Europe he holds positions in the German retailer turned wholesaler Metro and France’s Le Monde newspaper. The latter purchase was perhaps his most controversial, with journalists at one of France’s newspapers of record alarmed at what a Czech investor who made his money in coal and gas pipelines in eastern Europe could want to do with a title that reports prominently on the climate crisis and on Russia’s increasingly authoritarian leader, Vladimir Putin. Yet the paper’s reporters have not found any evidence to back up those fears. In a rare interview in 2019 with the New York Times, Křetínský insisted he was happy to remain a minority shareholder at Le Monde, and that he had fallen in love with France while watching films from the country as a child. The son of a computing professor and a senior judge, Křetínský studied political science and then law to doctorate level at Masaryk University in Brno. He joined J&amp;T bank in 1999, becoming an equity partner and entering the world of dealmakers such as Patrik Tkáč, a J&amp;T founder who also co-owns Vesa, and Petr Kellner, who died as the Czech Republic’s richest man in a helicopter accident in March. Kretinsky’s long-term partner, Anna Kellnerova, is Kellner’s daughter. When Energetický a průmyslový holding (Energy and Industrial Holding, or EPH) was spun out of the bank in 2009, he became a shareholder. He and Tkáč bought out the other partners in 2014, and Křetínský now holds 50%, while Tkáč holds 44%. The company bought a series of coal plants and gas assets, including pipelines and storage, and claims to employ more than 24,000 people across Europe. EPH has bought four power plants in the UK and, to the surprise of some observers, has set about upgrading them. EPH demolished the coal plant at Eggborough in North Yorkshire to build a new gas version, and converted Lynemouth in Northumberland to run on biomass instead. In 2017 it bought two gas power plants from Centrica: one at Langage in Devon and another at South Humber Bank in Lincolnshire. Křetínský has also garnered other hallmarks of the billionaire class: his name appeared in the Panama Papers leak of offshore files, in connection with a British Virgin Islands company called Wonderful Yacht Holdings Limited. Křetínský’s spokesperson said the company was used to transfer ownership of a catamaran that is kept mostly in the Caribbean. There has been no tax evasion or concealment of ownership, the spokesperson said.Time to wrap up - here’s today’s main stories: Lira tumbles as Turkey’s central bank cuts interest rates UBS sees ‘year of two halves’ in the new normal U.S. asks Japan, China, others to consider tapping oil reserves Goodnight. GW Turkey could potentially face a credit crunch or debt restructuring if the lira keeps spiraling lower, experts say. Bloomberg has a good round-up - here’s a flavour: While Turkey has endured a rolling crisis for years, there’s concern that the speed of the recent depreciation could have far-reaching effects. “This is too much unorthodoxy in action,” said Ogeday Topcular, a money manager at RAM Capital. “It may start biting institutions more now and we can see an increase in debt restructurings, which may take us to uncharted waters.” The lira fell as much as 6% to 11.3118 against the dollar, extending the biggest depreciation in emerging markets this year. Further rate cuts likely to put more pressure on the Turkish lira, predicts Joseph Marlow, assistant economist at Capital Economics. He writes: We think that political pressure will continue and the CBRT’s approach looks increasingly as though it will re risk of a full-blown currency crisis akin to the one in 2018. Back then, the lira’s freefall forced the CBRT into a sharp rate hike, and it would probably require something similar to end the lira’s fall this time around. But policymakers now seem to be more tolerant of a weaker lira, so a very high bar would need to be cleared in the form of severe lira weakness before the CBRT even considers hiking rates. Admittedly, Turkey’s current account balance is in a much better position than it was in 2018, but large short-term external debts and low FX reserves mean that the lira is vulnerable to shifts in external financing conditions. The recent rise in US Treasury yields has no doubt contributed to the falls in the lira and we think gradual policy normalisation in the US will lead to higher US yields and further pressure on the lira. Sanjeev Gupta’s GFG Alliance has sold two aluminium parts factories after carmaker Jaguar Land Rover (JLR) stepped in to secure a vital part of its supply chain. Evtec, an automotive supplier based in Coventry, will take over Liberty Aluminium Technologies casting plants in Coventry and Kidderminster in the West Midlands, saving 170 jobs. However, GFG is closing a site in Witham, Essex, with the loss of 64 jobs. GFG has gone through months of restructuring since the collapse of its key lender, Greensill Capital, in March. The collapse prompted Gupta to rush to find new lenders to finance his businesses, while also looking at asset sales and dealing with potential criminal investigations in the UK and France. It is understood Evtec paid more than £10m for the two sites. JLR, the UK’s biggest automotive manufacturing employer, intervened to ask Evtec to take on the sites because of concerns over whether Liberty’s travails would threaten supplies of key components. The Midlands sites produce lightweight aluminium parts mainly for car powertrains. However, the Essex plant had struggled after it lost business from Ford, which produces engines at Dagenham. More here: The former Formula One team owner Eddie Jordan is part of a consortium considering making a £3bn offer for Playtech, as the London-listed gambling software supplier becomes the focus of a potential bidding war. Last month, Playtech’s board recommended shareholders accept a £2.7bn takeover offer from Aristocrat, the Australian slot machine developer, and a rival offer from its second-biggest shareholder Gopher Investments. JKO Play, the consortium set up by Jordan and Keith O’Loughlin, who formerly ran the sports betting operation of the Nasdaq-listed Scientific Games, confirmed it was “evaluating making a competing offer for Playtech”. JKO is in talks with the US-based investment firm Centerbridge, among other potential partners, to finance a cash and shares offer for the business. In the City, the FTSE 100 dropped to a two-week low, ending 0.5% lower at 7256 points. Royal Mail led the risers, surging almost 10%, after announcing its £400m windfall for shareholders after a boost to profits this year. Housebuilders also had a strong day, with Persimmon (+4.8%), Berkeley Group (+3.9%), Taylor Wimpey (+3.75%) and Barratt Development (+3.6%) also in the risers, after smaller rival Crest Nicholson reported that profits would be slightly ahead of forecast. Cyber-security group Darktrace lost another 4.6%, though, while miners and pharmaceuticals firms also filled the fallers table (Glaxo went ex-dividend). Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says pandemic worries weighed on shares: Talk of tighter covid restrictions being rolled out incrementally across Europe appears to be tempering risk appetite, over concerns of lower demand heading into the winter months. The FTSE100’s struggles have continued today, this time feeling the effects of GlaxoSmithKline going ex-dividend, while weakness in BP and Royal Dutch Shell, due to the slide in oil prices overnight, which has acted as another significant drag on overall sentiment. Wider concerns about enduring inflation also appear to be limiting the appetite for further strong gains, even as bond yields also slip back from their recent highs. The European stock market rally took a shunt today. The Stoxx 600 fell by 0.5%, after six days of gains that had pushed the index to fresh record highs. Oil stocks weakened, as the prospect of China moving to release strategic fuel reserves weighed on the markets. Miners also fell, as copper prices hit their lowest in more than a month. Financial stocks also fell, as did healthcare, but real estate and consumer cyclicals had a better day. Some late news percolating through - Unilever has agreed to sell its global tea business to CVC Capital Partners in a €4.5bn deal. The agreement comes nearly two years after Unilever first lifted the “for sale” sign over the business, which includes a host of well-known brands including Lipton, Brooke Bond and Pukka Herbs. The business, called Ekaterra, generated revenues of around €2 billion in 2020. Unilever decided to spin off the tea business because younger consumers were more focused on other drinks like coffee and fashionable herbal teas. Today, Alan Jope, CEO of Unilever said: “The evolution of our portfolio into higher growth spaces is an important part of our growth strategy for Unilever. Our decision to sell ekaterra demonstrates further progress in delivering against our plans. Unilever is holding onto its India, Nepal and Indonesia tea operations as well as its Pepsi Lipton ready-to-drink Tea joint venture. 2022 will be a year of discovery for the UK too. Caroline Simmons, UK chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management, says: It will likely be the first year in two years that we don’t have any lockdowns. We will discover what our new normal of working and leisure are. Meanwhile, markets will be focused on discovering where inflation and monetary policy end up. We see upside to the FTSE 100 to 7900 by December 2022. In the UK equity space in the near term, we expect a value style to continue to outperform given the expectation for rising rates and inflation.” The FTSE 100 has just closed at 7256 points, so that does suggest gains over the next 13 months (Caveat emptor and all that...) 2022 will be a ‘year of two halves’, as investors get to grips with the new normality on growth and inflation after two years disrupted by the pandemic. That’s the view of Swiss investment bank UBS, in its Year Ahead 2022 report, released this afternoon. It predicts that world economic growth will be well above trend in the first half of next year, before normalizing in the second half as reopening effects fade. So from an investment perspective, regions performing well right now should do well in H1, such as the US and Europe. Mark Haefele, chief investment officer at UBS Global Wealth Management, told a media call that investors should “buy the winners of global growth”, which includes eurozone and Japanese equities, US mid-cap companies, global financials, commodities, and energy stocks. Haefele added that China and emerging markets could be ready to take on the baton in the second half of next year, if inflation and growth have normalised. UBS’s central scenario is that Chinese growth stabilizes, with Covid-19-related restrictions starting to be lifted in 2Q 2022. Other recommendations include: Seek opportunities in healthcare. Although growth is set to be strong in early 2022, favoring cyclical sectors, a slowdown over the course of the year should start to favor more defensive parts of the market, such as healthcare. Seek unconventional yield as interest rates, bond yields, and credit spreads remain low by historical standards. US senior loans, synthetic credit, private credit, and dividend-paying stocks, look attractive. Position for a stronger US dollar as a combination of Fed tapering and slowing global growth favor the greenback, relative to currencies bound to looser monetary policies, such as the euro, yen, and Swiss franc And the long term view, is that over the next decade, investors should seek opportunities in the net-zero carbon transition and the “ABC” of disruptive technologies – artificial intelligence, big data, and cybersecurity. 2022 will also be a year of two halves for the US Federal Reserve, predicted Solita Marcelli, UBS’s chief investment officer Americas. She explains that the Fed will have to be patient about some high inflation in the first half of the year, as it looks for the US labor force participation rate to improve (a key part of its mandate). Price pressures and growth will probably normalise in the second half of the year. But faced with unclear economic signals, the Fed is likely to err on the side of loose monetary policy rather than take the risk of tightening too early and hurting growth, she adds. So the first US rate rise probably won’t come until 2023. But other central banks may act faster in 2022. UBS expect the Fed to end quantitative easing by the middle of the year, the ECB to further trim its bond-buying program, and the Bank of England, the Bank of Canada, and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand to raise interest rates. Turkey’s central bank looks to be a shambles, says Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at OANDA. He explains that the threat of another rate cut in December, on top of today’s move, sent the lira to record lows: The Turkish central bank took the unusual step of cutting rates in line with market expectations today and even suggested it will assess ending rate cuts in December. I’m not sure if that counts as hawkish by its standards or if we’ve now just come to expect the ridiculous. It did suggest it may ease again in December though, at which point there was no saving the lira which plunged to a new record low against the dollar, with the USDTRY pair breaching 11, only three days after hitting 10 for the first time ever. There’s clearly no indication that the CBRT is being deterred by anything that’s happening in the markets. The central bank is a shambles and the website crashing and delaying the announcement could not have been more symbolic of what’s happening behind the scenes. Auditors aren’t being tough enough on company managers, according to industry watchdog the Financial Reporting Council (FRC). Its latest ‘Developments In Audit’ report warns that some auditors are failing to show enough professional scepticism when scrutinising companies. It also warns that some auditors are failing to challenge management’s assumptions, and showing poor application of professional judgement. The persistence of these issues over time is “disappointing”, says the FRC, as they are fundamental to the mindset required to actually auditing a company effectively. Overall, nearly one third of audits inspected by the FRC still required improvement, down from 38% a year ago. Smaller auditors are struggling the most. The FRC says it has also increased the number of inspections of smaller firms which audit public interest entities, and has found 10 of 16 audits reviewed required improvements. It adds: This level of quality is unacceptable so the FRC has increased resources dedicated to supervision of the smaller firms to drive those improvements. The FRC’s executive director of supervision, Sarah Rapson, says audit quality is ‘mixed’: “While it is encouraging that today’s report finds some of the audit firms are successfully implementing improvement measures, audit quality remains mixed across the firms. As we continue to lay the groundwork for establishing a new regulator - the Audit, Reporting and Governance Authority - our continued objective will be to drive all firms to deliver consistent, high-quality audit to the benefit of all stakeholders and the wider public.” A closely watched survey of factories in the US mid-Atlantic region has shown a surge in activity -- a good sign for America’s economy. The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia’s factory sector index jumped from 23.8 in October to 39.0 for November. Economists had expected a decline to 22.0 (any reading over zero shows conditions are improving) Businesses reported that new orders jumped, with this gauge surging 16.6 points to 47.4. That’s the highest reading since the survey began in 1973, showing strong sales. Unfilled orders also jumped, suggesting that supply chain problems and staff shortages are still hitting production. But the six-month business outlook index also rose. Here’s some expert reaction: More central bank news. South Africa’s central bank has raised its main lending rate for the first time in three years. The South African Reserve Bank (SARB) lifted borrowing costs by 25 basis points to 3.75%, reacting to growing inflation risks. Governor Lesetja Kganyago told a news conference that inflation risks had increased since the last meeting in September, so an increase in borrowing costs should keep expectations under control. “Given the expected trajectory for headline inflation and upside risks, the committee believes a gradual rise in the repo rate will be sufficient to keep inflation expectations well anchored and moderate the future path of interest rates.” It was a close vote, though -- the SARB’s monetary policy committee split 3-2; the committee still expecting inflation to stay close to the midpoint of its target range over the forecast period. More here. Here’s Robert Frick, corporate economist at Navy Federal Credit Union, on today’s small drop in new US jobless claims: “Weekly unemployment insurance claims only ticked down by 1,000 in the most recent week, and while there is a link between claims and COVID-19 cases, and those cases have started rising, it’s too early to say there’s a correlation. We are still within striking distance of the pre-pandemic level of claims by year’s end should we stay on trend of 5,000 to 10,000 fewer per week.” Back in the City, a brokerage is planning to give its staff unlimited holiday, in an attempt to prevent them burning out. Bloomberg has the story: After a blockbuster year for capital markets and a pandemic to boot, FinnCap Group Plc will allow its employees to take as many vacations as they want in the hopes of preventing staff burnout. The London-based broker is changing its vacation policy to offer employees unlimited paid breaks from 2022, Chief Executive Officer Sam Smith said in a phone interview Thursday. The firm’s investment bankers, salespeople and other staff will be required to take at least four weeks a year and two or three days a quarter, according to Smith. “There’s not a maximum, there’s a minimum you must take,” she said. “The rest is up to you.” More here. In the US, the number of Americans filing new unemployment claims has dipped to a new pandemic low, as firms hang onto staff in the fight to hire workers. There were 268,000 initial claims last week, down from 269,000 the previous seven days. That’s closer to pre-pandemic levels, extending the recent recovery as the US economy has reopened, and the surge in Delta variant cases has receded. CNBC’s Emily Pandise has more details: The selloff is gathering speed, with the Turkish lira tumbling through the 11 mark against the US dollar for the first time. Today’s interest rate cut shows that Turkish president Erdoğan is driving monetary policy, rather than the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey. So says Fawad Razaqzada, analyst at ThinkMarkets, who warns monetary policy ‘is in tatters’: The market clearly doesn’t take the CBRT seriously anymore, as it has lost any little credibility it had. Erdogan is running the show. If he wants lower interest rates he will get lower rates, regardless of how high inflation might be or how the economy is doing. So, with the CBRT head saying the central bank will consider ending rate cuts in December, then he might as well consider a new job! It is very difficult to see the light at the end of the tunnel for the Turkish lira unfortunately. The slumping currency may make holidays cheaper and boost exports. But foreign demand for Turkish products and services will have to rise materially to offset the negative impact of the currency crisis and inflation on the economy. If the TRY is to find support, it will have to come from fiscal policy as monetary policy is in tatters. Last month Erdoğan dismissed three central bank policymakers, two of whom had opposed an earlier rate cut. Turkey’s central bank has hinted that it ease policy again next month, continuing its cycle of controversial interest rate cuts which have hammered the lira. Announcing its latest rate cut, its policy committee warned that inflationary pressures will remain high in the first half of next year. As such, it could ‘complete’ using the room available next month (many analysts question whether it had any space for its existing cuts, let alone more....) They say: The Committee expects that the transitory effects of supply-side factors and other factors beyond monetary policy’s control on price increases will persist through the first half of 2022. The Committee will consider to complete the use of the limited room implied by these factors in December. The CBRT also flags that Covid-19 variants continue to weigh on the recovery: Despite the recovery in global economic activity in the first half of the year and the increase in the vaccination rate, new variants keep the downside risks to global economic activity alive. Recovery in global demand, high course of commodity prices, supply constraints in some sectors and rise in transportation costs have led to producer and consumer price increases internationally. Unfavorable effects of weather conditions in major agricultural commodity exporting countries are observed on global food prices. Europe’s energy crisis has sparked a profit surge for National Grid after its subsea power cables connecting the UK to the continent raked in higher revenues on the back of historic electricity market highs. National Grid secured higher prices to transmit electricity through its cables running from the UK to Belgium and France, and also benefited from the early startup of the world’s longest subsea power cable linking the UK to Norway’s hydropower in October. The FTSE 100 energy giant reported an 86% jump in profits for the first half of the year to £1.1bn compared with a slowdown in energy markets during the Covid-19 lockdown a year earlier – sparked by record-high electricity prices in the UK in recent months. The half-year results were also buoyed up by National Grid’s acquisition of Western Power Distribution, the local power grid company running grids for the Midlands, south Wales and south-west England, for £14.2bn in March. The group added that its earnings per share over the year as a whole would be “significantly above the top end” of its 5-7% guidance at the beginning of the year. More here: Today’s losses cement the lira’s position as the worst performing major emerging market currency this year: Back in the markets, Brent crude remains below the $80/barrel mark, as China prepares to release some oil stocks and the US pushes for a coordinated move. Raffi Boyadjian, lead investment analyst at XM, says: Crude oil prices were headed south as well amid a push by Washington to get other countries on board with its plan to release oil from the strategic reserves. President Biden has reportedly asked China, Japan, India and South Korea to tap into their reserves to ease the energy crisis after OPEC refused to boost its supply. Although no decision has been made, China seems willing to join the US in coordinated action to relieve the pressure on soaring fuel prices. WTI futures were last trading at six-week lows below the $78/barrel level, having started the week above $80, while Brent futures were defending the $80/barrel level. Former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre is to receive a payout of almost £2m, as the top executives at parent company DMGT share £33m in pay, bonuses and share awards this year – while staff brace for job cuts. Dacre, who stood down as editor in 2018 and until earlier this month was chair and editor-in-chief of the paper’s parent company Associated Newspapers, is to receive the payout in December under one of Daily Mail and General Trust’s long-term incentive plans for senior management. The vesting of the award of 168,851 shares, worth about £1.9m at DMGT’s current share price, relates to the hitting of performance targets in 2019. The award follows a payout of £1.5m given to Dacre last December. Dacre’s payout is dwarfed by that of the top four directors at DMGT, which is in the process of being taken private by the Rothermere family after 90 years on the London Stock Exchange, who took home a combined £33m in salary and share awards in the year to the end of September.... More here: The Turkish lira is tumbling after the country’s central bank slashed interest rates again, despite inflation already being painfully high. The Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey (CBRT) lowered its benchmark interest rate by 100 basis points to 15%, from 16%, the third cut in as many months. The cut follows sustained pressure from Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, to lower interest rates. But consumer inflation is already almost 20%, and a weaker currency will drive up import costs. The lira has hit a new record low, hitting 10.9 against the US dollar in a fresh wave of selling. It has lost over 40% of its value against the $ this year, as the CBRT’s rate cuts have battered the currency. Erdoğan argues that high interest rates cause inflation, rather than dampening it. Yesterday he reiterated his calls for lower borrowing costs, telling the Ankara parliament that: “I cannot be on the same path with those who defend interest. “We will lift the interest rate burden from citizens,” Three-quarters of UK businesses who trade abroad experienced a challenge importing in late October to early November 2021, according to the ONS’s latest survey. It also found that 64% of firms saw challenges exporting. That’s up from 52% for exporting and 60% for importing in late September 2021, the ONS reports, adding: The data also suggests that businesses continue to be more likely to experience a challenge when importing rather than when exporting. Change in transportation costs, additional paperwork, customs duties or levies and disruption at UK border were the top problems: The survey also found that approximately one in six (17%) of the workforce were estimated to be using a hybrid model of working in late October; rising to 21% across firms with 100 employees or more. Multipacks of crisps have replaced frozen turkeys as the item in shortest supply in UK shops. The Office for National Statistics reports that multipack crisps were in limited supply at three in 10 stores surveyed last week (4% had run out, and 26% were running low). Paracetamol and Ibuprofen were also in short supply, as the nation stocked up on painkillers in the face of autumn bugs. Frozen turkeys, which topped the shortages list last week, were still flying out of the door at some locations. Around 10% of shops had run out, and 5% were running low, after shoppers prepared early for Christmas. But Britain isn’t running out of beer; 71% of outlets had high availability, according to Kantar’s survey. Naked Wines has slashed its sales forecast as drinkers return to bars and wineries as lockdowns lift, and its customer recruitment push was less successful than hoped. Naked sells wine from independent producers to its network of ‘Angel’ subscription customers. It reported that it faces a changing market environment, as wine consumers “sought in-person experiences” as they emerged from lockdowns. The change has been strongest in the US, where much of the country has embraced a chance to return to somewhat of “life as normal”. In the wine category that has played out with traditional wineries reporting record revenues, boosted by extremely strong winery visitation rates. Naked is now cutting its investment in new customers this year, to between £35m and £45m, from £40m-£50m. That will knock millions off sales -- which are now expected to come in between £340m and £355m, down from £355m-£375m previously. Naked posted a £1.3m profit in the first half of the financial year, up from an £8.9m loss, and grew its active customer base by 25% to 947k. But CEO Nick Devlin admits the firm made some mistakes. Naked spent approximately £2 million to acquire new customers at below its preferred payback, he says. Some deals didn’t perform as well as hoped, and it was also hit by higher advertising costs on Facebook and reduced targeting effectiveness after privacy changes to Apple’s iOS operating system. Supply chain disruption hurt its ability to get wine and glass onto markets on schedule, and drove up warehousing and transport costs. And there have been problems getting deliveries out on-time and in-full. Too many customers have experienced delays to delivery or substitution of items - and for that we are sorry. Financially we know that any compromise to the delivery experience of a new customer is especially costly. Devlin insists that the wine industry is ripe for disruption: Our disruptive business model connects consumers directly with winemakers, stripping out the cost of traditional sales and distribution and delivering consumers exclusive world-class wines at fair prices and with a genuine connection to their maker. Shares have tumbled 18% this morning to 545p, the lowest in almost a year, and down from almost 900p in September. ii’s Victoria Scholar tweets the details: Many UK pay rises are not keeping pace with inflation, a new report shows. The average pay deal across the UK is worth just 2%, despite a rise in prices that pushed the retail prices index (RPI) – a widely used measure of inflation in pay bargaining – to 6% this month. According to the latest figures from the consultancy XpertHR, pay bargaining across some of Britain’s biggest private and public sector employers showed median basic pay increased 2% in the three months to the end of October, unchanged for the seventh consecutive month. The firm said: “The data shows that pay awards are at the same level as this time last year and confirms a period of stability after awards dipped in the middle of 2020 and the beginning of 2021.” The global semiconductor shortage has pushed European car sales to a record October low. New car registrations in the European Union tumbled by over 30% in October, the European Automobile Manufacturers’ Association reports. Just 665,001 cars were sold in the region, which is the weakest result any October since records began, and the fourth monthly fall in a row. Most EU markets suffered double-digit losses, including the four largest ones: Italy (-35.7%), Germany (-34.9%), France (-30.7%) and Spain (-20.5%). EU sales so far this year are only 2.2% higher than in 2020, although Germany is lagging. ACEA says: Despite the recent drop in sales due to the ongoing impact of the semiconductor supply crisis, substantial gains earlier in the year helped to keep cumulative volumes in positive territory. Likewise, demand remained positive in three out of the four key EU markets: Italy (+12.7%), Spain (+5.6%) and France (+3.1%). By contrast, Germany’s year-to-date performance has worsened compared to one year ago (-5.2%). The UK market suffered a similar shunt. Sales hit a 30-year low, falling by 24.6% compared with October 2020. Shares in UK challenger bank Metro have slumped by nearly a fifth after takeover talks with US private equity firm Carlyle broke up. Carlyle announced this morning that the two sides have agreed to terminate discussions regarding a possible offer for the Company. Metro says its board “continues to strongly believe in the standalone strategy and future prospects of Metro Bank”. Shares are down 18% at 107p, slightly above their 103p level two weeks ago before news of the talks broke, sending Metro shares soaring. Metro launched in 2010 as Britain’s first new high-street lender for more than a century, and had hoped to challenge the Big Five banks in the aftermath of the financial crisis. But a major accounting error in 2019 rocked the bank, forcing it to rein in its expansion plans. While oil majors slide, Royal Mail are leading the FTSE 100 risers after announced it will return £400m to shareholders after a strong performance. Royal Mail announced a £200m share buyback, and a £200m special dividend, following a jump in profits and ongoing strong demand for parcel deliveries. Pre-tax profits rose to £315m in the six months to 26th September, up from £17m a year ago when the pandemic was hitting the UK economy. Reported operating profits hit £311m, following a £20m operating loss a year earlier, “driven by recovery in profitability” after the negative impact of Covid-19 and restructuring charges a year ago. Royal Mail’s domestic parcel volumes were 33% higher than before the pandemic, showing the structural shift in consumer behaviour, but 4% lower than a year ago when the lockdown drove demand for home deliveries as shops were closed. On the other hand, letter volumes are 19% lower than before the pandemic, but have risen 11% compared with last year. Simon Thompson, chief executive of Royal Mail, said the ‘re-invention of Royal Mail is inflight’ following cost-cutting programmes. The pandemic has resulted in a structural shift and accelerated the trends we have been seeing. Domestic parcel volumes, excluding international, are up around a third since the pandemic, whilst addressed letter volumes, excluding elections, are down around a fifth. This reaffirms that our strategy to rebalance our offering more towards parcels is the right one, and demonstrates the need to start defining what a sustainable Universal Service is for the future. I want to thank our teams for what we have delivered so far: it is an impressive start but there is still much more to do together.” Thompson adds that Royal Mail is developing plans to address inflationary pressures in the economy which he says “will impact next year and beyond”. That plan will include increased automation, and “tariff increases where we can on certain letter services from January 2022”. Covid-19 and international conveyance costs are unwinding at a slower rate than it expected this year. In the short term, Royal Mail is hedged against rising fuel and electricity prices, but has seen a rise in wages for temporary workers such as HGV lorry drivers. And in the longer term, it is “increasingly clear that inflationary pressures will persist”, Royal Mail adds, saying the increase in National Insurance contributions will cost around £50m in the 2022-23 financial year. It also needs to agree a new pay deal with the Unite/CMA and CWU unions. [Unite yesterday said it will continue to base its pay claims on RPI inflation, which hit 6% last month]. Plus, Royal Mail’s fuel and energy hedges will start to unwind. Shares in National Grid have nudged 0.5% higher after it said profits this year will be significantly higher than forecast. National Grid lifted its outlook despite the fire in September at Britain’s main subsea cable with France — called IFA1. As the FT points out: National Grid did not offer any update on the cause of the fire at a site in Sellindge in Kent, where underground cables connect to a converter station, other than to say the blaze caused “significant damage to infrastructure on site”. The possible shift towards a more balanced oil market has pulled Brent crude away from October’s three-year highs, explains Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor: Oil is pushing lower once again today. Brent crude and WTI have broken below critical support turned resistance at $80 a barrel this week with bearish momentum sending the benchmarks down to lows not seen since the first week of October. Brent crude has now retraced more than a third of the gains it enjoyed since the trough in August with losses accelerating in recent sessions, signalling a potential shift towards a more balanced market as supply catches up with demand. Shares in oil companies are dropping this morning too, with Royal Dutch Shell down 1.5% and BP off 1.2%, tracking the move in crude. China’s state reserve bureau has said it is working on a release of crude oil reserves. The National Food and Strategic Reserves Administration has said it would disclose the details of the move on its website. A spokeswoman for the Reserves Administration explained: “We are carrying out the work of releasing crude oil reserves. And for any details related to the releasing, we will put out a statement on our website.” Beijing declined to comment on the US’s invitation to participate in a joint release of oil, though. So it’s not yet clear if authorities are doing so in response to the request from Washington, which came in a virtual summit earlier this week between Joe Biden and Xi Jinping, or due to their own concerns over higher prices. Bloomberg points out that China has already used its reserves once this year: China tapped its national crude stockpiles earlier this year in an effort to bring domestic prices down, and also made a private sale from the reserves. On Thursday, the reserve bureau’s spokeswoman said that more details on the volume and the date of sale would follow on its website in due course. The oil price has hit a near-six-week low after America reportedly asked some of the world’s largest oil consuming nations to consider releasing crude stockpiles. Under the plan, these countries could join the US in a coordinated effort to lower global energy prices. Reuters reports this morning that the Biden White House asked China, India and Japan if they would push some of their strategic reserves of oil onto the market, to drive down costs. The US has its own Strategic Petroleum Reserve, which can be tapped to push down prices or increase supplies as needed, but is also pushing for a wider response. The unusual move follows a jump in gasoline prices, and the wider surge in US inflation to a 30-year high. Having failed to persuade Opec+ to speed up its production, the US is now looking to pile pressure on the group. Reuters explains: “We’re talking about the symbolism of the largest consumers of the world sending a message to OPEC that ‘you’ve got to change your behavior,’” one of the sources said. In Asia, where China said it is working on a crude release, oil prices extended declines prompted by the U.S. request, after settling on Wednesday further below seven-year highs struck in early October. Biden and top aides have discussed the possibility of a coordinated release of stockpiled oil with close allies including Japan, South Korea and India, as well as with China, over the past several weeks, the sources said. The US and allies have coordinated strategic petroleum reserve releases before, for example in 2011 during a war in OPEC member Libya. But the current proposal represents an unprecedented challenge to OPEC, the cartel that has influenced oil prices for more than five decades, because it involves China, the world’s biggest importer of crude. A Japanese industry ministry official said the United States has requested Tokyo’s cooperation in dealing with higher oil prices, but he could not confirm whether the request included coordinated releases of stockpiles. By law, Japan cannot use reserve releases to lower prices, the official said. The prospect of more oil hitting the market has pushed Brent crude down below $80 per barrel to as low as $79.28, the lowest since early October, after falling sharply yesterday too. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. National Grid has hiked its profit forecasts after reporting a jump in earnings.... as its subsea cables that connecting Britain to other countries benefit from high energy prices across Europe. Pre-tax profits at National Grid, which runs the UK’s power infrastructure, jumped 86% in the first half of the financial year (to 30th September), to £1.08bn, from £583m a year ago. The jump was partly driven by higher auction prices across its interconnector portfolio, the high voltage cables which connect the UK’s electricity systems to other countries. And the early commissioning of the world’s longest under-sea electricity cable between Britain and Norway could also boost the firm’s fortunes, as well as improving the UK’s energy security. National Grid bought Western Power Distribution, the UK’s largest electricity distribution network operator, for £7.8bn, earlier this year, as part of a pivot away from gas and towards electricity. That gave a lift to operating profits, as did National Grid’s new IFA2 (Interconnexion France-Angleterre 2) link to France. Revenues from electricity transmission also rose. National Grid told the City: Excluding the first time contribution of £257m from Western Power Distribution (WPD), underlying operating profit was up 20% driven by the first six months of operations at IFA2, reduced impact from COVID-19 compared to the prior year, and higher UK Electricity Transmission net revenue as we accelerate our investment for the energy transition at the start of RIIO-T2. [RIIO-T2 are the new set of network price controls set by regulator Ofgem]. Shareholders will see the benefits -- National Grid now expects earnings per share to be ‘significantly’ higher than previously thought, partly due to higher auction prices. The new North Sea Link (NSL) which will be able to channel up to 1.4 gigawatts of electricity between Norway and the United Kingdom, will also help, it says: Given the strong start to the year, we now expect to deliver full year underlying EPS significantly above the top end of our 5 - 7% range. This is primarily driven by early commissioning of our new NSL interconnector, coupled with higher auction prices across our interconnector portfolio, which is expected to deliver around £100 million higher operating profit. Interconnector operators make money through auctions, so when price difference between two different markets are wide, profits are higher. But those same high prices are hitting consumers and businesses who have seen their bills soar as energy suppliers have struggled under record gas prices and rising electricity costs. Yesterday, UK inflation hit a 10-year high of 4.2%, with higher energy costs the biggest driving factor. National Grid’s CEO, John Pettigrew, says: In the UK, we have made a strong start to the new RIIO-T2 period in electricity transmission, and we are preparing our business plan submission for WPD. In the US, we have completed a full refresh of rates across our distribution businesses. In National Grid Ventures, we commissioned the North Sea Link, our new interconnector to Norway. Whilst delivering this strong performance, we have completed our acquisition of WPD, launched the process to sell a majority stake in National Grid Gas and the sale of our Rhode Island business is on track to be finalised by the end of our financial year, progressing our strategic pivot towards higher growth electricity, all made possible by the commitment of our people. Looking ahead, the new organisational structure that we have implemented, alongside a major cost efficiency programme, will ensure we are in a strong position to capitalise on the significant growth opportunities ahead. Our focus will be on delivering critical and green investment to enable the decarbonisation of power, transport and heat, and lead a clean, fair and affordable energy transition across the jurisdictions we serve.” The agenda 7am GMT: Eurozone new car registrations for October 9.30am GMT: Weekly business insights and impact on the UK economy report 1.30pm GMT: US weekly jobless figures 1.30pm GMT: Philadelphia Fed manufacturing indexThe premier of the British Virgin Islands has praised Sir Geoffrey Cox, after claiming that there is no evidence of corruption on the islands at a UK commission of inquiry (CoI). Andrew Fahie, the elected prime minister of the islands, also accused the British government’s former appointed governor Gus Jaspert of making irresponsible claims that only damage the reputation of the islands. The inquiry, which is due to report as early as January, shot into the headlines when it was revealed that Cox, a Tory MP and former attorney general, has been representing the ministers at the hearing and earning hundreds of thousands of pounds. Fahie praised Cox and his legal team for doing a great job and said he and his fellow BVI ministers would be vindicated, claiming: “Lie has speed, but truth has endurance.” In London, where he was attending an annual meeting of representatives of overseas territories with ministers, he said there would be no reason for him to resign and emphasised the steps being taken to reform governance and integrity. It is not clear if Cox will appear at a final public hearing due to be held on 24 November after criticism in the British media over second jobs. Fahie said the controversy surrounding Cox was a matter for British politics, and that he was more intent on defending his administration’s reputation, as well as keeping alive the hope of greater independence from the UK. He said of the legal firm Withers, hired by the BVI government: “They hired Sir Geoffrey. He has done exceptionally well with the team to defend us. Their legal skills have been a rare hope for us during the commission of the inquiry, but we leave the politics to the UK.” He said: “The key to any country is its reputation, but so far, and thank God for that, there is no evidence provided in the CoI showing that the BVI is corrupt. We have provided them with over 200,000 papers.” Faced by claims made by the previous governor that senior figures were involved in drug-running, he said: “I find that statement very irresponsible. It is clear from the inquiry there is no evidence to back up what he is saying, and it would be interesting to see if he would be willing to say that outside the protection of the inquiry as a private citizen. In saying that, he did not bear in mind the reputation of the BVI, families, the economy.” Pressed on the lack of a proper audit trail, he said all moneys reach their target and occasionally – while Covid-19 was prevalent – it was a tense time. He said: “It is true the administration needs to be modernised, but with the new governor we have moved already to a public-sector transformation.” He added his task was to prepare people for the journey constitutionally for whatever direction they take. “The people have to decide on self-determination. It is a debate we have had, off and on, for years. If they want a referendum on this they will indicate that through their representatives. “Our duty is to prepare the country. What you do with your children is get them though elementary school, high school, college and the world of work, so you put them in a positive state for whatever direction they choose to take, if it is self-determination or association status.” During the inquiry, the commissioner, Sir Gary Hickinbottom, said: “It’s clear from the evidence I’ve seen, to put it mildly, that governance in the BVI is not all that it should be. “I will have to determine in various areas the state of governance. But the evidence in some areas is pretty clear.”Another detail of Boris Johnson’s largely-free holiday to southern Spain last month has emerged after the prime minister declared £1,800 of hospitality from Heathrow. The declaration was made in the latest update to the register of MPs’ interests, where donations or other gifts must be set out, with their value. Johnson used the Windsor suite at Heathrow’s Terminal 5 on 7 October, when he was en route to Málaga. The Windsor suite is described by the airport as a collection of eight “unique and beautifully decorated private lounges”. Johnson declared its use for three people, with a total value of £1,800. While Johnson was previously a vehement opponent of Heathrow’s expansion to a third runway – he once pledged to stop it by lying down in front of bulldozers – he opted to travel to Kabul so as to miss a Commons vote that approved the plan in 2018, when he was foreign secretary under Theresa May. Johnson, after being elected for his Uxbridge and South Ruislip seat, which is close to the west London airport, told supporters: “I will lie down with you in front of those bulldozers and stop the building, stop the construction of that third runway.” Downing Street say Johnson, his wife, Carrie, and their one-year-old son, Wilfred, took a commercial flight to Spain. Once there, they stayed for free at a luxurious villa in Marbella belonging to the Goldsmith family. While the villa is rented commercially for about £25,000 a week, this use of the villa was not put in the register of MPs’ interests, meaning Johnson has not had to formally declare its value. Downing Street has confirmed the holiday was provided free of charge by the family of Zac Goldsmith, the former Conservative MP who, after he lost his seat in the 2019 election, was made a peer and an environment minister by Johnson. The stay was instead listed by the prime minister in the register of ministerial interests, which is updated less regularly, and does not cite monetary values. Downing Street said this was the correct way to register the free stay, “given the hospitality was provided by another minister”. However, there is speculation that Johnson is seeking to set a precedent that costs and obligations incurred as prime minister fall under the remit of Lord Geidt, the adviser on ministerial interests, who does not have the power to unilaterally begin investigations, rather than Kathryn Stone, the independent parliamentary commissioner for standards. Last week, Downing Street also argued that Stone should not investigate who paid for the renovation of Johnson’s official flat, as this was not connected to his role as an MP, prompting Labour to warn the PM was trying to evade proper scrutiny. As a minister, Johnson’s opportunity to earn extra income is severely limited. When he was a backbench MP, he was paid almost £23,000 a month by the Daily Telegraph to write a column, and regularly took on speaking engagements paying tens of thousands of pounds.