The Manhattan district attorney has reportedly convened a new grand jury in the Trump Organization case to weigh potential charges. According to the Washington Post, the grand jury is expected to hear evidence regarding how Donald Trump’s company valued its assets. A separate grand jury handed down tax evasion charges against the Trump Organization’s longtime chief financial officer. House speaker Nancy Pelosi pushed back against Joe Manchin’s criticism of the proposed paid leave program in Democrats’ reconciliation package. Speaking to CNN this morning, Manchin argued the paid family and medical program did not belong in the $1.75tn bill because it should be enacted through regular order. “I disagree,” Pelosi said in response to Manchin’s criticism. “I think this is appropriate for this legislation.” The Biden administration filed a federal lawsuit challenging Texas’ new voting law on Thursday, saying some of the state’s new restrictions violate key civil rights laws. The suit takes aim at two specific provisions in the Texas law that deal with providing assistance to voters at the polls and mail-in voting Pelosi touted a new report from the nonpartisan Joint Committee on Taxation showing that the reconciliation package will raise $1.5tn in revenue over 10 years. In a letter to her House colleagues, the speaker noted that the analysis does not include two other pay-for proposals, which could bring the total revenue raised to more than $2tn. “It is essential that the legislation is fully paid for and reduces the debt,” Pelosi said. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said he wants the upper chamber to pass the reconciliation package “before Thanksgiving”. “So as the House prepares to move forward, the Senate continues to achieve progress in our goal of passing Build Back Better before Thanksgiving. That’s our goal,” Schumer said. But it remains unclear whether the House will be able to vote on the reconciliation bill today. The Biden administration unveiled two new policies requiring more than 100 million American workers to be fully vaccinated against coronavirus by 4 January. According to one of the rules, those who work for companies with 100 or more employees must be vaccinated by 4 January or receive weekly coronavirus tests. Another rule specifies that workers at healthcare facilities must be vaccinated by 4 January, with no option to test out of the requirement. Half a million dollars and nearly four years into his Los Angeles-based cannabis venture, Donnie Anderson had no shop, no prospects and a mountain of debt. With financial help from family and friends, Anderson rented a $6,000-a-month space in January 2018 for his new cannabis retail shop. He kept paying the rent as the city’s permitting process dragged on. He bought cabinets and other equipment as he waited. And waited. Sick of waiting, he’s selling all that equipment and giving up his lease. Inaction by the city is forcing him to give up his dream, he says. “It’s killing business owners,” Anderson says. “All the air has been let out of me.” In November 2016, Californians voted to legalize recreational cannabis. But nearly five years later, the state and many of its cities and counties are still figuring out how exactly to regulate the industry. The challenge has been particularly frustrating for Black entrepreneurs like Anderson, who were promised a leg-up getting started, but have seen little movement in that regard. Following regulation, several cities and counties in California created social equity programs to help entrepreneurs in communities most harmed by the war on drugs. Black people have borne the brunt of marijuana criminalization in the US over the past 20 years. They’re nearly four times as likely as white people to be arrested for pot violations, according to the American Civil Liberties Union, even though the two groups use marijuana at roughly the same rate. The equity programs were supposed to help people of color and those formerly incarcerated for cannabis crimes get licensed to run all types of cannabis businesses: cultivation, manufacturing, delivery, retail. The programs created big expectations, but implementation has been much trickier. “Many people got totally burnt,” said Christine De La Rosa, co-founder and CEO of cannabis company The People’s Ecosystem, who planned to apply for a social equity license in Los Angeles but didn’t win the city’s lottery for a chance. “I can’t think of one [program] that has been good for women or for people of color. It has been a failure.” Read more: No, it’s not deja vu: Senate Republicans once again used the filibuster on Wednesday to stymie Democratic efforts to pass a significant voting rights bill. It’s the fourth time it’s happened this year, the most recent coming just two weeks ago. But Democrats and other voting rights advocates hope that this time is different. They never really expected 10 Republicans to sign on to the bill and advance it. Instead, they hoped to use the vote as a final chance to show the West Virginia senator Joe Manchin and Arizona senator Kyrsten Sinema, two of the staunchest filibuster defenders, that there is no hope of passing a voting rights bill while the filibuster remains in place. It’s a development that significantly escalates pressure on Manchin, specifically. The voting rights bill Republicans blocked in late October was one he personally helped write and sought GOP input on. The measure Republicans blocked on Wednesday, which would have restored a critical provision of the Voting Rights Act, is one he supports. Manchin has said that “inaction is not an option” on voting rights. But now Republicans have made it clear that while the filibuster remains in place, inaction is the only option. So where do things go from here? To start, I think we’ll begin to see a lot more explicit language from Chuck Schumer, the majority leader, about changing the rules of the filibuster. While Schumer has repeatedly said “all options are on the table” when it comes to voting rights, he’s stopped short of outlining specific changes he’d like to see or calling out Manchin and Sinema in particular. Schumer has only recently begun talking about the need “to restore the Senate as the world’s greatest deliberative body”. I expect we’ll also see some increased pressure from the White House. Schumer continued that rhetoric on Wednesday after the filibuster. He described it as a “low, low point” in the history of the Senate, and questioned whether some of Congress’s greatest legislative accomplishments would have been able to overcome the filibuster if they had been proposed in today’s Senate. Read more: Here’s more background on the Texas voting restrictions, which the Justice Department is challenging in a lawsuit: A former senior official in the Trump administration’s justice department will testify before members of congress investigating the 6 January insurrection, Reuters reports. A congressional aide familiar with the probe shared the information with Reuters. Last week, the House of Representatives Select Committee delayed testimony by Jeffrey Clark because he had retained a new lawyer. Clark did not immediately respond to requests for comment. The congressional aide spoke on condition of anonymity. Clark, the former acting head of the Justice Department’s civil division, was a proponent of Trump’s unfounded claims that Democrat Joe Biden’s victory in the November 2020 election was the result of fraud. On Oct. 13, the committee announced it had issued a subpoena to Clark asking him to produce records and testify at a deposition by Oct. 29. In announcing it had subpoenaed Clark, the panel said it needed to understand all the details about efforts inside the previous administration to amplify misinformation about election results. In January, the Justice Department’s inspector general announced his office was launching an investigation into whether Clark plotted to oust then-Acting Attorney General Jeff Rosen so he could take over the department and help pursue Trump’s baseless claims by opening an investigation into voter fraud in Georgia. A U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee report found Clark also drafted a letter he wanted Rosen to approve which urged Georgia to convene a special legislative session to investigate voter fraud claims. Clark’s plan ultimately failed after senior department leaders threatened to resign in protest, the Senate investigation found. The lawsuit comes as Joe Biden faces mounting pressure to enact federal legislation to protect voting rights. Republicans have successfully used the filibuster four times this year to block voting rights bills in the US senate. The most recent filibuster came on Wednesday, when Republicans blocked a bill that would have restored a key part of the Voting Rights Act that required states with repeated evidence of voting discrimination, including Texas, to pre-clear voting laws with the federal government before they go into effect. Nineteen states have passed 33 laws this year restricting voting access, according to the Brennan Center for Justice. This is the second major voting rights suit Biden’s Justice Department has filed this year. It sued Georgia over its sweeping new voting restrictions in June. “Prohibiting assistors from answering voters’ questions, responding to requests to clarify ballot translations, and confirming that voters with visual impairments have marked a ballot as intended will curtail fundamental voting rights without advancing any legitimate state interest,” DoJ lawyers wrote in their complaint. “Conditioning the right to cast a mail ballot on a voter’s ability to recall and recite the identification number provided on an application for voter registration months or years before will curtail fundamental voting rights without advancing any legitimate state interest,” the complaint says. The Biden administration filed a federal lawsuit challenging Texas’ new voting law on Thursday, saying some of the state’s new restrictions violate key civil rights laws. The suit takes aim at two specific provisions in the Texas law that deal with providing assistance to voters at the polls and mail-in voting, respectively. The first measure restricts the kind of assistance people can provide at the polls to voters, blocking them from explaining how voting works or breaking down complex language on the ballot. That violates a provision of the Voting Rights Act that guarantees that anyone who requires assistance because of “blindness, disability, or inability to read or write” can receive assistance, the justice department said. The complaint targets a second provision that requires voters to provide identification information on mail-in ballot applications as well as the ballot return envelopes. The new Texas law says that election workers have to reject the ballots if there are discrepancies in the identification provided. The Justice Department said that violates a provision of the 1964 Civil Rights Act that says someone can’t be blocked from voting because of an error on a paper or record that is unrelated to their qualifications under state law to vote. “Laws that impair eligible citizens’ access to the ballot box have no place in our democracy. Texas Senate Bill 1’s restrictions on voter assistance at the polls and on which absentee ballots cast by eligible voters can be accepted by election officials are unlawful and indefensible,” Kristen Clarke, the head of the Department’s Civil Rights Division, said in a statement announcing the suit. A Russian analyst who was the main source for Christopher Steele’s dossier on Donald Trump and Moscow has been arrested by US authorities, the justice department said on Thursday. Igor Danchenko now faces charges as part of the investigation by John Durham, the special counsel appointed by the Trump administration to examine the origins of the FBI’s investigation into links between the Trump campaign and Russia. Danchenko collected much of the intelligence behind Steele’s dossier during three trips to Russia in summer and autumn 2016. He was the chief source behind its most incendiary allegation: that Trump was compromised during a trip to Moscow in November 2013 for the Miss Universe beauty pageant. Trump has vehemently denied the claim. Last summer, however, a report by the Senate intelligence committee said that the FSB spy agency presided over a network of secret cameras inside the Ritz-Carlton hotel where Trump stayed, including in guest bedrooms. An FSB intelligence officer was permanently on site, it said. The five-page indictment released on Thursday accuses Danchenko of lying repeatedly to the FBI when interviewed in 2017 – a criminal offense. These include over his dealings with an unnamed US PR executive with close links to the Democrats. The executive’s information found its way into some of the dossier’s memos, a fact Danchenko allegedly concealed. Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The Manhattan district attorney has reportedly convened a new grand jury in the Trump Organization case to weigh potential charges. According to the Washington Post, the grand jury is expected to hear evidence regarding how former president Donald Trump’s company valued its assets. A separate grand jury handed down tax evasion charges against the Trump Organization’s longtime chief financial officer. House speaker Nancy Pelosi pushed back against Joe Manchin’s criticism of the proposed paid leave program in Democrats’ reconciliation package. Speaking to CNN this morning, Manchin argued the paid family and medical program did not belong in the $1.75tn bill because it should be enacted through regular order. “I disagree,” Pelosi said in response to Manchin’s criticism. “I think this is appropriate for this legislation.” Pelosi touted a new report from the nonpartisan Joint Committee on Taxation showing that the reconciliation package will raise $1.5tn in revenue over 10 years. In a letter to her House colleagues, the speaker noted that the analysis does not include two other pay-for proposals, which could bring the total revenue raised to more than $2tn. “It is essential that the legislation is fully paid for and reduces the debt,” Pelosi said. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said he wants the upper chamber to pass the reconciliation package “before Thanksgiving”. “So as the House prepares to move forward, the Senate continues to achieve progress in our goal of passing Build Back Better before Thanksgiving. That’s our goal,” Schumer said. But it remains unclear whether the House will be able to vote on the reconciliation bill today. The Biden administration unveiled two new policies requiring more than 100 million American workers to be fully vaccinated against coronavirus by 4 January. According to one of the rules, those who work for companies with 100 or more employees must be vaccinated by 4 January or receive weekly coronavirus tests. Another rule specifies that workers at healthcare facilities must be vaccinated by 4 January, and they do not have the option to test out of the requirement. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. According to public polling heading into Tuesday’s election, New Jersey governor Phil Murphy was cruising to re-election over his Republican opponent, Jack Ciattarelli. But in the end, the race wasn’t called until Wednesday, with Murphy narrowly eking out a victory. For this, a prominent New Jersey-based pollster is apologizing. “I blew it,” Patrick Murray, director of the independent Monmouth University Polling Institute, which is based in New Jersey, writes in a new op-ed, published by NJ.com. “The final Monmouth University Poll margin did not provide an accurate picture of the state of the governor’s race. So, if you are a Republican who believes the polls cost Ciattarelli an upset victory or a Democrat who feels we lulled your base into complacency, feel free to vent. I hear you. “I owe an apology to Jack Ciattarelli’s campaign — and to Phil Murphy’s campaign for that matter — because inaccurate public polling can have an impact on fundraising and voter mobilization efforts. But most of all I owe an apology to the voters of New Jersey for information that was at the very least misleading.” The final Monmouth poll had Murphy with a sizable lead over Ciattarelli. The final spread showed New Jersey voters favoring Murphy by an 11-point margin, 50% to 39%. Ballots are still being tabulated, by the final margin appears to be less than two percentage points. Since 2016, when polling largely failed to forecast the election of Donald Trump, pollsters and reporters have been grappling with questions about the accuracy of polling and the amount of faith the public, campaigns and the media should place in them. That uncertainty, Murray says, has led some organizations like Pew and Gallup to stop conducting election polling altogether. He wonders the same. “If we cannot be certain that these polling misses are anomalies then we have a responsibility to consider whether releasing horse race numbers in close proximity to an election is making a positive or negative contribution to the political discourse,” he writes. “Most public pollsters are committed to making sure our profession counters rather than deepening the pervasive cynicism in our society. We try to hold up a mirror that accurately shows us who we are,” he concludes. “If election polling only serves to feed that cynicism, then it may be time to rethink the value of issuing horse race poll numbers as the electorate prepares to vote.” Karine Jean-Pierre would not provide any clarity on when the House might vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill or the reconciliation package, saying that was a decision for Nancy Pelosi. But the House speaker has not yet given any clear indication as to whether the chamber will vote on one of the bills tonight. Pelosi told reporters earlier today, “I’ll let you know as soon as I wish to.” And now some of the centrist members of the House Democratic caucus are suggesting they would not support a vote on the reconciliation package tonight, per CNN: The deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, criticized Republicans for trying to win votes by stirring up fears about Critical Race Theory. During his campaign, Virginia gubernatorial candidate Glenn Youngkin warned of the dangers of CRT -- a theory that recognizes how racism has shaped American laws and institutions -- even though it was not taught in the state’s schools. “Republicans are lying. They’re not being honest,” Jean-Pierre said at the daily White House briefing. “They’re not being truthful about where we stand, and they’re cynically trying to use our kids as a political football. They’re talking about our kids when it’s election season, but they won’t vote for them when it matters.” The Manhattan district attorney has convened a new grand jury in the Trump Organization case, in order to weigh potential charges. This is the second long-term grand jury in the case, gathered to hear evidence about the financial practices of former president Donald Trump’s business empire, the Trump Organization, and potentially to vote on criminal charges, unnamed sources with knowledge of the matter have told the Washington Post, the paper reported this afternoon. The Post notes that DA Cyrus Vance declined to comment today and the newly-elected (as of this week) Manhattan DA, fellow Democrat Alvin Bragg, had remained mum on the matter while he was campaigning. Vance is due to depart the office at the end of the year. The report continues: An earlier grand jury — convened this spring in Manhattan — previously handed down felony indictments against two Trump companies and Trump’s longtime chief financial officer Allen Weisselberg, charging them with tax evasion. It is unclear if that grand jury is still hearing evidence about the Trump Organization. The new grand jury was seated last week, and is expected to meet three days a week over six months, people familiar with the matter said. It was expected to hear evidence on Thursday, meeting in Manhattan’s Surrogate’s Court — usually a forum for disputes over the estates of the deceased — because the criminal court buildings are jammed with a rush of post-pandemic trials. One person familiar with the matter said the second grand jury was expected to examine how former president Donald Trump’s company valued its assets. That appears to be a separate issue than the one described in indictments from the first grand jury, which has dealt with allegations that Weisselberg and other Trump executives evaded taxes on their pay by systematically hiding some of their compensation from the IRS. Both Weisselberg and the two companies have pleaded not guilty. The seating of the new grand jury does not signal that any other Trump entities or executives will be charged. The second grand jury could end its term without indicting anyone. The former president has not been charged with any crime. On Thursday, neither Trump’s company or his post-presidential office responded to requests for comment. Ron Fischetti and Phyllis Malgieri, two of Trump’s personal lawyers, declined comment. Joe Biden’s deputy press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, is now holding the daily White House briefing with reporters. Jean-Pierre said the president has not yet spoken to Glenn Youngkin, the Republican governor-elect of Virginia, but he congratulated him on his victory in the Tuesday race. A White House official previously said Biden spoke yesterday with Democrat Terry McAuliffe, who lost to Youngkin, and the president “thanked him for a hard-fought campaign, as well as his many years of service to both the Democratic Party and the United States of America”. House speaker Nancy Pelosi celebrated a new report from the nonpartisan Joint Committee on Taxation showing that Democrats’ reconciliation package will raise $1.5tn in revenue over 10 years. “This analysis does not include the legislation’s other pay-fors, including prescription drug pricing savings and IRS enforcement,” Pelosi said in a “Dear colleague” letter to House members. “Estimates suggest that these two pay-fors together will raise approximately $650 billion, putting the total revenue above $2 trillion. It is essential that the legislation is fully paid for and reduces the debt.” The centrist members of the Democratic caucus have repeatedly emphasized the importance of fully paying for the $1.75tn reconciliation package, and some of them are demanding a score from the Congressional Budget Office before supporting the bill. The new JCT report will likely provide some reassurance for those centrist Democrats, but they will also probably want to wait for the CBO score before moving forward. Pelosi concluded her letter, “We are proceeding with transformative legislation to drive historic progress For The People, For The Children and For The Planet!” Adam Kinzinger is considering running for president in 2024, after the Republican congressman announced last week that he would not seek another term in the House. CNN reports: Acknowledging his potential career options and timeline for the first time since announcing his retirement from the House last week, Kinzinger told CNN he is considering at least a statewide run if not a presidential one, and that he’ll ‘probably’ make his decision on whether to launch a bid for governor or senator by January. ‘The key is, how do we restore the honor of the party in the country?’ Kinzinger told CNN, adding that he ‘definitely’ wouldn’t rule out a White House run in 2024. But as CNN notes, Kinzinger would face significant challenges in both a Republican presidential primary and a statewide election in the traditionally Democratic state of Illinois. Republicans overall remain quite loyal to Donald Trump, and Kinzinger has become of the former president’s most vocal critics within the party, making a national campaign difficult. And Kinzinger would also face many hurdles if he launched a Senate or gubernatorial bid in Illinois. The state voted for Joe Biden by 17 points last year. A Pentagon investigation that found a drone strike in Kabul that killed 10 Afghan civilians was an “honest mistake” and recommended no legal or disciplinary action has been met with widespread outrage from Congress and human rights groups. Critics said the report contributed to a culture of impunity and failed to address systemic problems in the US conduct of drone warfare, making future civilian casualties inevitable. The victims of the 29 August strike included Zemari Ahmadi, who worked for a US-based aid organisation, and nine members of his family, including seven children. Even though the investigation by the US air force inspector general, Lt Gen Sami Said, found that the drone operators had confused a white Toyota Corolla at the scene with a car linked to a terrorist group and also failed to spot a child visible in surveillance footage two minutes before the strike, it found no evidence of wrongdoing. “The investigation found no violation of law, including the law of war. Execution errors combined with confirmation bias and communication breakdowns led to regrettable civilian casualties,” the report said. “It was an honest mistake,” Said told reporters at the Pentagon on Wednesday. “But it’s not criminal conduct, random conduct, negligence.” Joe Biden spoke yesterday to New York mayor-elect Eric Adams, New Jersey governor Phil Murphy and Ohio congresswoman-elect Shontel Brown, all of whom won their races on Tuesday night. “He congratulated them on their victories this week and committed to continue working closely to build back better, grow jobs and the economy, and expand opportunities for working families across the country,” a White House official told the press pool. “They additionally spoke of the continued need to defeat Covid-19 and get Americans vaccinated.” Biden also spoke to Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic gubernatorial candidate in Virginia who lost his election to Republican Glenn Youngkin. The official said Biden “thanked him for a hard-fought campaign, as well as his many years of service to both the Democratic Party and the United States of America”. Joe Biden’s $1.75 trillion bill to boost social protections and act on a large scale to deal with the climate crisis needs to figure out what a group of nonpartisan tax experts says is an arithmetic headache, it’s reported this afternoon. Democrats argue that the bill they now aim to pass by Thanksgiving (November 25) is paid for. However, the official US joint committee on taxation issued a report scoring the legislation’s revenue provisions at $1.48 trillion over the next decade, some $270 billion short of the top-line spending figure, Reuters reports. The news agency further reported that: House Speaker Nancy Pelosi and Ways and Means committee chairman Richard Neal said the difference would be made up by provisions intended to enhance the Internal Revenue Service’s tax collection and to lower the cost of prescription drugs for the Medicare healthcare program for the elderly. “It’s an objective view that it is solidly paid for,” Pelosi told reporters after a meeting of House Democrats on the legislation ahead of a potential floor vote that could come Thursday or Friday. It was unclear whether the Joint Tax Committee analysis would help ease the concerns of some moderate Democrats who have said they cannot support the social policy bill until they have cost estimates. Lawmakers have also been waiting on an estimate from the Congressional Budget Office. The White House has estimated the legislation could raise up to $400 billion over the next decade by ramping up IRS tax enforcement and save another $145 billion from prescription drugs, according to a framework released last week. In a meeting with fellow Democrats, Pelosi expressed hope for action on the social policy bill this week as well as on a bipartisan infrastructure bill that the Senate has already passed, a source familiar with her remarks said. “Hopefully we’ll see if we have votes for (the social policy bill) tonight and [the bipartisan infrastructure bill) tomorrow morning,” Pelosi told Democrats, the source said. If passed by the House, the social policy legislation would move to the Senate, where Senate Majority Leader Chuck Schumer said on Thursday that lawmakers would aim to enact it before the Nov. 25 Thanksgiving holiday. If enacted, the legislation would raise $640 billion from tax increases on high-income individuals and $814 billion from corporate and international tax reforms from 2022 to 2031, the tax committee said. The Joint Committee on Taxation is a nonpartisan committee of Congress made up of lawmakers from both parties who are aided by economists, attorneys, and accountants. It evaluates tax provisions in proposed legislation. Meghan Markle has been picking up the phone calling US senators to lobby for legislation providing paid family leave to American parents, according to numerous media reports. The Duchess of Sussex, who’s married to Prince Harry, aka the Duke of Sussex and grandchild of Queen Elizabeth II, recently called West Virginia Republican Senator Shelley Moore Capito. Capito told a Politico reporter, according to the Daily Beast, that Markle introduced herself, although it doesn’t describe the conversation that followed. There are so many ironies, here. Including that Democrats in the House, led by Speaker Pelosi, want to get a paid family leave provision back into the $1.75tn Build Back Better bill and get that voted on in the House asap, then onto the Senate for the reconciliation process - as a budgetary bill that could be passed with a simple majority. This bill has no Republican support in the Senate and, moreover, the Democrat currently standing in its way and just today freshly digging in his heels if, of course, West Virginia Democratic Senator Joe Manchin. In fact, Capito reportedly said, when her phone rang: “I’m in my car. I’m driving. It says caller ID blocked. I thought it was Senator Manchin. His calls come in blocked. And she goes, ‘Sen. Capito?’ I said, ‘Yes.’ She said, ‘This is Meghan, the Duchess of Sussex.” Markle also called Republican US Senator Susan Collins of Maine, whose slightly indignant response added up to “that’s rich”. A plotting Kirsten Gillibrand, Democratic Senator of New York, reportedly gave the duchess her colleagues’ numbers and said: “She wants to be part of a working group to work on paid leave long term, and she’s going to be. “Whether this comes to fruition now or later, she’ll be part of a group of women that hopefully will work on paid leave together.” Here’s where the day stands so far: House speaker Nancy Pelosi pushed back against Joe Manchin’s criticism of the proposed paid leave program in Democrats’ reconciliation package. Speaking to CNN this morning, Manchin argued the paid family and medical program did not belong in the $1.75tn bill because it should be enacted through regular order. “I disagree,” Pelosi said in response to Manchin’s criticism. “I think this is appropriate for this legislation.” Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said he wants the upper chamber to pass the reconciliation package “before Thanksgiving”. “So as the House prepares to move forward, the Senate continues to achieve progress in our goal of passing Build Back Better before Thanksgiving. That’s our goal,” Schumer said. But it remains unclear whether the House will be able to vote on the reconciliation bill today. The Biden administration unveiled two new policies requiring more than 100 million American workers to be fully vaccinated against coronavirus by 4 January. According to one of the rules, those who work for companies with 100 or more employees must be vaccinated by 4 January or receive weekly coronavirus tests. Another rule specifies that workers at healthcare facilities must be vaccinated by 4 January, and they do not have the option to test out of the requirement. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. House speaker Nancy Pelosi would not provide a definitive timeline of when the chamber might vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package. But House majority whip Jim Clyburn said he did not expect the chamber to be in session over the weekend to pass the two bills, per Politico. House speaker Nancy Pelosi acknowledged she was disappointed by the results of Tuesday’s elections, after Democrats suffered a loss in the Virginia gubernatorial race and narrowly held on to the governor’s seat in New Jersey. A reporter noted that some Virginia Democrats have argued their candidates struggled because of the party’s failure to pass the infrastructure and reconciliation bills before the election. “Any sign of progress is good for the public,” Pelosi said. “So it would have been better if we had [passed the bills].” But the speaker argued there were “other issues at work” in the Virginia gubernatorial race, so the failure to pass the two bills was not the sole reason for the loss. “But it was not a good night,” Pelosi said of the election results. House speaker Nancy Pelosi was asked about Joe Manchin’s argument that the proposed paid family and medical leave program does not belong in Democrats’ reconciliation package. While thanking Manchin for supporting key proposals like establishing universal prekindergarten and expanding access to affordable childcare, Pelosi said she disagreed with the senator’s assertions about paid leave. “We can afford it. It’s universal. It’s a compromise,” Pelosi said, noting that the proposed four weeks of paid leave is far short of what many Democrats had hoped for. “I disagree,” Pelosi said in response to Manchin’s criticism. “I think this is appropriate for this legislation.” But even if the House can pass a version of the reconciliation package that includes paid leave, it is very likely the provision will be stripped out of the bill during Senate negotiations. House speaker Nancy Pelosi would not provide any additional details about when the chamber might vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package. “I’ll let you know as soon as I wish to,” the Democratic speaker told reporters at her weekly press conference. But Pelosi specifically said she would not take up the infrastructure bill without a simultaneous vote on the reconciliation package. House progressives have already made clear they would not support a standalone vote for the infrastructure bill. The speaker acknowledged she was “very unhappy” that the infrastructure bill did not pass last week, but she said she will not bring the two proposals to the floor until she has the votes to pass them. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said he wants the upper chamber to pass the $1.75tn reconciliation package “before Thanksgiving”, which falls on 25 November this year. “So as the House prepares to move forward, the Senate continues to achieve progress in our goal of passing Build Back Better before Thanksgiving. That’s our goal,” Schumer said on the Senate floor moments ago. The Democratic leader added, “We are moving forward because the challenges American families and workers are facing are enormous, and President Biden’s agenda has many things that will lower costs to help families pay the bills.” House speaker Nancy Pelosi is now holding her weekly press conference and may offer an update on the timing of votes in her chamber. Stay tuned. Eric Berger reports on the recent surge in coronavirus hospitalizations in Colorado: A recent surge in Covid-19 cases around Colorado has increased the number of unvaccinated patients needing care and prompted concerns that hospitals may have to ration services for other issues. “If you have been waiting for an elective procedure for the last 18 months and are finally scheduled – you’re vaccinated, you don’t have Covid – your procedure might still get canceled if a hospital is totally full,” said Dr Anuj Mehta, a pulmonologist with Denver Health who serves on the governor’s expert emergency epidemic response committee. “While this is a pandemic of the unvaccinated at this point – and the surges in the hospital are entirely being driven by unvaccinated folks – it is having a massive bleed-over effect on to the entire population.” There are about 1,300 patients hospitalized with Covid-19 in Colorado, according to the New York Times data; that’s the highest number since December 2020, when more than 1,900 patients were hospitalized. That number has increased by 15% over the last two weeks, the third largest increase in the country, and at a time when the national picture for the US is of a Delta variant surge that is firmly on the way down. The trend in Colorado can be attributed in part to the almost 40% of the state population that has not been vaccinated and people again gathering indoors without masks. It also shows that, despite the national downward trends of infections, regional spikes can still happen that can cause havoc in state healthcare systems. Joe Biden has issued a statement praising his administration’s new rules requiring coronavirus vaccinations for more than 100 million American workers. “For our country, the choice is simple: get more people vaccinated, or prolong this pandemic and its impact on our country,” the president said. “Vaccination is the single best pathway out of this pandemic. And while I would have much preferred that requirements not become necessary, too many people remain unvaccinated for us to get out of this pandemic for good. So I instituted requirements – and they are working.” Pointing to polls showing most Americans support vaccine requirements, Biden noted that such mandates have been in effect for other diseases for decades. “I’m calling on employers to act,” Biden said. “Businesses have more power than ever before to accelerate our path out of this pandemic, save lives, and protect our economic recovery.” More than 100 million American workers must be fully vaccinated against coronavirus by 4 January, according to two new rules issued by the Biden administration. The first rule, issued by the labor department’s occupational safety and health administration (Osha), applies to those who work for companies with 100 or more employees. Those employees must be fully vaccinated by 4 January or receive weekly coronavirus tests to mitigate the potential spread of the virus among coworkers. According to a fact sheet from the White House, that rule will impact roughly 84 million working Americans. The second policy, issued by the centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid services (CMS) at the department of health and human services, requires workers at healthcare facilities to be fully vaccinated by 4 January. But the 17 million Americans impacted by the CMS policy will not have the option to test out of the vaccination requirement. Joe Biden announced in September that he was taking additional steps to boost vaccination rates in the US, but his administration has only just finalized the details of some of those policies. House majority leader Steny Hoyer was asked whether he believes the chamber may hold a vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package today. “It’s been close for a long time. We’ll see,” Hoyer said, per Politico. House Democratic leaders are now holding a meeting, so Hoyer may soon have an update on the timing of the votes. And House speaker Nancy Pelosi is also scheduled to hold a press conference in about an hour. Stay tuned. Joe Manchin also warned Democrats against going “too far left” with their $1.75tn reconciliation package, as progressives call for robust investments in healthcare, childcare and climate initiatives. “We just have to work together. We can’t go too far left,” Manchin told CNN this morning. “This is not a center-left or a left country. We are a center, if anything, a center-right country.” Manchin described himself as “fiscally responsible and socially compassionate” and he argued most Americans “in the middle” of the political spectrum view themselves the same way. Speaking to his progressive colleagues, Manchin said, “Realize what can and can’t be done. Don’t force basically something that’s not going to happen to make people believe it will.” Senator Joe Manchin is still expressing concerns about the House version of the reconciliation package, specifically the proposal to fund four weeks of paid family and medical leave. Manchin, one of two Democratic holdouts in the Senate as the party crafts the reconciliation package, previously pushed to eliminate the paid leave proposal because of its cost. “I don’t think it belongs in the bill,” Manchin told CNN this morning. The West Virginia senator warned that, if the paid leave program were funded through reconciliation, Republicans would end the policy once they took control of Congress. “Let’s get it done in regular order through the process,” Manchin said. Of course, Manchin also opposes altering or eliminating the Senate filibuster, meaning such a bill would likely need 60 votes to pass. And there is currently no path to attract 10 Republican votes on a paid leave bill. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. House Democrats are still hoping to approve the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the $1.75tn reconciliation package by the end of the week. Majority leader Steny Hoyer indicated that the House may vote on the two bills as soon as today, despite ongoing arguments among Democrats over the specifics of the reconciliation package. The potential votes come two days after Democrats suffered a bruising loss in the gubernatorial race of Virginia, a state that Biden carried by 10 points last year. Asked about the Virginia defeat yesterday, Joe Biden acknowledged that voters are frustrated with Democrats’ delays in advancing his economic agenda. “I do know that people want us to get things done. They want us to get things done,” Biden said. “And that’s why I’m continuing to push very hard for the Democratic party to move along and pass my infrastructure bill and my Build Back Better bill.” The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.The journey to Voyage, Abba’s final studio album and their first in 40 years, began with a tweet from their shiny new Twitter account in August, coaxing people to “join us”. Billboards across London followed, featuring images of a sort of solar eclipse, a glitter ball in a sci-fi silhouette. A week later came news of a 10-track album and a “digital avatar” concert residency in a custom-built London arena. The signs were good. Here was a band alive to their legacy as makers of sparkling pop, but also to the spirit of disco’s futurism, understanding that they had to harness the shock of the new. In September, one of two album taster tracks, Don’t Shut Me Down, fulfilled this brief exquisitely, morphing from vulnerable Swedish noir to piano-and-horn-propelled pop-funk. Its impact was unexpected and exciting and it became Abba’s first Top 10 hit since 1981, charging Voyage with the promise of forward motion and glamour – qualities that felt wildly attractive in our messy, mid-Covid times. And so it is hard to reckon with the disappointment that Abba’s ninth album delivers, as it prefers to languish in often bafflingly retrograde settings. It begins with I Still Have Faith in You, the other taster track released in September. An epic example of the “bittersweet song” Anni-Frid Lyngstad and Agnetha Fältskog refer to in the lyric – in their different, yet still lovely, older voices – its meditation on how to confront and own the ageing process is precision-tailored, in glistening silver thread. The opening, elegiac string phrase yearns for resolution throughout, before returning wistfully in the song’s final bars. The second verse’s soft drum rolls (by Per Lindvall, veteran of Super Trouper and The Visitors) are among many fine, musical details that urge the women on. It is, admittedly, a little cheesy, but its tenderness still feels triumphant. But rather than reflecting poignantly on the past, much of the rest of Voyage feels terminally stuck there. When You Danced With Me tells the story of a girl left behind in Kilkenny when a boy she loved “left for the city”. She’s spent years waiting for him to return, we’re told; presumably she’s oblivious to the existence in Ireland of train routes, driving tests or text messages. The Celtic-leaning melody in the intro recalls Abba’s incursions into other global settings, such as the Mexican battlefields in Fernando, or the Spanish-Peruvian musical moodboards of Chiquitita. The overall effect doesn’t prompt folkloric nostalgia, but mild nausea. Then comes the album’s big crime against sense, sentimentality and sequencing, Little Things, a Christmas song shoved in at track three. All about the delights of the season, it includes a children’s choir singing about their grandma (the St Winifred’s school singers would sound like rebel punks in comparison), but also, in a jolting juxtaposition, intimations about mum and dad’s sex life. Particularly weird is the implication of a grim transactional quality behind a romantic gesture. “You’d consider bringing me a breakfast tray, but there’s a price,” Lyngstad sings, having noticed her partner’s “naughty eyes”. You hope if she’s presented with a breakfast sausage, she’ll impale it then bin it. Admittedly, Björn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson have never been the most enlightened lyricists on the feminism front. One of Us and Gimme! Gimme! Gimme! (A Man After Midnight) are two Abba songs among many featuring a fraught woman desperate for any man to pop along and quick-fix her loneliness. Now four decades have passed, and one can’t help but despair at the chorus of I Can Be That Woman (“You’re not the man you should’ve been / I let you down somehow”) and that’s after its terrible lyrical twist about a female her husband is sleeping with, who turns out to be … a dog. Keep an Eye on Dan offers another miserable monologue from a pining divorcee, spoiling its fantastic mixture of Visitors-era iciness and Voulez-Vous-era disco propulsion. Ulvaeus recently said these songs were written “absolutely trend-blind”. It shows. Including tracks such as the rejected 1978 single Just a Notion (a reminder of early, jangly Abba glam, but nothing more) and Bumblebee (a naive attempt to say something universal about climate change) makes you doubt their quality control. At least Voyage’s finale, Ode to Freedom, hints at a grand, closing statement, pastiching and stretching a phrase from a waltz in Tchaikovsky’s Swan Lake. But then its lyric talks about the futility of writing an ode that’s worth remembering, which leaves an odd note, especially when we’re talking about a band whose songs are known around the world. “If I ever write my ode to freedom / It will be in prose that chimes with me,” it concludes. Maybe it’s a reference to the female members’ preference for privacy, or even Abba’s determination to keep creating their unusual song structures in their Swedish reading of English – but it also suggests Abba feel they can exist in their own bubble. They can’t. In the past, they excelled when they twisted the sounds of their times in their own way, when they were within glam, disco and electronic pop but also apart from these genres; when their idiosyncrasies elevated them, rather than diminished them. If only they had stopped at those two knowing songs, leaving the rest to our dazzling imaginations.The metals tycoon Sanjeev Gupta should be investigated for potential breaches of his duties as a company director, according to a scathing report by MPs that said his leadership threatened the future viability of Liberty Steel. Liberty Steel has lurched through eight months of crisis after the March collapse of its key financial backer, Greensill Capital, triggered an ongoing attempt to find new lenders. Gupta controls Liberty Steel through GFG Alliance, an informal group of companies that employs as many as 35,000 people worldwide, including about 3,000 in UK steel. GFG has been the object of persistent concerns over its corporate governance, and the government in March rejected its request for a £170m bailout because of its opaque corporate structure. The UK’s Serious Fraud Office is also investigating “suspected fraud, fraudulent trading and money laundering” in relation to GFG and Greensill Capital. In their report, MPs on the business select committee flagged multiple areas of concern, stating: “We are not satisfied that Sanjeev Gupta is adequately addressing the many fundamental issues and concerns associated with the corporate governance, leadership, transparency, funding and operations of his businesses and remained concerned that this poses a threat to the long-term prospects of Liberty Steel UK.” The report flagged a series of issues, saying: Gupta may have breached his duties as a company director; Liberty Steel’s auditors should be referred for investigation; Frequent changes of auditors and accounting deadlines represented “red flags”; Liberty Steel employees were sometimes unable to perform their roles and duties. Darren Jones, the Labour MP who chairs the business committee, said: “Steel is a national strategic asset, a foundation industry, and a sector which the UK cannot afford to lose. “The evidence we heard during our inquiry has highlighted serious problems with high-risk financial practices, weaknesses in audit, and about inadequate accountability and corporate governance arrangements within GFG Alliance. Sanjeev Gupta must urgently fix these problems if he is to be seen as a fit and proper owner of steel companies in the UK.” Liberty Steel was last month able to restart operations at its plants in Rotherham and Stocksbridge, both in south Yorkshire, after a partial £50m refinancing. However, the MPs said they still had concerns over the lack of transparency over the funding terms. Their report called for the government’s Insolvency Service to examine “whether, on the basis of the evidence we have received, Sanjeev Gupta may have acted in breach of his fiduciary duties as a company director in the United Kingdom”. Among their other findings, the MPs also said Liberty Steel employees were “prevented from performing their roles and duties adequately” because of a structure that centralised crucial information and control with Gupta and GFG. This was “unacceptable” for such a large group, the MPs said. GFG and Greensill Capital, they said, used “high-risk financial practices” to fund the businesses, including lending based on “future receivables” – invoices that did not yet exist. Investigations have found Greensill loaned money to Gupta’s company based on notional future invoices for products which it had not yet sold. The report confirmed previous findings that Greensill Capital had lent £300m more than it should have to GFG companies under the government’s coronavirus large business interruption loans scheme, which was supposed to be limited to £50m per company or group. They said the Financial Reporting Council (FRC), the audit regulator, should refer the auditors of Liberty Steel companies, King &amp; King, for investigation. The small firm had “a lack of capacity to complete audits effectively”, the report said. Milan Patel, a partner at King &amp; King, previously told the committee his organisation was capable of auditing an organisation of GFG’s size and said the firm had “many clients who have hundreds of millions of pounds of turnover”. A GFG Alliance spokesman said the group would “review and reflect upon” the report’s conclusions, and added that the Liberty Steel had “a secure pathway to recovery”. “We are disappointed that the report fails to recognise the significant role Sanjeev Gupta and Liberty Steel has played in saving and safeguarding thousands of UK jobs which otherwise would have been lost,” the spokesman said. “Mr Gupta has consistently met his obligations as a director of a private company, and with the restructuring and transformation committee has led GFG’s global restructuring since Greensill’s collapse which has enabled the refinancing of our Australian operations and laid the foundations to achieve secure financing across the group.” King &amp; King was approached for comment. Spokespeople for Grant Thornton, the administrators of Greensill Capital, and for Lex Greensill, the finance firm’s founder, declined to comment, as did the FRC. A government spokesperson said: “We are determined to secure a competitive future for the UK steel industry and in recent years have provided it with extensive support, including more than £600m to help with the costs of energy and to protect jobs. We are working closely with the sector to support its transition to a low-carbon future in a way that supports competitiveness, jobs and clean growth. “We recognise the critical role the steel industry plays in all areas of the UK and in our economy and will carefully consider the report’s recommendations.”The number of adults in England and Wales working for gig economy companies has reached 4.4 million and is now two-and-a-half times bigger than in 2016, according to a report highlighting the rise of insecure working practices. Almost 15% of working adults now get paid by platform such as Deliveroo, Uber and Amazon’s delivery arm Flex, compared with about 6% in 2016 and just under 12% in 2019, according to research for the TUC union carried out by the University of Hertfordshire and the consultancy BritainThinks. Prof Neil Spencer, who co-authored the research, said it indicated that gig work made up a substantial part of the UK’s economy and added: “I expect it to grow.” He said the research indicated an especially strong rise in such employment among couriers and those doing other driving work, as well as in errand and odd jobs services. Almost a quarter of workers have done platform work at some point, up from one in 10 in 2016, the study found. The term “platform work” covers a wide range of gig economy jobs that are found through a website or app, and accessed using a laptop, smartphone or other internet-connected device. In the past five years, the study found, the proportion of the working population carrying out platform work at least once a week has more than quadrupled in delivery and driving, and more than doubled in household services. Errand-running is up nearly three times. The authors found an overwhelming majority using platform work to supplement other forms of income, with gig workers increasingly likely to patch together a living from multiple different sources, leading to long working days. “Gig work can offer flexibility, but many workers also experience lower pay and poor working conditions,” said Spencer. Frances O’Grady, general secretary of the TUC, said millions of workers were having to rely on casual and insecure jobs to make ends meet, and often on top of other work. “Gig economy platforms are using new technologies to carry out the age-old practice of worker exploitation,” said O’Grady. “Too often gig workers are denied their rights and are treated like disposable labour.” A landmark ruling earlier this year forced Uber to guarantee its 70,000 UK private hire drivers a minimum hourly wage, holiday pay and pension, and it has signed a recognition deal with the GMB union. The UK’s pensions watchdog has also said that all gig economy firms should set up workplace retirement savings schemes. However, platforms including Deliveroo, Stuart and Amazon Flex say their workers are independent self-employed contractors without such basic rights. Even Uber’s UberEats takeaway couriers are not classed as workers, meaning they have fewer protections than its private hire drivers.People are being urged to open their windows for 10 minutes every hour when they are socialising at home in an attempt to stop the spread of Covid-19 as winter approaches. Doctors and scientists are backing a government-funded campaign across all media platforms to encourage people to ventilate their home to help disperse virus particles. It will include a short film asking people to “stop Covid-19 hanging around” and showing how the coronavirus can build up in an enclosed space where an infected person is talking to someone else, linger in the air and then get passed on to someone else. Dr Thomas Waite, a deputy chief medical officer for England, said: “Small but important actions can help protect us against Covid-19. Getting vaccinations, wearing a face covering in enclosed spaces and taking regular Covid-19 tests all make an important difference but it is also crucial that we don’t overlook the value of ventilation. “With winter fast approaching and people spending more time indoors, it’s vital everyone understands the importance of using ventilation, such as regularly opening windows – even if just for a few minutes – to keep the air moving and prevent infections.” The Department of Health and Social Care is asking people to take ventilation more seriously after a representative survey of 3,000 people in England found that 64% do not know that opening windows helps limit Covid’s spread and only 29% do so when visitors come to their home. It said: “With fewer restrictions in place this winter, following the success of the vaccination programme, the act of refreshing air in the home when people have visitors is even more important for everyone to keep infections down.” Dr Chaand Nagpaul, the leader of the British Medical Association, welcomed the campaign and belated communication with the public about the benefits of ventilation. But he added: “We believe action should go further than a campaign, by setting explicit standards for ventilation in public spaces, including the appropriate use of CO2 monitors to assess adequate levels of ventilation. “There should also be resources and guidance to businesses so they can implement changes.” Experts involved in the push on ventilation hope to prompt a much greater use of open windows, especially with much greater social mixing indoors set to occur before and during the festive period.Buongiorno, Antonio. On Tuesday the official Spurs Twitter account had briefly provoked online mirth by greeting their new head coach in Spanish, before hastily correcting the error and acclaiming him in his native language. Two days later the welcome inside Antonio Conte’s new home was unambiguous but Tottenham’s performance was the equivalent of speaking in tongues. Little about this club’s behaviour of the past two years has made much sense and, in a stadium yearning to be pleased, the task in hand was emphatically pronounced. This was a bizarre night’s football and much in keeping with the state of things. Conte has famously been reluctant to take jobs in mid‑season and it is especially unlikely he had ever envisaged debuting in a competition called the Europa Conference League, an event that was not really built for nights such as this. Much as he might try to shrug off the idea, little about the Italian has ever been low-key so an empty upper tier, with tickets held back due to the lack of enthusiasm this fixture had prompted until Nuno Espírito Santo’s dismissal, was jarring. Conte is box office material and that was the idea behind his appointment: here, at times, he found himself presiding over a pantomime. Conte had not worked with his players before Vitesse’s visit so perhaps the occasion’s lack of grandeur was a help: while anything bar a win would have put their onwards participation in serious trouble, the jeopardy was hardly so extreme as to override the getting-to-know-you process. He went full-fat by bending his new charges to his will: they would line up in his favoured 3-4-3 immediately and learn from the consequences, warts and all. Spurs’ first two goals, finished well by Son Heung-min and Lucas Moura, drew near-identical reactions from Conte. First a clenched fist, then a hand-slap with members of his entourage; then a quick straightening-up and intense conversation with Cristian Stellini, his assistant. While this was not Conte in full flight, the arm-whirling kept to a minimum, he never stopped micromanaging from the touchline. Within minutes of the start, he was bellowing at Son to push higher as an impressive, confident Vitesse attempted to play out; by the end he was straining at the pitch’s edge as Emerson Royal, whose performance was eye‑catching if eccentric, galloped upfield to remove the spectre of late pressure. What will Conte have learned? He saw flashes, during half an hour of coherent attacking, that his system may suit these players. Tottenham went 3-0 up and looked bound at that point to give Conte the most fitting of receptions, via an excellent move that saw Sergio Reguilón feed the surging Ben Davies for a cross-shot that, despite the PA’s valiant attempt to award Harry Kane the goal, was bundled over his own line by Jacob Rasmussen. Reguilón, the left wing-back, was perfectly positioned for regular ear warmings from the technical area in that opening period and could frequently be found further forward than any other home player; Davies, who may be a useful option at left centre-back, had exploited the formation’s possibilities fully by marauding enterprisingly in open play. Those glimmers of possibility apart, Conte might reflect things went as trailed. Even in the process of amassing their lead, Tottenham had not looked especially solid; whether Vitesse had enough quality to punish them was another question but, when Rasmussen and Matus Bero scored before half-time, the complexion changed irrevocably. Spurs’ back three had lacked protection when attacks broke down with Reguilón and Emerson stranded; Cristian Romero, the right-sided centre-back, was torridly exposed as a result and his red card for hauling down Loïs Openda had been signposted. Out of possession they looked skittish, uncertain and readily bent out of shape. “We lost a bit of confidence and have to work in this aspect,” Conte said. “When there is a possibility to kill the opposition you must kill. I don’t like these crazy games.” It all meant Vitesse could emerge feeling a comeback draw, more than achievable had they not incurred two late sendings‑off of their own, would have been fair. For Conte, though, the process was surely of longer-term importance. To that end he may have craved a more lively outing from Kane, who provided the assist,for Moura’s goal and produced some smart footwork before a shot against the bar from Son but never came close to scoring. The received wisdom is that Kane will be turbo-charged under a force of nature such as Conte: it may yet be but, while he bought some useful free‑kicks to remove some sting after Romero’s departure, the talisman was largely peripheral to Spurs’ better work. The hard work starts here: or at least after the international break, before which Conte will have minimal time to operate at a training ground he described as “the best in the world”. Spurs now have a manager who is firmly in that bracket himself but that does not entitle them to expect instant miracles. “Welcome Conte,” read a placard as he saluted the crowd before kick-off, a smattering of Italian flags also fluttering into sight. He clearly appreciated the touch but the past few days have shown it will take time for Conte and Spurs to become fluent in one another’s vernaculars.1) Harmony and points required for Villa Dean Smith’s reversion to a 4-3-3 formation against West Ham last weekend was undermined by the red card shown to Ezri Konsa on 50 minutes. The dismissal forced the early withdrawal of a visibly displeased Emi Buendía so Tyrone Mings could slot into defence, having started the game fuming on the substitutes’ bench to which he had been dropped. These obvious signs of player disquiet are to be expected but do little to dispel rumours that all is not harmonious behind the scenes at Villa Park. Smith takes his side to Southampton on the back of four straight defeats in which they have conceded an average of three goals per game. Their hosts are inconsistent and have just two league wins to their name, so there are far more difficult tests Villa could face. One suspects another defeat will seriously drain any of the remaining credit we keep hearing Smith has in the Villa bank. BG Southampton v Aston Villa, Friday 8pm (all times GMT) 2) Maguire’s form and fitness a derby concern Vibechester United go into the international break with their good work against Spurs and a draw at Atalanta potentially about to be obliterated in the Manchester derby. City do not have a No 9 to utilise but their forwards will spend 90 minutes dragging United’s defenders around as they move the ball quickly to create openings against a porous backline. One of the pillars at the back is Harry Maguire, but his form and fitness have forsaken him this season. The England centre-half was rushed back from a calf problem as Ole Gunnar Solskjær hoped his captain could shore things up at Leicester, a game United lost 4-2. Since Maguire’s return, United have conceded 13 goals in five games, a sign of the difficulties the individual and team have at the moment. He will almost certainly feature here, and it may have been better for him to miss the England games in the international break. WU Manchester United v Manchester City, Saturday 12.30pm 3) Conte’s need for new system to kickstart revolution Antonio Conte is a terrific appointment for Spurs. Though it’s fair to note that the title he won with Chelsea, he won when Liverpool and the Manchester clubs were rebuilding – and the overall standard of the league is much higher now – that is not where Tottenham are at the moment. Rather, they need a manager with the force of personality to inspire talented players who’ve looked jaded of late, and a CV that gives him the authority to savage whoever he wants, whenever he wants, if they don’t do what he wants – there would be few complaints if, as well as televising the match, broadcasters also screened his tête-à-têtes with Tanguy Ndombele. Otherwise, the fact that just five teams in the league have conceded more goals than Spurs and only Norwich have scored fewer tells us not just that signings are necessary – transfers do not solve everything – but that a new system is essential, and few managers pick and inculcate them as wisely as Conte. DH Everton v Tottenham, Sunday 2pm 4) Liverpool’s talent finally stopping Hammers in tracks It’s relatively infrequent that two sides on a roll meet one another, but this will be the case at the London Stadium so we should steel ourselves for a beautifully devastating collision. On the face of things, West Ham have the tools to compete: they defend with discipline, denying space around the sides and in behind; their midfield is athletic enough to compete physically; and in attack they have the means to target gaps left by Liverpool’s playmaking full-backs. But football is practice not theory and, for all the nice chatter about systems, the visitors have a significant and potentially insurmountable advantage: talent. Mohamed Salah is showing no signs of slowing down, while alongside him, Sadio Mané has rediscovered his goalscoring knack and Diogo Jota is also in the goals. It may well be that pattern of the game plays into West Ham’s hands, but Liverpool’s individuals are good enough to override it at any moment – and probably will. DH West Ham v Liverpool, Sunday 4.30pm 5) Clarets trying to nullify Blues in midfield Just as Arsenal seemed to spend entire seasons playing Charlton at home and Manchester United spent two decades playing teams whose managers were either friends or former players of Sir Alex Ferguson, Chelsea have reached that rarefied stage of at-oneness where they never seem to face a difficult opponent. But Burnley, as Sean Dyche keeps reminding us, are actually performing well, and will feel that last weekend’s 3-1 victory over Brentford represented a turning of the corner. Their 4-4-2 formation is a decent match-up for Chelsea’s 3-4-2-1, able to suffocate a midfield that can lack creativity and exploit the spaces behind the wing-backs and down the sides of the centre-backs, at the same time as giving Chelsea’s three centre-backs two centre-forwards to deal with, rather than the usual one. A home win remains the likely outcome, but if Burnley can avoid conceding early, they can make this a difficult afternoon for the European champions. DH Chelsea v Burnley, Saturday 3pm 6) Newcastle not putting off overhaul until January In the history of football, no club with the resources that Newcastle now have have failed to win things. But increasingly, it looks like their new owners have acquired the club without a precise plan of what to do – strange, given their profound love of football and the Toon – and relegation is a serious possibility. Below them, Norwich look doomed, while above them, though Watford could easily sink, Burnley, Leeds, Villa, Southampton and Brentford are far superior teams. It is possible that not-Saudi Arabia try to spend their way out of trouble in January, but convincing players of requisite quality to sign up for a relegation battle will be difficult, so they need to start winning and quickly. Though Brighton have started the season well, in Callum Wilson and Alain Saint-Maximin Newcastle have attackers good enough to cause problems and, though it’s fair to wonder if their defence can limit damage at the other end, as a team they cannot afford to keep losing games of this ilk. DH Brighton v Newcastle, Saturday 5.30pm 7) Arsenal finally showing signs of depth Mikel Arteta thinks Arsenal’s goalkeeper and defence could be together for “five or six years”, which would make them into an impressively cohesive unit. To go with their back five, Arsenal are starting to have credible options as backup, too. Nuno Tavares, a summer signing from Benfica, has replaced the injured Kieran Tierney in recent weeks and proven himself an able deputy despite his arrival going under the radar. Benfica’s academy is famed for creating talent but Tavares barely got a chance to shine in Portugal, playing 25 league games before leaving aged 21. The left-back’s ability has shone in recent games thanks to his work going both ways, making Tierney’s absence an irrelevance. The Scot could be fit to face Watford but Arteta has a decision to make on whether he sticks with Tavares or recalls the former Celtic man. Either way, it is good news for the future of Arsenal’s defence and proves the club finally have some strength in depth. WU Arsenal v Watford, Sunday 2pm 8) Gallagher continuing his rise with Palace Patrick Vieira has changed Palace into a completely new side since arriving in the summer; they possess style and flair, something that could not be said of the team moulded by Roy Hodgson. One of the key reasons behind the shift in dynamic can be found in central midfield where the Chelsea loanee Conor Gallagher is proving himself to be an exceptional player. He was instrumental in defeating Manchester City last time out, in addition to his man-of-the-match display at Arsenal the previous week. The 21-year-old pressed the City defence and midfield to stop them playing and utilised the ball effectively in attack, capping his performance with his third goal of the season. Gareth Southgate will be keeping tabs on the midfielder, who is aiming to avoid the Chelsea loan cycle and is going the right way about it by standing out in an exciting team. WU Crystal Palace v Wolves, Saturday 3pm 9) Gelhardt getting chance to replace Bamford Leeds go into their eighth consecutive match without Patrick Bamford and it is no exaggeration to say the 28-year-old striker’s Nike Phantom GTs have proved big boots to fill. Marcelo Bielsa has clearly struggled to find adequate cover for a player whose hold-up play and work ethic are almost as irreplaceable as the goals he provides. Dan James, Tyler Roberts, Jack Harrison and Rodrigo have all spent time deputising for Bamford, often swapping positions during the same game, while Joe Gelhardt was hugely impressive off the bench in their draw against Wolves. The 19-year-old Scouser was withdrawn at half-time during Leeds Under-21s’ midweek defeat at the hands of Salford in the Football League Trophy, a substitution that suggests he may be given another chance to test his Premier League mettle against Leicester. BG Leeds v Leicester City, Sunday 2pm 10) The importance of Mbeumo for Bees Last week’s shellacking at Burnley will have been a wake-up call for a side who have impressed almost everyone since promotion. Burnley’s well-organised and disciplined team kept Marcus Forss and Ivan Toney quiet, as Bryan Mbeumo was only fit enough for the bench. Mbeumo is expected to return, and his partnership with Toney will be key against the Premier League’s bottom side. Despite dominating possession at Turf Moor and having 12 shots, Brentford could muster only a single goal, as Mbeumo’s absence was felt by a team lauded for their play in the final third. They were also missing David Raya in Lancashire, with many thinking his long-term injury will have a big impact, but it was at the other end where the problems were most clear. Without Mbeumo’s attacking flair, the Bees showed they can be blunted quite easily and they need to reignite against a side who have conceded 25 goals in 10 games. WU Brentford v Norwich, Saturday 3pmScientists have successfully combined two existing cancer drugs to create a treatment for children diagnosed with deadly brain tumours. Diffuse intrinsic pontine glioma (DIPG), a rare and fast-growing type of brain tumour in children, can mutate and evolve to resist treatment with a single drug. There is currently no cure and many children found to have the disease die within months. Now a team of scientists and doctors at the Institute of Cancer Research (ICR), London, have found that using a skin cancer drug and a blood cancer drug together could be effective in combating DIPG. The breakthrough, described as “promising” by cancer experts, was revealed in the journal Cancer Discovery. Prof Chris Jones, a professor of paediatric brain tumour biology at the ICR, said: “We now have a much better understanding of the ways that DIPG brain tumours can mutate, and how they can evolve resistance to treatment with a single drug. It has allowed us to identify what we hope could become a successful new combination treatment for this terrible disease.” In the new research, lab tests found the combination of two existing cancer drugs – dasatinib for leukaemia and trametinib for melanoma – slowed the growth of DIPG tumours. The treatments are known as MEK inhibitors. These targeted drugs have been found to often work well on their own initially, only for cancers to evolve resistance to treatment. Until now, they had not previously been explored for children with DIPG – most of whom currently die within a year of diagnosis. Researchers evaluated trametinib in mice, and found that on its own it had little effect. They then then tried using dasatinib alongside trametinib to treat DIPG cells in the lab. They found that the combination of these two drugs, each with a different mechanism of action, “slowed down tumour growth”, the ICR said. The combination “had a much greater effect than would have been expected by adding the effects of the two drugs together,” it added. The combination managed to cut growth in DIPG cancer cells grown on mouse brain tissue by over 60%. “Our findings will need to be validated further in the lab, but because we are using existing approved drugs that we know are safe, we hope it won’t be too long before the new treatment enters clinical trials,” said Jones. “These promising results have emboldened us to keep analysing patient samples and modelling their treatment response, because it shows how specific some of the treatments are that we’re needing to develop.” Prof Kristian Helin, the chief executive of the ICR, said: “Cancer’s ability to evolve to become resistant to treatment is one of the biggest challenges we face in creating effective targeted cancer therapies. “It’s vital that we can continue to identify ways to overcome cancer’s ability to adapt and evolve in children’s cancers such as DIPG – so we can bring forward new treatments for young cancer patients who so desperately need them.” The research was funded by a range of cancer charities, including Christopher’s Smile, Abbie’s Army, Islastones Foundation, the CRIS Cancer Foundation, Cancer Research UK, Children with Cancer UK, and the Ollie Young Foundation.That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today. Please join us a little later for our next Covid blog but in the meantime you can follow along with all the latest developments here. Here’s a run down of today’s key stories. Europe is once again at centre of the Covid pandemic, the World Health Organization has said. Cases are at near-record levels and 500,000 more deaths are forecast by February. Uneven vaccine coverage and a relaxation of preventive measures have brought Europe to a “critical point” in the pandemic, WHO says. The UK has become the first country to approval an oral antiviral pill to treat Covid. Nearly half a million doses of molnupiravir, a pill that can be taken twice daily at home, are due for delivery from mid-November and will be given as a priority to elderly Covid patients and those with particular vulnerabilities, such as weakened immune systems. The drug will initially be given to patients through a national study run by the NHS. Central and Eastern Europe are grappling with spiralling coronavirus cases with several countries hitting new daily records in the regions, which have lower vaccination rates than the rest of the continent. Ukraine, Croatia, Slovenia and Slovakia reported their highest ever numbers of daily cases, while other countries registered the most infections in months.Most Central and Eastern European countries have vaccinated about half of their populations or less, which is lower than the European Union average of some 75%. Understanding the origins of Covid-19 remains a key focus of the Biden administration and that they will continue pushing for answers, The White House said. A study suggests UK Covid cases may have peaked for this year. The study, which estimates the number of Covid cases in the community from the information that users log on an app, found a clear decline in cases in under-18s since mid-October, with infection rates levelling off in most other age groups though still climbing in 55- to 75-year-olds. Latvia will allow businesses to fire workers who refuse to either get a Covid vaccine or transfer to remote work, from 15 November as the country battles one of the worst Covid waves in the EU. The new law allows businesses to suspend the unvaccinated without pay if they refuse to either get the Covid jab or, if possible, to get transferred to remote work. They can then fire the employees if they do not get the vaccine in three months of the suspension. US vaccine mandate for private sector workers to begin 4 January. President Joe Biden will begin enforcing the mandate that private-sector workers in the US be vaccinated against Covid or be tested weekly from 4 January. Cyprus expanded its Covid-19 vaccination booster shot drive on Thursday to include everyone aged 50 and over, as well as those who have been diagnosed as obese irrespective of age. The country began administering booster shots last month to people aged 60 and over. Around one in 10 people on Cyprus have been diagnosed with Covid-19 since the start of the pandemic with some 570 having died as a result of the virus, AP reports. Germany has reported a record number of new Covid cases since the outbreak of the pandemic. The Robert Koch Institute said 33,949 new cases had been registered in the last 24 hours, up from 28,037 daily cases a week ago. The previous record was 33,777 new cases on 18 December, 2020. The all-time high comes as the country’s federal Health Minister Jens Spahn is set to meet with the 16 state health ministers to discuss how to limit the spread of the virus in the winter as intensive care units in the hospitals are starting to fill up again and infections among children are skyrocketing. Germany hasn’t made coronavirus vaccinations obligatory for any professional groups, unlike some of its European counterparts. It’s Samantha Lock here, taking over from Nadeem Badshah for the next short while. Here’s a quick update on where Australia stands with Covid. The state of Victoria has recorded 1,343 Covid cases and 10 deaths, NSW has recorded 249 cases and 3 deaths as the border with Victoria opens. The Northern Territory town of Katherine has gone into a full 72-hour lockdown after the Top End recorded its first community transmitted Covid-19 case. The NSW premier Dominic Perottet and prime minister Scott Morrison are expected to make a joint press conference very soon. New York City mayor Bill de Blasio’s administration and unions representing over 70,000 workers reached a deal on Thursday on a Covid-19 vaccine mandate, including on exemption requests and leave policies, Reuters reports. New York City’s public-sector employee union District Council 37 said union members who have not provided proof of at least one dose of the vaccine will have the option to resign or take a leave of absence. In both cases, employees will maintain their health benefits. Employees without proof of vaccination who have either not submitted an application for an exemption or have been denied an exemption may be placed on unpaid leave beginning as of last Monday through November 30, the union said. It added that employees will remain eligible for health benefits during that time. Vaccine developer Novavax Inc said it has completed the submission process for emergency use listing of its Covid-19 vaccine candidate with the World Health Organization, Reuters reports. The company submitted to the health agency all modules required for the evaluation of NVX-CoV2373, its protein-based vaccine, days after receiving its first emergency use authorisation from Indonesia. “The first authorisation of the Covid-19 vaccine... will fill a vital need for Indonesia, which is the fourth most populous nation on earth and continues to work to procure sufficient vaccine for its population,” chief executive Stanley Erck said during an investor call. The company is also expecting regulators in countries including India and the Philippines to decide on its jab within weeks. Brazil registered 436 Covid-19 deaths on Thursday and 13,352 additional cases, according to data released by the country’s health ministry. The South American country has now registered a total of 608,671 coronavirus deaths and 21,849,137 total confirmed cases, Reuters reports. The US administered 426,728,092 doses of Covid-19 vaccines in the country as of Thursday morning and distributed 528,775,895 doses, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Those figures are up from the 425,272,828 vaccine doses the CDC said had gone into arms by Nov. 3, out of 525,071,855 doses delivered. The agency said 222,591,394 people had received at least one dose, while 193,227,813 people were fully vaccinated as of 6:00 a.m. ET on Thursday, Reuters reports. The White House said understanding the origins of Covid-19 remains a key focus of Biden administration and that they will continue pushing for answers. “It’s incredibly important for us to get to the bottom of this,” said spokesperson Karine Jean-Pierre. She said the US and its partners will continue to fight for transparency from China, Reuters reports. Scientists on the Zoe Covid study believe UK cases of coronavirus may have peaked for the year, a suggestion that prompted some experts to warn that it was too soon to know how the epidemic would play out in the weeks ahead. The study, which estimates the number of Covid cases in the community from the information that users log on an app, found a clear decline in cases in under-18s since mid-October, with infection rates levelling off in most other age groups though still climbing in 55- to 75-year-olds. The trends are based on 42,359 swab tests taken between 16 and 30 October and point to 88,592 daily symptomatic cases, a decrease of 4.7% on the previous week’s Zoe data. The numbers equate to one in 53 people in the UK currently with symptomatic Covid infections. Pacific islanders at risk of rising sea levels are struggling to be heard at the climate summit in Glasgow as the Covid-19 pandemic impacts travel from the other side of the Earth, Reuters reports. Only three Pacific leaders - of Palau, Fiji and Tuvalu - have travelled to the COP26 U.N. climate talks in Scotland to make speeches to press for deep cuts in greenhouse gases by major emitters. Usually, almost all the leaders of 14 Pacific island states come to the annual talks. “It has been a huge challenge,” Seve Paeniu, finance minister of Tuvalu, said of getting to Glasgow. He said it was the first time he had left the low-lying nation of about 12,000 people in almost two years. Paeniu faces a three-week quarantine on his return home to Tuvalu, one of the only countries in the world to have recorded zero cases of Covid-19. The statistics are stark. In the second wave of the pandemic those with Pakistani backgrounds were more than twice as likely to die from Covid-19 than those from white European backgrounds. For those of Bangladeshi heritage the risk was three- to four-fold. The disproportionate impacts of the pandemic have required policymakers to confront the question as to why some people have experienced far worse outcomes than others. Now, it seems, part of the explanation could be genetic. A gene has been found that alters the way that cells in the lining of the lungs respond to the Covid-19 infection. If you carry the low-risk genetic variant your cells will be quicker to batten down the hatches against the virus. With the high-risk gene this defence mechanism is more sluggish, doubling risk of respiratory failure and death. Apple Inc will remove its mask mandate for customers at many US retail stores from Friday as Covid-19 cases decline, Bloomberg News reported. More than 100 of the company’s about 270 stores across the country will scrap the requirement, with more stores adopting it gradually, according to sources. The mask mandate will continue for Apple’s retail employees, the report added. French health authorities reported 9,502 daily new Covid infections on Thursday, pushing the seven-day moving average of new cases to a six-week high. That average, which smoothes out daily reporting irregularities, rose to 6,226, a level unseen since 22 September, from a three-month low of 4,172 on 10 October. It had set a 2021 record of 42,225 in mid-April before falling to a 2021 low of 1,816 at the end of June. The cumulative total of new cases now stands at 7.19 million. In another sign the virus is ramping up again, the number of patients in intensive care with Covid rose by 3 in 24 hours to 1,099 and by 62 over a week. France also registered 49 new deaths from coronavirus, taking the total to 117,832. The seven-day moving average of new fatalities reached an almost one-month high of 34. Here is a recap of some of the main developments from today so far: Latvia will allow businesses to fire workers who refuse to either get a Covid vaccine or transfer to remote work, as the country battles one of the worst Covid waves in the EU. Taking effect from 15 November, the new law allows businesses to suspend the unvaccinated without pay if they refuse to either get the Covid jab or, if possible, to get transferred to remote work. They can then fire the employees if they do not get the vaccine in three months of the suspension. Vienna will tighten coronavirus restrictions to only allow those vaccinated or recovered from Covid to enter restaurants, go to hairdressers and attend bigger gatherings. From the end of next week, negative Covid tests will no longer be sufficient to enter restaurants, for services with close contact such as at hairdressers and for gatherings of 25 people or more, in the Austrian capital. Uneven vaccine coverage and a relaxation of preventive measures have brought Europe to a “critical point” in the pandemic, the World Health Organization said, with cases again at near-record levels and 500,000 more deaths forecast by February. Hans Kluge, the WHO’s Europe director, said all 53 countries in the region were facing “a real threat of Covid-19 resurgence or already fighting it” and urged governments to reimpose or continue with social and public health measures. Story here. Europe registered a 55% rise in Covid cases in the last four weeks, despite the availability of vaccines, which should serve as a “warning shot” to other regions, the WHO emergency director, Mike Ryan, said. The gene responsible for doubling the risk of respiratory failure from coronavirus has been identified by researchers. A study found that about 60% of people with south Asian ancestry carry the high-risk genetic signal, compared with around 15% of those with white European backgrounds. The findings could partly explain why people of south Asian heritage are more vulnerable to the disease. Story here. The World Health Organization called for vaccine makers to prioritise deliveries of Covid jabs to the Covax dose-sharing facility for poorer countries and said that no more doses should go to countries with more than 40% coverage. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO director general, said boosters should not be administered except to people who are immunocompromised. Tens of thousands of care home staff in England have not been fully vaccinated against coronavirus and are due to lose their jobs next week. The UK government has made it mandatory for staff in registered care homes in England to have both jabs as a condition of deployment, unless they are exempt for valid medical reasons. With the deadline next Thursday, sector leaders believe there may be an exodus of staff which they say will threaten safe care. The European Union’s drug regulator is in discussions with AstraZeneca over possible authorisation of booster doses of the drugmaker’s Covid vaccine, after it already gave the green light to mRNA booster shots. Joe Biden will begin enforcing his mandate that private-sector workers in the US be vaccinated against Covid or be tested weekly from 4 January, in a reprieve to companies struggling with labour shortages during the crucial US holiday season. US officials also said a requirement that federal contractors be vaccinated was moved back a month to the same date. Millions of workers in healthcare facilities and nursing homes participating in Medicare and Medicaid will also need to get their shots by 4 January. Carbon emissions have rebounded to near pre-pandemic levels, according to a study, with coal and natural gas emissions surging in the power and industry sectors even as transportation emissions remain low. To reach net zero in the next three decades, drastic CO2 reductions are needed, said the study’s lead author, Pierre Friedlingstein, a climate modelling researcher at the University of Exeter. “What needs to be done every year between now and 2050 is – broadly speaking – about the same [reduction] as we had during the Covid crisis,” he said. The UK became the first country in the world to approve the first pill designed to treat symptomatic Covid. The oral antiviral pill - molnupiravir - will be given as a priority to elderly patients with Covid and those with particular vulnerabilities, such as weakened immune systems. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the treatment would be a “gamechanger” for the most frail and immunosuppressed. Story here. The Latvian parliament on Thursday allowed businesses to fire workers who refuse to either get a Covid vaccine or transfer to remote work, as the country battles one of the worst Covid waves in the EU, Reuters reports. About 61% of Latvian adults are fully vaccinated, less than the EU average of 75%. The country was the first in the EU to return to a lockdown this autumn as Covid cases spiked, and has asked other EU members for medical help as makeshift Covid facilities are installed in halls and garages of its hospitals. The new law allows businesses to suspend the unvaccinated without pay if they refuse to either get the Covid jab or, if possible, to get transferred to remote work. They can then fire the employees if they do not get the vaccine in three months of the suspension. “There is a sufficient reason to believe that such person is not suitable for the position,” the Latvian government wrote in a submission to the parliament, explaining the reasoning. The new rules will take effect on 15 November as Latvia emerges from the lockdown, and there are exceptions for those with medical reason to not vaccinate, such as recent survivors of the disease. Previously, the vaccine mandate only applied only to workers in healthcare, education, and social care, the Latvian public broadcaster reported. Spain’s coronavirus infection rate rose above 50 cases per 100,000 people on Thursday, crossing back over the threshold considered “medium risk” by the health ministry just four weeks after dropping into low-risk territory. More than 80% of Spain’s population has been fully vaccinated against Covid and most restrictions on movement and socialising have been dropped, although masks remain mandatory in enclosed spaces. The infection rate, or incidence, as measured over the preceding 14 days, reached 51.6 cases per 100,000 people on Thursday. It had been edging higher since bottoming out at 41.9 cases per 100,000 people on 19 October. The health ministry added 3,291 cases to its tally of infections, bringing the total up to 5.02 million people since the pandemic began. The death toll rose by 15 to 87,477. A quarter of young teenagers in England have had a first dose of Covid-19 vaccine. An estimated 25.3% of 12 to 15-year-olds had received a jab as of 3 November, up from 20.1% a week earlier, UK government figures show. Take-up of vaccines among young teens in England has picked up pace in recent days, after jabs became widely available at vaccination centres across the country. Previously first doses were being delivered mostly in schools. England still lags some way behind Wales and Scotland, however. Some 45.9% of 12 to 15-year-olds in Wales are thought to have received a first dose, along with 54.7% in Scotland. Figures for take-up are calculated slightly differently in the three nations, with England and Wales using age groups based on their national immunisation databases, and Scotland using population estimates from the Office for National Statistics. Vaccines have been available to 12 to 15-year-olds in Scotland since 20 September, and have been delivered mostly at drop-in clinics and other community settings. The rollout in England also began on 20 September, but was initially delivered mainly by NHS teams in schools. This changed just before the half-term holiday, when parents and children became able to book a jab online at a local vaccination centre. Take-up in England is also likely to have been affected by the level of infection circulating in the community. A first dose of vaccine cannot be delivered to someone if they are within four weeks of testing positive for Covid, waiting for the results of a coronavirus test, or self-isolating. Around 9% of children in England in school years seven to 11 were likely to have tested positive for Covid-19 in the week to 22 October, the highest rate for any age group, according to estimates from the ONS. Meanwhile, there are signs that take-up of first doses among young teenagers in Scotland might be slowing, with the latest figure of 54.7% up only slightly from 53.2% a week earlier. NHS Wales began offering a first dose of vaccine to 12 to 15-year-olds from 4 October. Most vaccines are being given at vaccination centres, with a small number being delivered in schools. In Northern Ireland, 12 to 15-year-olds are being offered the vaccine in schools, but no figures have yet been published on the level of take-up. Vienna said it would tighten coronavirus restrictions to only allow those vaccinated or recovered from Covid-19 to enter restaurants, go to hairdressers and attend bigger gatherings. The new rules in the Austrian capital come as the daily surge in nationwide cases hit a record high for 2021, at almost 8,600 infections. “The situation in all of Austria is serious,” Vienna mayor Michael Ludwig told a press conference on Thursday as he announced the stricter rules for the capital. From the end of next week negative Covid tests will no longer be sufficient to enter restaurants, for services with close contact such as at hairdressers and for gatherings of 25 people or more, he said. Austria’s vaccination rate has stagnated at 64% of its almost 9 million people, below the EU-wide average of almost 67%. Two provinces have launched lotteries - with cars as prizes in the state of Burgenland - as part of their vaccination campaigns. So far, more than 11,400 people have died of Covid in Austria. Europe registered a 55% rise in Covid cases in the last four weeks, despite the availability of vaccines, which should serve as a “warning shot” to other regions, World Health Organization (WHO) officials said on Thursday. WHO emergency director Mike Ryan said that some European countries had “suboptimal vaccination coverage” despite availability. “It’s a warning shot for the world to see what is happening in Europe despite availability of vaccination,” Ryan told a news conference. WHO chief scientist Soumya Swaminathan said that Indian drugmaker Bharat Biotech’s Covaxin showed about 70% efficacy against the Delta variant. The WHO said on Wednesday that it has granted approval for its emergency use listing. Related: Europe once again at centre of Covid pandemic, says WHO Researchers have identified the gene responsible for doubling the risk of respiratory failure from coronavirus. About 60% of people with south Asian ancestry carry the high-risk genetic signal, a new study found. Scientists say this partly explains the excess deaths experienced in some UK communities, and the impact of Covid-19 in the Indian subcontinent, but stress that they are not suggesting that socioeconomic factors are not important for Covid risk and outcome. The gene is also common in the European population, occurring in about 15%. Study co-lead Prof James Davies, who worked as an NHS consultant in intensive care medicine during the pandemic and is an associate professor of genomics at Oxford University’s Radcliffe Department of Medicine, said: If you have the high-risk genotype and you get very unwell with Covid, there’s a 50% chance that that wouldn’t have happened to you had you had the lower-risk genotype. The study, published in Nature Genetics, also found that the gene does not alter immune cell function. Because the effect is in the biology of the lungs, people with the higher-risk version of the genes should respond fully to vaccination, the scientists say. Previous research had identified a stretch of DNA on chromosome three that doubled the risk of adults under the age of 65 from Covid. But it was not known how this genetic signal worked to increase the risk, nor the exact genetic change that was responsible. Study co-lead Prof Jim Hughes, professor of gene regulation at the University of Oxford, said: The reason this has proved so difficult to work out, is that the previously identified genetic signal affects the ‘dark matter’ of the genome. We found that the increased risk is not because of a difference in gene coding for a protein, but because of a difference in the DNA that makes a switch to turn a gene on. It’s much harder to detect the gene which is affected by this kind of indirect switch effect. The gene was identified using a combination of artificial intelligence and cutting-edge molecular technology, which visualises the structure of DNA inside cells in unprecedented detail. Dr Damien Downes, who led the laboratory work from the Prof Hughes research group, said: Surprisingly, as several other genes were suspected, the data showed that a relatively unstudied gene called LZTFL1 causes the effect. The researchers found that the higher-risk version of the gene probably prevents the cells lining airways and the lungs from responding to the virus properly. They hope drugs and other therapies could target the pathway preventing the lung lining from transforming to less specialised cells, raising the possibility of new treatments customised for those most likely to develop severe symptoms. Davies said: The genetic factor we have found explains why some people get very seriously ill after coronavirus infection. It shows that the way in which the lung responds to the infection is critical. This is important because most treatments have focused on changing the way in which the immune system reacts to the virus. The study also found that 2% of people with African-Caribbean ancestry carried the higher-risk genotype, meaning this genetic factor does not completely explain the higher death rates reported for black and minority ethnic communities. Davies added: Although we cannot change our genetics, our results show that the people with the higher risk gene are likely to particularly benefit from vaccination. Since the genetic signal affects the lung rather than the immune system it means that the increased risk should be cancelled out by the vaccine. A further 214 deaths within 28 days of a positive Covid test have been recorded in the past 24 hours in the UK, and another 37,269 new cases reported, according to the latest figures from the government dashboard. This compares with 41,299 cases and 217 deaths reported the day before. The World Health Organization has called for vaccine makers to prioritise deliveries of Covid jabs to the Covax dose-sharing facility for poorer countries and said that no more doses should go to countries with more than 40% coverage. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, the WHO director general, said boosters should not be administered except to people who are immunocompromised. “We continue to call on manufacturers of vaccines that already have WHO emergency use listing to prioritise Covax, not shareholder profit,” he said. The WHO listing of Indian drugmaker Bharat Biotech’s Covaxin on Wednesday contributed to vaccine equity, he said. The Eiffel Tower is clocking up visitor numbers not seen since Covid-19 kept most tourists away and ripped a deep hole in its finances, AFP reports. A substantial job on the “Iron Lady” has resumed after an interruption during the pandemic because of high lead levels, its operator said, with the aim of having the landmark look its best in time for the 2024 Paris Olympics. The Eiffel Tower had “a good month of October”, operator Sete said, thanks to tourists returning to Paris. It received an average of more than 20,000 visitors per day in October, up from 13,000 during the summer when curbs kept down numbers allowed into the tower’s lifts. October weekend numbers were better than in 2019, Sete said. One big factor was the return of American tourists, who accounted for 10% of overall visits, as well as tourists from nearby European countries. But overall visits this year are still only expected to reach 1.5 million, against 6.2 million in 2019, leaving the tower in dire financial difficulties. Sete expects to post a loss of €75m (£64m) this year, adding to 2020’s loss of €52m. Sete has arranged a near-€60m recapitalisation by the city of Paris, its main shareholder, plus a government-backed loan of €25m. To make up for the shortfall, the operator has asked for help elsewhere, notably from the French government. “Discussions are ongoing,” it said. The Eiffel Tower shut from mid-March to late June last year during the first Covid lockdown, and then again from end-October 2020 to mid-July of this year, its longest closure since the second world war. Tens of thousands of care home staff in England have not been fully vaccinated against coronavirus and are due to lose their jobs next week, PA Media reports. About 89.4% of staff working in older age care homes had received two vaccine doses as of 31 October, according to the latest figures from NHS England. The remaining 49,040 staff – about one in 10 of the total – had not been recorded as having received two doses at this point. The equivalent figure for staff in care homes for under-65s is 13.6% – 11,924 staff. The data suggests a total of 60,964 staff have not had a second jab or their second jab has not been reported as of the end of October. The total includes staff who cannot be vaccinated for valid medical reasons and those whose vaccination status is unknown, while there may also be a time lag in some vaccinations being reported. There is no published data on how many staff have self-certified as exempt or have applied for official proof. But it is understood that this is about several thousand staff. The UK government has made it mandatory for staff in registered care homes in England to have both jabs as a condition of deployment, unless they are exempt for valid medical reasons. The deadline for staff to be double-jabbed is next Thursday. Sector leaders believe there may be an exodus of staff which they say will threaten safe care. A government consultation on extending the mandatory vaccination condition to wider social care and NHS staff has recently concluded. The government is expected to make an announcement imminently. Among the UK’s under-18s, vaccine uptake is low, and there is a growing issue with misinformation spread on social media and at school. Is there anything a concerned caregiver can do? Emine Saner speaks to pro-vax parents with vaccine-hesitant kids to find out: The European Union’s drug regulator said on Thursday it was in discussions with AstraZeneca over possible authorisation of booster doses of the drugmaker’s Covid vaccine, after it already gave the green light to mRNA booster shots. “AstraZeneca is submitting data to us. Actually today they submitted a new package of data that could support an extension to use the booster,” the European Medicines Agency’s head of vaccines strategy, Marco Cavaleri, said at a briefing. “We will be discussing with them whether this data could be sufficient for [authorisation] or whether we need more evidence,” Cavaleri added. The new US workplace rule that requires tens of millions of Americans to get vaccinated for Covid or submit to weekly testing will exclude employees who work exclusively outdoors, according to regulatory filing by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration. An estimated 2.4 million healthcare workers will need to be vaccinated or replaced under a related rule issued by Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services. For more on that story, please see 12.59pm. Millions of people around the world have quit their jobs during the pandemic or are planning to. Emma Beddington has some advice for business leaders worried about the growing gaps in their workforce on how to encourage staff to stay. An extract from her column reads: In August, 4.3 million Americans resigned, beating the previous record, set in April. In the UK, the interminable carnival of Brexit gave us a summer of incredulous headlines like “HGV drivers paid more than CEOs”. (If only they were; it seems obvious that people who sleep in laybys, relying on baby wipes for personal hygiene and ruining their health to keep us fed, should earn more than anyone whose day involves nothing more arduous than some blue-sky thinking conducted from an ergonomic desk chair.) But the UK staffing crisis is deepening: more than a quarter of firms surveyed last month said a lack of staff was affecting their ability to operate. This new economic landscape, for all its real horrors, offers scope to do things differently. Employers need us; although we still require food, shelter, wifi and Netflix (the 2021 pyramid of needs), we seem to have entered a period of existential reckoning about the role of work in our lives. Tǎng píng (“lying flat”), the Chinese protest movement against a frenetic working culture that treats employees as expendable, profit-maximising units, is becoming a reasoned philosophy and gathering momentum. Of course, the thing about not caring quite so much is that it is the perfect negotiating position. For once, we have an opportunity to exercise our bargaining power, so what do we want? Justice, yes, but here are some more specific suggestions. Joe Biden will begin enforcing his mandate that private-sector workers be vaccinated against Covid or be tested weekly from 4 January, in a reprieve to companies struggling with labour shortages during the crucial US holiday season, Reuters reports. US officials on Thursday also said a requirement that federal contractors be vaccinated was moved back a month to the same date. Millions of workers in healthcare facilities and nursing homes participating in Medicare and Medicaid will also need to get their shots by 4 January. President Biden established the requirements to raise vaccination rates and get more people back to work. But in numerous meetings with companies and industry groups representing retailers, logistics companies, construction workers, executives asked the administration to delay the implementation deadline after the New Year, citing concerns about worker shortages. Employers will also not be required to provide or pay for tests and the rule offers medical and religious exemptions. Failure to comply with the mandate will result in an approximately $14,000 fine per violation with a scale that increases with several violations, senior administration officials said. They did not offer clarity on whether workers would be fired if they refused to get the shot or get tested. “It is important to understand that there are still so many workers who are not protected and remain at risk from being seriously ill or dying from Covid-19,” said a senior administration official. Biden initially set a deadline for 70% of US adults to get at least one shot by 4 July, but the White House missed the deadline as it underestimated growing anti-vaccine sentiment in the country fuelled by rightwing talk show hosts, anti-vaxxers, online disinformation campaigns and resistance from Republican lawmakers. Biden announced his mandate in September after his administration’s efforts reached a breaking point as the country was struggling to control the virus spread. A large swath of the population was refusing to accept free vaccinations despite a major rollout and incentive campaign from the administration involving 42,000 pharmacies, dozens of mass vaccination sites, free rides and free beer. In many parts of the country, it worked. Millions lined up for shots, and the vaccination rate increased nationwide with latest data showing 70% of US adults have been fully vaccinated and 80% have received at least one shot. But an average of 1,100 Americans are still dying daily from Covid, according to the latest US data, the vast majority of them unvaccinated. Covid has killed more than 745,000 Americans. The mandate is likely to unleash a frenzied legal battle that will hinge on a rarely used law and questions over federal power and authority over healthcare. “The new emergency temporary standard is well within OSHA’s authority under the law...there is a well established legal precedent for OSHA’s authority,” a senior administration official said, explaining the legal authority of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) to issue the rule. The mandate will apply to businesses with 100 or more employees and could affect roughly 84 million workers nationwide, the White House estimates. Goldman Sachs economists estimate that as few as 12 million people would be vaccinated as a result of the mandate. Along with Biden’s executive order that requires all federal workers and contractors be vaccinated, the rules cover 100 million people, about two-thirds of the US workforce, the White House estimates. The rule for healthcare workers covers 17 million employees across 76,000 healthcare facilities even though a majority of them are already vaccinated, data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) shows. The administration estimates the rule will prevent over 250,000 hospitalisations and save thousands of lives during the six months after it is implemented. Carbon emissions have rebounded to near pre-pandemic levels, according to a study released on Thursday, with coal and natural gas emissions surging in the power and industry sectors even as transportation emissions remain low. “We were expecting to see some rebound. What surprised us was the intensity and rapidity of the rebound,” said the study’s lead author Pierre Friedlingstein, a climate modelling researcher at the University of Exeter. In 2020, CO2 emissions fell by a record 1.9bn tons – a 5.4% drop – as countries locked down and economies ground to a halt. The new report, produced by the Global Carbon Project, forecasts emissions to rise by 4.9% this year. Among major emitters, China and India are expected to post higher emissions in 2021 than in 2019, while the US and Europe are expected to have slightly slower emissions. China was an outlier in 2020 because investments to spur pandemic recovery led to large increases in coal use, even as emissions in other countries dropped. The study projected total global emissions this year to reach 36.4bn tons of CO2. The report comes as global leaders meet at a UN climate conference in Glasgow, Scotland, to try to limit temperature rise to 1.5 degrees Celsius and avoid the most catastrophic effects of climate change. In order to do so, scientists say, CO2 emissions must reach net zero by 2050. Total global commitments to reduce emissions fall far short of meeting this goal. Already, deadly wildfires, hurricanes, and floods have become more frequent and more intense because of climate change, and sea level rises are locked in for centuries to come. To reach net zero in the next three decades, drastic CO2 reductions are needed, said Friedlingstein. What needs to be done every year between now and 2050 is – broadly speaking – about the same [reduction] as we had during the Covid crisis. At the current level of emissions, the researchers found, it will take only 11 years before the odds of staying within the Paris Agreement’s goal of 1.5C of warming will be no better than a coin toss. You can follow the Guardian’s live coverage of day four of Cop26 here: The mayor of Los Angeles has tested positive for coronavirus a day after attending a breakfast with the British prime minster, the leaders of the UK’s devolved nations and a host of other heads of government. Eric Garcetti, who is fully vaccinated, is now isolating in his hotel room and is “feeling good”, a message posted on the mayor of LA Twitter account said. Boris Johnson made a brief appearance at the event on Tuesday in the blue zone at Cop26 in Glasgow. Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, and her Welsh counterpart, Mark Drakeford, hosted the event, along with Northern Ireland’s first minister, Paul Givan, and the deputy first minister, Michelle O’Neill. Among those in attendance at the breakfast were the prime ministers of Norway, Sweden, Barbados and Vietnam, as well as the UK foreign secretarym Liz Truss. The presidents of Armenia, Costa Rica and Zambia also took part, as well as the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, and Glasgow city council leader, Susan Aitken. Everyone attending the Cop26 blue zone must take a lateral flow test each morning, and increased hygiene procedures are in place at the venue. Uneven vaccine coverage and a relaxation of preventive measures have brought Europe to a “critical point” in the pandemic, the World Health Organization has said, with cases again at near-record levels and 500,000 more deaths forecast by February. Hans Kluge, the World Health Organization’s Europe director, said all 53 countries in the region were facing “a real threat of Covid-19 resurgence or already fighting it” and urged governments to reimpose or continue with social and public health measures. “With a widespread resurgence of the virus, I am asking every health authority to carefully re-consider easing or lifting measures at this moment,” he said, adding that even in countries with high vaccination rates, vaccination could only do so much. The message has always been: do it all. Vaccines are doing what was promised, preventing severe forms of the disease and especially mortality … But they are our most powerful asset only if used alongside public health and social measures. Catherine Smallwood, WHO Europe’s senior emergency officer, said countries that had mostly lifted preventive measures had experienced a surge in infections. Vaccinations meant that they had not seen “the same rates of hospitalisation or mortality we would have otherwise expected”, she said. However, the more cases you have in crude terms, the more people will end up in hospital, and the more people will in the end go on do die. So there’s a very simple explanation for what’s going on. We have many susceptible individuals, including in high-vaccinated countries, and this is leading to unpredictable explosive outbreaks of Covid-19. And that’s not where we want to be right now. Kluge said case numbers in Europe and central Asia had risen by 6% – and deaths by 12% – in a week, with new daily infections surging by 55% over the past month. Europe and central Asia combined now accounting for 59% of all confirmed cases globally and nearly half of all deaths. Kluge said the most alarming development was the rapid increase in infections and deaths in older population groups, with hospital admission rates more than doubling in a week and 75% of fatal cases now occurring in people aged 65 years and over. If we stay on this trajectory, we could see another half a million Covid-19 deaths in Europe and central Asia by the first of February next year, and 43 countries in our region will face high to extreme stress on hospital beds. Kluge said insufficient vaccination coverage and the relaxation of public health and social measures were to blame. With a billion doses now administered in Europe and central Asia, vaccines “are saving thousands upon thousands of lives”, he said. But while 70% of people are fully vaccinated in some countries, barely 10% are in others. “Where vaccine uptake is low, in many countries in the Baltics, central and eastern Europe and the Balkans, hospital admission rates are high,” he said. Authorities must accelerate vaccine, rollouts including booster shots for at-risk groups, he said: Hospitalisation rates in countries with low vaccine uptake are markedly higher, and rising more quickly, than in those with higher uptake. Most people hospitalised and dying from Covid-19 today are not fully vaccinated. But public health measures such as test and trace, and social measures such as mask-wearing and social distancing, were equally vital, he said, adding that WHO estimates suggested that 95% universal mask use in Europe and central Asia we “could save up to 188,000 of the half a million lives we may lose” before February. When applied “correctly and consistently”, preventive measures “allow us to go on with our lives, not the opposite”, Kluge said. Preventive measures do not deprive people of their freedom, they ensure it. Covid passes showing proof of vaccination should be viewed as “a collective tool towards individual liberty”, he added. Belgium today reported a steep rise in Covid infections and hospitalisations, back to levels last experienced in October 2020, Reuters reports. It comes three days after the United States advised its citizens against travelling to the country that hosts EU and Nato headquarters. Data from Belgium’s Sciensano health institute showed 6,728 daily new cases on average in the past 14 days, up 36% from the previous week. An average of 164 patients with Covid were admitted to hospitals daily in the last seven days, a 31% increase, and 343 patients were in intensive care. Belgium went into its second coronavirus lockdown in October 2020, a few days after recording similar hospitalisation numbers. On Monday, the US Centres for Disease Control (CDC) added Belgium to its highest risk level, discouraging international travel there for those not fully vaccinated. “Because of the current situation in Belgium, even fully vaccinated travellers may be at risk for getting and spreading Covid-19 variants,” it said. There are nine other EU countries on the US maximum Covid risk level including Austria, Britain, Croatia, Greece and the Baltic countries. More than 8.6 million people in Belgium have been fully vaccinated, 74% of its population. But the country has eased face mask requirements in recent months and is now facing a fresh spike in infections as winter nears. So far in the nearly two years of the pandemic, Belgium has had one of the world’s highest per-capita mortality rates, mostly due to deaths in care homes in the first wave. A recent surge in Covid cases in the US state of Colorado has increased the number of unvaccinated patients needing care and prompted concerns that hospitals may have to ration services for other issues. Dr Anuj Mehta, a pulmonologist with Denver Health who serves on the governor’s expert emergency epidemic response committee, said: If you have been waiting for an elective procedure for the last 18 months and are finally scheduled – you’re vaccinated, you don’t have Covid – your procedure might still get canceled if a hospital is totally full. While this is a pandemic of the unvaccinated at this point – and the surges in the hospital are entirely being driven by unvaccinated folks – it is having a massive bleed-over effect onto the entire population. There are about 1,300 patients hospitalised with Covid in Colorado, according to the New York Times data; that’s the highest number since December 2020, when the figure rose above 1,900 patients. That number has increased by 15% over the last two weeks, the third largest increase in the country, and at a time when the national picture for the US is of a Delta variant surge that is firmly on the way down. The trend in Colorado can be attributed in part to the almost 40% of the state population that has not been vaccinated and people again gathering indoors without masks. It also shows that, despite the national downwards trends of infections, that regional surges can still happen that can cause havoc in state healthcare systems. Read the full story from Eric Berger here: European countries must work harder to prevent the coronavirus spreading further as deaths and new cases surge, the World Health Organization’s Europe head said on Thursday. Current transmission rates in 53 European countries are of “grave concern” and new cases are nearing record levels, exacerbated by the more transmissible Delta variant of the virus, Hans Kluge told a media briefing. We must change our tactics, from reacting to surges of Covid-19, to preventing them from happening in the first place. The region recorded a 6% increase in new cases last week of nearly 1.8m new cases, compared to the week before. The number of deaths rose 12% in the same period. On the current trajectory, Kluge said, another 500,000 Covid-related deaths could occur in the region by February next year. Today every single country in Europe and central Asia is facing a real threat of Covid-19 resurgence or already fighting it. Austria’s daily new coronavirus cases surged on Thursday towards the record set a year ago, making a lockdown for the unvaccinated ever more likely as the government struggles to convince holdouts to get their shot, Reuters reports. Roughly 64% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated against the coronavirus. That is in line with the EU average but it is also among the lowest rates in western Europe. Many Austrians are sceptical about vaccines, a view encouraged by the far-right Freedom party, the third-biggest in parliament. The number of new daily infections rose to 8,594 on Thursday, data from the interior and health ministries showed. That was a 32% increase from Wednesday and approaching the record of more than 9,000 set in November of last year, when the second of three nationwide lockdowns was ordered. Having taken a hands-off approach to restrictions last summer, the conservative-led government has since outlined a plan under which the unvaccinated population will be placed under lockdown, with restrictions on their daily movements, once 600 intensive-care beds are filled with patients with Covid-19. Under that incremental plan the unvaccinated, not including those who have recovered from a coronavirus infection, will be barred from cafes and restaurants once 500 intensive-care beds are occupied by patients with Covid. The number of those beds currently in use is 352 and rising by more than 10 a day. Of Austria’s nine provinces, Salzburg and Upper Austria accounted for 45% of Thursday’s new cases. Those two conservative-led provinces have by far the most infections relative to population. Upper Austria, a Freedom party stronghold, has Austria’s lowest vaccination rate. The UK has become the first country in the world to approve the first pill designed to treat symptomatic Covid. Having been approved by the UK medicines regulator, the “gamechanging” tablet – molnupiravir – will be given twice a day to vulnerable patients recently diagnosed with the disease. The Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) said the drug is safe and effective at reducing the risk of hospital admission and death in people with mild to moderate Covid who are at extra risk from the virus. Molnupiravir is for people who have had a positive Covid test and have at least one risk factor for developing severe illness, such as obesity, being over the age of 60, diabetes or heart disease. The MHRA said the drug should be taken as soon as possible following a positive Covid test and within the first five days. In clinical trials the pill, originally developed to treat flu, cut the risk of hospitalisation or death by about half. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, said the treatment as a “gamechanger” for the most frail and immunosuppressed. In a statement he said: Today is a historic day for our country, as the UK is now the first country in the world to approve an antiviral that can be taken at home for Covid. This will be a gamechanger for the most vulnerable and the immunosuppressed, who will soon be able to receive the ground-breaking treatment. Developed by the US drug company Merck, molnupiravir is the first dedicated oral antiviral medication for Covid. It works by interfering with the virus’s replication. It prevents the virus from multiplying, keeping levels low in the body and therefore reducing the severity of the disease. Merck said that should make it equally effective against new variants of the virus as it evolves in the future. According to data published in a press release and not yet peer-reviewed, clinical trials on 775 patients in the study found: 7.3% of those given molnupiravir were hospitalised that compares with 14.1% of patients who were given a placebo or dummy pill there were no deaths in the molnupiravir group, but eight patients who were given a placebo in the trial later died of Covid Trial results suggest molnupiravir needs to be taken soon after symptoms develop to have an effect. An earlier study in patients who had already been hospitalised with severe Covid was halted after disappointing results. Diwali celebrations have been taking place in south Asia, amid concern that they may cause another rise in Covid cases. After months of delay, the World Health Organization (WHO) has finally given emergency approval to Covaxin, the Indian domestically developed Covid vaccine, which was rolled out as part of India’s vaccination drive. Germany reported its highest-ever daily new infection tally of 33,949, ahead of a two-day meeting of state health ministers. There’s a note of caution on the numbers, though – they were likely inflated by a public holiday in parts of Germany on Monday that led to a delay in data-gathering. The previous record was on 18 December, with 33,777 cases. The German health minister, Jens Spahn, has warned that Germany is developing a “massive” pandemic of the unvaccinated. The total number of Covid-19 cases in Ukraine has exceeded 3 million, with more than 70,000 deaths, the health ministry said today. It also registered a record daily high of 27,377 new coronavirus infections over the past 24 hours Slovakia reported 6,713 new Covid-19 cases, the highest daily tally since the pandemic hit last year. Bulgaria, with the lowest vaccine uptake in the EU, saw 4,922 new cases. Hungary reported a jump in daily Covid-19 infections to 6,268 with the government saying that the daily tally had more than doubled from the middle of last week. Europe has been warned by the World Health Organization that due to rising case numbers, it could record “another half a million Covid-19 deaths” by February. In the UK the Office for National Statistics estimates that 1.2 million people in private households were experiencing self-reported long Covid as of 2 October 2021. This is just shy of 2% of the population. A separate study has recorded its highest overall Covid infection rate ever for England, at 1.72%. China is on high alert at its ports as strict policies on travel in and out of the country are enforced to reduce Covid risks amid a fresh domestic outbreak. A poll in the US found that Americans are increasingly turning their attention away from the coronavirus and focusing it elsewhere. Just 12% of US adults rated public health issues such as the coronavirus as a top national priority, even as the country continues to experience over 1,000 deaths per day. South Korea has opened Covid-19 quarantine centres to house potentially thousands of teenagers ahead of the country’s annual ritual of eight-hour college entrance exam in two weeks. The Lesotho government’s plans to implement a Covid passport system this week are being undermined by widespread fraud involving certificates being sold to unvaccinated people. The Covid pandemic has caused the loss of 28m years of life, according to the largest-ever survey to assess the scale of the impact of the pandemic. The enormous toll was revealed in research, led by the University of Oxford, which calculated the years of life lost (YLL) in 37 countries. On the site today there is live UK politics with Andrew Sparrow – which has been incredibly eventful this morning. Bibi van der Zee is covering Cop26 live. Lucy Campbell will be here to take over from me shortly, and I’m off to host our Thursday quiz. See you tomorrow. In the UK there is an Office of National Statistics (ONS) bulletin this morning, and they find that an estimated 1.2 million people in private households were experiencing self-reported long Covid as of 2 October 2021. This is just shy of 2% of the population. The ONS say that of those reporting long Covid symptoms, about a third (35%) were experiencing these symptoms for at least a year after their first suspected infection. Symptoms adversely affected the day-to-day activities of about two-thirds of those with self-reported long Covid. Symptoms reported include fatigue (55%) shortness of breath (39%) loss of smell (33%) difficulty concentrating (30%) The study found that self-reported long Covid was more common among those aged 35 to 69 years, females, people living in more deprived areas, those working in health or social care, and those with another health condition or disability. The ONS noted that compared with the survey the previous month, self-reported long Covid was higher among young people aged 12-16 or 17-24 years. There’s a World Health Organization briefing about Covid in Europe going on at the moment. I’ll have a full report in due course, but just for now there’s quite an alarming message coming out about the prospects for a winter wave sweeping the continent. Americans are increasingly turning their attention away from the coronavirus and focusing it elsewhere, especially toward rising consumer prices and other economic areas where Democrats are less trusted, Reuters/Ipsos polling shows. While Covid-19 continues to claim more than 1,000 lives a day in the US, the 18-22 October national opinion survey shows the country’s fixation on public health and diseases has faded since the beginning of the year. In October, just 12% of US adults rated public health issues such as the coronavirus as a top national priority, down from 20% in February. Chris Kahn reports for Reuters that it is a dramatic shift in the political landscape in just one year. Joe Biden and his Democratic party won the White House and control of Congress last year on a campaign focused on the pandemic and the former president Donald Trump’s handling of it. As is often the case at the moment, we have two other live blogs running alongside this, which may be of interest to you. Andrew Sparrow is live with our UK politics blog. There is more than enough fallout from yesterday’s vote to demolish the oversight of MPs’ behaviour to keep him busy today. Also live is my colleague Bibi van der Zee, who continues our coverage of the Cop26 conference in Glasgow. You can find that here. I will be continuing here with the latest coronavirus-related news from the UK and around the world. I know it is early for a Christmas tale, but Reuters have this from Naples this morning. The Three Wise Men will have something extra to carry along with gifts of gold, frankincense and myrrh when they travel to visit Baby Jesus this year: Covid-19 health passes. Craftsmen along San Gregorio Armeno street in the historical centre of Naples, Italy, are famous for using art to adapt their nativity scenes to the times they are living in. “Last year was the year of the masks, so the figurines of Mary, Joseph and the Three Wise Men were wearing masks. This year it seemed like the right thing to keep following this direction,” said craftsman Marco Ferrigno. The Green Pass, which shows someone has received at least one vaccine dose, tested negative or recently recovered from the virus, is a requirement in Italy for travel on much inter-city transport and to access a range of cultural and leisure venues. “Because the Three Wise Men have to take a long journey to the crib, I gave them all their own Green Pass so that they have the proper documents for travelling,” said Ferrigno. Slovakia reported 6,713 new Covid-19 cases, the highest daily tally since the pandemic hit last year, data from Health Ministry showed. Reuters note the country of 5.5 million has 1,890 patients in hospital, including 327 in a serious condition. The ministry said that 79% of the hospitalised people were not vaccinated. In Kiev, the director of hospital number four, Tetiana Mostepan, says: “Five of our patients have died since yesterday.” In the hospital’s morgue, rows of bodies in black plastic bags testify to the deadly surge in infections. The hospital’s 455 Covid beds are 70% full. Among those hospitalised, “only 3-4%” were vaccinated, Mostepan says. A despatch from Agence France-Presse today says that Ukraine, one of Europe’s poorest countries, has been hit by a huge rise in infections with the more contagious Delta variant. The country of about 40 million reported 720 new daily Covid deaths on Wednesday, the third-highest number in the world after the US and Russia. Ukrainians have access to three vaccines – AstraZeneca, Pfizer and the Chinese-made CoronaVac – with about 180 vaccination centres in Kiev alone, including in shopping malls and at the main train station. But so far only 7.6 million people in Ukraine have been fully vaccinated – less than 20% of the population – despite a strong government push and restrictions on the unvaccinated. Some Ukrainians even prefer to pay for fake certificates, and police have opened hundreds of cases into false vaccination documents. “It is distrust of the state,” says Mostepan. “Covid is preventable, so why not prevent it instead of listening to all sorts of nonsense?” she says. Last week, President Volodymyr Zelensky pleaded with Ukrainians to ignore the noise and get vaccinated. “Switch off social networks and turn on your brain,” he said. Here’s a reminder of our science editor Ian Sample’s overnight story that England’s Covid infection rates doubled in over-65s between September and October: The study, which analyses swabs from a representative group of people in the community whether they have symptoms or not, recorded its highest overall infection rate ever for England, at 1.72%. The study launched in May 2020, after the peak of the spring wave that year and, because of a pause in data-taking, missed the peak of last winter’s wave. By far the sharpest rise in cases between September and October was seen in the south-west, home to the 10 lower-tier local authorities with the highest rates in the country. According to the study, prevalence of the infection almost quadrupled from 0.59% in September to 2.18% in October in areas around Bristol, Swindon and Gloucester. Prof Paul Elliott, director of the React study, said the study could not explain why cases had surged in the south-west, but added that the rise might be related to issues at the Immensa lab which issued tens of thousands of false negative test results in the region, leading infected people to believe they were safe to mingle. The UK Health Security Agency is investigating how the lab failed to spot the problem before the public did. Read Ian Sample’s full report here: England Covid infection rates doubled in over-65s between September and October Bulgaria is also in the grip of a new Covid wave. There were 4,922 new cases yesterday, and the government said there were 954 new hospitalisations, of which 89.5% of people had not been vaccinated. Bulgaria has the lowest uptake of Covid vaccination in the EU, with only 28.5% of eligible adults having received at least one dose, well below the overall EU figure of 80.5%. A very quick snap from Reuters here just to note that Hungary reported a jump in daily Covid-19 infections to 6,268 on Thursday, with the government saying that the daily tally had more than doubled from the middle of last week. Speaking of Germany, it has reported 33,949 new Covid-19 infections, the highest daily increase since the start of the pandemic last year, ahead of a two-day meeting of state health ministers which starts today. There’s a note of caution on the numbers though – they were likely inflated by a public holiday in parts of Germany on Monday that led to a delay in data-gathering. The previous record was on 18 December, with 33,777 cases. Helge Braun, chief of staff to acting chancellor Angela Merkel, said that German states needed to make faster progress in giving older people booster shots. “That should have happened long ago,” he told broadcaster ZDF on this morning. Maria Sheahan reports for Reuters that as of Wednesday, only 6.7% of people over 60 in Germany had received a booster shot, according to data from the Robert Koch Institute for infectious diseases. Older people were also more likely to be admitted to hospital with Cover-19. The number of infected people in hospital stood at 3.62 per 100,000 on Wednesday – up from 1.65 in early October – but at 8.27 per 100,000 for those over 60. Here’s a reminder of the latest picture of case numbers across Europe. You can see the surge of cases in the east of the continent, but also a concerning change of colour from recent days for Germany and Denmark, as Belgium and the Netherlands seem to be in the foothills of their next Covid wave. The prevalence of cases per 1 million people in Ireland and in the UK has dipped slightly. The Lesotho government’s plans to implement a Covid passport system this week are being undermined by widespread fraud involving certificates being sold to unvaccinated people. Covid-19 vaccination certificates are being sold for less than £20 by unscrupulous health workers to the largely vaccine-averse population in Lesotho, where there has been little positive campaigning around the jabs. The prime minister, Moeketsi Majoro, announced in October that from this week, restaurants, bars, nightclubs, gyms and sporting facilities would only admit people who had a Covid-19 vaccination certificate. It led to an immediate increase in the numbers presenting for vaccination, with queues at health centres, but has also sparked a burgeoning hidden market in fraudulent certificates. The latest scam follows a reported jabs-for-cash scandal involving health workers from Motebang hospital in Leribe, about 50 miles north-east of the capital, Maseru. The health workers allegedly sold Covid-19 jabs to ineligible people, among them expatriates, for about £19, during a period when the government was still vaccinating frontline workers and vulnerable people. Read more of Silence Charumbira’s report from Maseru: Vaccine certificates-for-sale scam undermines Lesotho’s Covid effort It is the second year that Diwali will be taking place under the shadow of the coronavirus pandemic. That obviously hasn’t stopped people celebrating, or creating scenes of light and great beauty across south Asia. Varying degrees of Covid prevention measures are being taken by different countries in the region, with many devotees wearing face masks while they celebrate. The Indian prime minister, Narendra Modi, has returned to India from the Cop26 conference in Glasgow, and used the opportunity to visit troops in Jammu &amp; Kashmir’s Nowshera district, saying: “It is because of you all that people of our country can sleep peacefully and there is happiness during festivals.” India is currently experiencing a respite from Covid, with the seven-day average number of new cases detected at about 13,000, down from a peak of nearly 400,000 at the height of May’s crisis. South Korea has opened Covid-19 quarantine centres to house potentially thousands of teenagers ahead of the country’s annual ritual of eight-hour college entrance exam in two weeks. The quarantine centres will house confirmed Covid-19 cases and possibly any students who come into contact with an infected person over the next two weeks. The highly competitive exam is seen as a life-defining event, as success and a good college place are considered the main route to a prosperous job in the future. It was unclear how many, if any, students were in the quarantine centres on Thursday. The Education Ministry is not expected to disclose the number of quarantined students who plan to take the test until closer to the exam date of 18 November. On the test day, there will be 112 centres specifically for students who have been in quarantine and 33 hospitals and treatment centres will prepare special rooms for students with the virus, on top of the regular 1,255 test centres. Around 510,000 final-year high school students, about 40% of the total across the country, are scheduled to take the lengthy test, which encompasses subjects ranging from languages to mathematics and science. The total number of Covid-19 cases in Ukraine has exceeded 3 million with more than 70,000 deaths, the health ministry said today. Pavel Polityuk reports for Reuters that the ministry said it had registered a record daily high of 27,377 new coronavirus infections over the past 24 hours, exceeding the previous high of 26,870 on 29 October. Ministry data also showed 699 new coronavirus-related deaths. Ukraine has registered record-high rates of new cases and deaths from the coronavirus in recent weeks, and the government has imposed strict lockdown restrictions to curb new infections. Several thousand people blocked traffic in the centre of the Ukrainian capital Kyiv on Wednesday in a protest against coronavirus restrictions and mandatory vaccinations. Vaccines have become mandatory for some state workers, and in “red” zone areas including Kyiv only vaccinated people or those with negative COVID test results are allowed into restaurants, gyms and on public transport It is Martin Belam here in London taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. I’ll bring you any quotes from UK business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng doing the early morning media round in the UK for the government if he talks about coronavirus, although I suspect Cop26 and Tory sleaze will be the dominant themes. Here’s the latest Covid numbers for the UK. Indians across the country began celebrating Diwali, the Hindu festival of lights, on Thursday amid concerns over the coronavirus pandemic and rising air pollution. Diwali is typically celebrated by socialising and exchanging gifts with family and friends. Many light oil lamps or candles to symbolise a victory of light over darkness, and fireworks are set off as part of the celebrations. Last year, celebrations in India were upended by a renewed spike in Covid infections, but festivities this year seem to be back, AP reports. Even though the government has asked people to avoid large gatherings, markets have been buzzing ahead of Diwali, with eager crowds buying flowers, lanterns and candles. As dusk fell on Wednesday, over 900,000 earthen lamps were lit and kept burning for 45 minutes in the northern city of Ayodhya in Uttar Pradesh state, retaining the Guinness World Record it set last year. As part of the Diwali celebrations, the city last year lit 606,569 oil lamps. The festival is being celebrated at a time when India’s pandemic crisis has largely subsided, however some experts have warned that the festival season could bring a renewed spike in infections if health measures are not enforced. China is on high alert at its ports as strict policies on travel in and out of the country are enforced to reduce Covid risks amid a fresh domestic outbreak, Reuters reports. The National Immigration Administration (NIA) said on Thursday it would continue to guide citizens not to go abroad for non-urgent and non-essential reasons. China aims to ensure no outbreaks among people arriving from overseas for the Winter Olympics, according to a recent state television report, citing Huang Chun, an official on the Beijing organising committee for the event. Authorities will strive to avoid failures in virus control for the Games that would then disrupt the event or lead to clusters among residents, Huang said. After months of delay, the World Health Organisation (WHO) has finally given emergency approval to Covaxin, the Indian domestically developed Covid vaccine which was rolled out as part of India’s vaccination drive. The approval is good news for Indian travellers who received the vaccine, as it will now be recognised to allow entry into countries such as the US. “The Technical Advisory Group, convened by WHO and made up of regulatory experts from around the world, has determined that the #Covaxin vaccine meets WHO standards for protection against #COVID19, that the benefit of the vaccine far outweighs risks &amp; the vaccine can be used across the planet,” tweeted WHO on Wednesday. The decision by the Indian government back in January to begin administering Covaxin, developed by Indian pharmaceutical company Bharat Biotech, was initially mired in controversy over concerns it was being rolled out before all the efficacy data had been released. It was administered in much smaller quantities than AstraZeneca, the only other approved vaccine in India. Figures from September show that Covaxin accounted for just over 12% of jabs in India. Data released in July showed that Covaxin has an efficacy of 77.8% against Covid. On Wednesday, health minister Mansukh Mandaviya tweeted: “This is a sign of a capable leadership. This is the story of Modi ji’s resolve. This is the language of the faith of the countrymen. This is a Diwali of self-reliant India. Thanking @WHO for granting emergency use listing (EUL) to Made-in-India #Covaxin,.” Hello and thanks for joining us back on our global Covid blog. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be reporting from Sydney, Australia, to bring you all the latest developments from around the world. In promising news as the world looks towards vaccinating all its citizens, The World Health Organization (WHO) has granted an emergency use license to a coronavirus vaccine developed in India, offering reassurance for a shot that was authorised by the country’s regulators long before advanced testing was completed to prove it was safe and effective. Covaxin, the Indian domestically developed Covid vaccine, was rolled out as part of India’s vaccination drive. A recent study found a record prevalence of Covid in England throughout October. Researchers at Imperial College London warn the virus is spreading from schoolchildren into more vulnerable age groups, noting that rates had doubled in older groups compared to September, a concerning sign as the government races to give booster shots to the most vulnerable. “We did see a doubling in that group, and clearly that’s the worry,” Paul Elliott, the Imperial epidemiologist who leads the programme, told reporters. The Covid pandemic has caused the loss of 28m years of life, according to the largest-ever survey to assess the scale of the impact of the pandemic. The enormous toll was revealed in research, led by the University of Oxford, which calculated the years of life lost (YLL) in 37 countries. Germany is enveloped in a “massive” pandemic of the unvaccinated, health minister says. Jens Spahn has warned: “The pandemic is far from over. We are currently experiencing a pandemic of the unvaccinated, which is massive. There would be fewer coronavirus patients on intensive care units if more people would let themselves be vaccinated.” The US has administered 425,272,828 doses of Covid-19 vaccines in the country as of Wednesday morning and distributed 525,071,855 doses, the CDC said. Turkey will begin administering booster shots to people who have received two doses of the Pfizer Inc/BioNTech coronavirus vaccine, its health minister Fahrettin Koca said. France reports highest daily cases since mid-September. Health authorities reported 10,050 daily new Covid-19 infections on Wednesday, the first time the tally has topped 10,000 since September 14. The UK recorded another 41,299 Covid cases, and a further 217 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, in the latest 24-hour period. This is compared to 293 deaths and 33,865 positive infections reported a day prior. UK launches trial of drug to tackle fatigue in long Covid patients. The first trial of a drug, called AXA1125, is set to target the fatigue and muscle weakness experienced by more than half of people with long Covid/ The drug targets cellular power plants called mitochondria, which it is thought could be dysfunctional in the subset of long Covid patients with severe fatigue. The US is set to begin giving Covid vaccines to children aged five to 11, with roughly 28 million school-age kids eligible for the shots that provide protection against the illness.A giant 7.9kg potato found in a New Zealand couple’s overgrown garden may set a new world record for the largest of its kind ever to be discovered. Colin and Donna Craig-Brown were doing a spot of weeding in their Hamilton back yard, when Colin’s hoe hit something below the ground. “So I said to Donna this must be one of those white kūmara (sweet potato) that we grew,” he told Stuff, “because some of them just grew massive here.” He tasted it, discovered it was potato and set about excavating it from the soil. The bulbous tuber weighs the same as an extra-large turkey and would exceed the allowance for check-in luggage. The couple named their new discovery Doug, and have grown pretty fond of him. “We put a hat on him. We put him on Facebook, taking him for a walk, giving him some sunshine,” Colin told the NZ Herald. “It’s all a bit of fun. It’s amazing what entertains people.” The current Guinness world records entry for the heaviest potato is a 2011 specimen found in Britain, that weighed in at just under 5kg. The couple say they’ve applied to Guinness to have Doug recognised and are waiting to hear back. The couple could not recall when they last planted potatoes in their garden, but guessed it must have been about two or three years ago. Colin thinks perhaps Doug self-seeded. “It’s a mystery to me,” Colin said. “It’s one of nature’s little pleasant surprises.” “It’s fair to say our veggie garden can sometimes get a bit feral. There are some parts of the garden you need to pack a lunch and advise your next of kin before heading in to,” he told Stuff. The couple have wrapped Doug in plastic bags to keep him from drying out, and Colin, an amateur brewer, says he is now keen to turn the oversized tuber into vodka.Opening arguments in the trial of the three white men accused of murdering Ahmaud Arbery are set for Friday, as members of Arbery’s family described the decision to impanel an almost entirely white jury as “devastating”. Gregory McMichael, 67, his 35-year-old son Travis McMichael and their neighbor William “Roddie” Bryan, 52, have pleaded not guilty to murder and other offenses in a case laced with allegations of racism. On Wednesday, Judge Timothy Walmsley empanelled a jury of 11 white members and one Black member despite acknowledging the appearance of “intentional discrimination” by defense lawyers, who struck 11 potential Black jurors from the final jury pool of 48. Jury selection had taken 11 days. Speaking on Wednesday outside the Glynn county courthouse in Georgia, Arbery’s mother Wanda Cooper-Jones said she found the final jury’s racial makeup “devastating” but was confident the jury would “make the right decision”. Arbery, a 25-year-old Black man, was killed while out jogging in the coastal town of Satilla Shores, Georgia. None of the men involved were charged until eyewitness footage was made public months later, shortly before the murder of George Floyd in Minneapolis, prompting widespread protests. Prosecutors had urged Walmsley, who is overseeing the trial in south Georgia, to reverse the striking of the eight Black potential jurors, whom they said had been intentionally targeted over race. A landmark 1986 US supreme court decision in Batson v Kentucky ruled it unconstitutional for potential jurors to be struck solely based on race or ethnicity. But Walmsley, while acknowledging the apparent “intentional discrimination”, cited limitations spelled out in the supreme court precedent and pointed to defense lawyers’ justifications, which did not mention race or ethnicity. Glynn county, Georgia, where the trial is taking place and where Arbery was killed, is 26% Black and 69% white. Arbery was shot dead in February 2020 when the three men pursued him while he was out on a run, claiming they suspected his involvement in a series of burglaries in the neighborhood. Arbery had been recorded on surveillance footage entering and leaving a semi-constructed house in the town that day, but no evidence has linked him to any offense. The McMichaels, both carrying firearms, attempted to corner Arbery in a roadway using their pickup truck. Travis McMichael then fired three times with a shotgun. All three men are expected to argue the shooting occurred in self-defense and will cite provisions under Georgia’s now defunct citizen’s arrest law to justify their actions. As well as the state criminal charges, the three accused men face federal hate crimes and attempted kidnap charges in a separate case brought by the US justice department. Their federal trial is due to start in February 2022.When News Corp unveiled plans for Piers Morgan to headline an international prime time talk show we flippantly said “Move over Andrew Bolt, Alan Jones and Peta Credlin – there is a new conservative loudmouth in town”. Sadly, for one of these Australian conservative loudmouths at least, our prediction appears to have come true. The 80-year-old Jones revealed in a fiery post on Facebook on Thursday he had not been offered another contract by Sky News Australia – and hours later he was saying his final goodbye after a 17-month TV stint which never matched up to the heights of his radio career. Ahead of Jones’ swan song, Bolt told his listeners Jones had not been sacked and he had been offered other roles at the company. Jones, Bolt suggested, had been moved aside to make way for the biggest loudmouth of them all in the Sky After Dark schedule. “Thing is we’ve also signed up Piers Morgan,” Bolt said while eulogising Jones. “There’s an international deal; we’re part of that. And we have to find room for Piers Morgan – and also pay for him. “We’re not giving into cancel culture. How can you say that when we’ve just hired Piers Morgan for goodness sake?” We asked Sky News boss Paul Whittaker if Bolt is on the money. “We’ll be announcing our 2022 programming lineup in due course,” a spokesperson said. Poetic farewell and Facebook plea The signs were there in August that Jones was on the nose at Sky when the channel rolled out its 25th anniversary celebration with full-page ads in the Daily Telegraph and Jones was conspicuous by his absence. He was the only Sky After Dark figure not to be featured. The ad appeared a month after the Daily Telegraph dropped his weekly column for no longer “resonating” with readers. His central role in the week-long YouTube ban for violating its medical misinformation policies, did not help Jones’ standing at Sky. The former shock jock spent his final hour on air railing against his favourite targets: climate change activists, Greta Thunberg and Prince Harry and Meghan. He also devoted a large segment to reciting poetry with Sky News presenter Catherine McGregor. “So Catherine, I suppose as Vera Lynn would say, ‘we’ll meet again, don’t know where, don’t know when, but we’ll meet again some sunny day’.” With Nine Entertainment, the Daily Telegraph and Sky News all cutting him adrift Jones told his fans they could reach him on Facebook: “Remember, you can still find me on my Facebook page. I ain’t going away. You search ‘Alan Jones Australia’. So stay with me. And I’ll still be with you. Just search ‘Alan Jones Australia’. So good night and good health.” 7News’s costly blunder The media interest in the disappearance and extraordinary rescue of Cleo Smith has been intense, and there is already pressure for the media to back off and leave the family to recover away from the spotlight. One outlet, Seven, has apologised for making what may prove to be a costly mistake. “Earlier on Wednesday 7News wrongly showed images of a man that were incorrectly labelled as the person under arrest over the disappearance of Cleo Smith,” Seven said in a statement. “These were removed promptly, but 7News apologises for the error.” Seven published several images of a man who lived in the same town of Carnarvon, Terry Flowers, who also goes by his mother’s name Kelly. According to NITV, Flowers said when he saw his photo on a social media post he went to the local police station for assistance. “What [Seven] did was go straight on Facebook,” he said. “I’m gonna end up suing them anyways, cause it’s not the right thing for them to be doing.” Limited ‘lashes’ of ‘turncoat Turnbull’ The Australian’s Greg Brown had a scoop of sorts on page one of the paper on Thursday headlined “Libs lash ‘turncoat Turnbull’ over attack”. Only, in the copy there was not a single Liberal quoted “lashing” the former prime minister for calling Scott Morrison a liar. Former defence minister Christopher Pyne, Brown reported, “said he had never found Mr Morrison to be dishonest” but direct criticism of Turnbull was nowhere to be seen. The only person quoted in the article criticising Turnbull was the acting prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, who as we all know is the leader of the Nationals. Joyce said Turnbull needed to “reflect on what he is doing to his legacy”, among other fairly mild comments. At the Daily Telegraph, James Morrow loved the non-story so much he repeated it on Friday, in a story headlined “Liberals turn on Turnbull over ‘lies’”. Morrow claimed that one of Turnbull’s biggest backers had “sensationally refuted the former prime minister’s claims about Scott Morrison’s truthfulness”. For the record, all Pyne said was “in my experience, Scott Morrison never lied to me”. He was not quoted as lashing or turning on Turnbull. AFR seeing visions Australian Financial Review columnist Joe Aston is no fan of Mike Cannon-Brookes and has poked fun at the billionaire many times over the years. This week the famously acerbic journalist targeted the “supreme Tech Dude Bro” for a “typically vomitous interview with Peter FitzSimons. There are two people who belong together”. Aston ridiculed Cannon-Brookes for saying he drove an electric vehicle and lived on a farm that runs almost entirely on sunlight. Aston claimed Cannon-Brookes was a hypocrite because he also drove a Range Rover. “And with my own eyes, I saw MCB on Monday driving down Ocean Avenue, Double Bay, behind the wheel of his black Range Rover,” Aston wrote triumphantly having been on an eyewitness to the travesty. “He might have many Teslas in his 58 garages, but he’s also plenty familiar with the family guzzler.” Only Aston’s “own eyes” had deceived him. The sledge had to be removed from the AFR website and a correction added. “The original version of this article contained a reference to Mike Cannon-Brookes driving a Range Rover,” the AFR said. “Mr Cannon-Brookes says he has never driven a Range Rover.” Holmes v the IPA It was great to see Jonathan Holmes back in front of the camera excoriating the Institute of Public Affairs in his own inimitable style, honed over more than five years at the helm of ABC TV’s Media Watch. In a video entitled Your ABC vs Their IPA, Holmes took the right-wing thinktank to task over its podcast series Their ABC, which argues the ABC is “a bloated, out-of-touch, biased broadcaster”. But wait, what happened to Paul Barry? Barry is still in the Media Watch chair but Holmes lent his expertise to the ABC Alumni, a pro-ABC lobby group of former staff which he now chairs, for a video funded by ABC Friends. Holmes neatly demolishes the IPA’s so-called research, which allegedly proved the ABC is biased, and challenges the IPA’s claim Tony Abbott and Chris Kenny, represent “mainstream Australians”. “The mainstream”, says Holmes, “thinks that the ABC is the most trustworthy source of news in Australia”. The ghost of ABC management past It was the 20th anniversary this week of the end of the tumultuous 19-month reign of Jonathan Shier as ABC managing director. Then ABC news and current affairs chief Max Uechtritz played a key role in convincing the ABC board that Shier had to go. Uechtritz, now a freelance TV producer, shared a letter he wrote to then ABC chair Donald McDonald which provides a little more detail about what happened leading up to his resignation. As Kerry O’Brien confirmed in his 2018 memoir, Shier wanted him removed and a new 7.30 host installed. “When Shier spoke to staff for the first time three months into his tenure, he flagged that everything was up for grabs across the program schedule but singled out 7.30 for special criticism,” O’Brien writes. “I didn’t need much imagination to conclude I was in the crosshairs – helped along by headlines such as ‘ABC’s dead man talking’ next to a large photo of me.” What we didn’t know until now is who Shier apparently suggested as a replacement: according to Uechtritz, none other than the singer Olivia Newton-John. Uechtritz wrote to McDonald to say that among other things Shier said: “You could get Olivia Newton-John, put her in the chair, put the word out and you could get more viewers”.World wine production is expected to fall to one of its lowest levels on record after harsh weather battered vineyards in Europe’s major wine-producing regions. The conditions “severely impacted” production in Italy, Spain and France, resulting in “extremely low” production volumes, an international wine body has said. In the midst of the shortage, demand is expected to recover to near levels seen before the coronavirus pandemic, the International Organisation of Vine and Wine (OIV) said in a statement on Thursday. Based on information collected from 28 countries, which represent 85% of the world production in 2020, the OIV pegged world production for 2021 at between 247.1 and 253.5 million hectoliters (mhl), with a mid-range estimate at 250.3 mhl. This would mark a third consecutive year of below-average output and approach the 2017 level of 248 mhl, the smallest in six decades, according to the OIV. One hectolitre is the equivalent of 133 standard bottles. A drop in production in Italy, Spain and France, the world’s largest wine producers, would outweigh what is forecast to be the highest-ever volume in the southern hemisphere, the OIV said. Vineyards in western Europe were hit by spring frosts, while French producers also endured heavy rain, hail and mildew disease. Global consumption trends were encouraging, with first-half data suggesting a rebound despite ongoing disruption to tourism and hospitality linked to the coronavirus pandemic, the OIV said. “We still expect the global consumption to increase compared to 2020,” Pau Roca, the OIV’s director general, told reporters, noting first-half trade data showed volumes above pre-pandemic levels. If wine growers adapted relatively well to the Covid-19 crisis last year, they were now “confronting a much greater problem than the pandemic: climate change,” Roca said. He said adverse weather events were occurring more and more frequently. While “there is no vaccine” against climate change, he said “there are long-term solutions which will require major efforts in terms of sustainable practices for cultivating vines and producing wine”. He said adaptation was an “urgent necessity” for the industry. A shift to online sales had also helped the wine industry during the pandemic, he added. However, an expected decline in Chinese demand could limit an annual rise in consumption to about 2% this year compared with a 3% drop in 2020, the OIV said. In the European Union, production was forecast to fall to 145 mhl, down 13% from last year, it said. In the southern hemisphere, favourable weather should allow high output in major producing countries, except for New Zealand, the OIV said. Total output for the southern hemisphere was projected at a record 59 mhl, up 19% from last year. US production was forecast to rise 6% from last year to 24.1 mhl, although summer drought in some regions was expected to keep the volume below the five-year average. The body did not give a 2021 production forecast for China due to a lack of harvest data, but said it expected a structural decline since 2016 to continue. With Reuters and Agence France-PresseA senior Morrison government minister has attempted to blame journalists for the escalation in the French-Australian diplomatic rift, questioning whether an interview with the French president was in the “national interest”. Finance minister and frequent Morrison government spokesman Simon Birmingham queried whether it was “wise” for Australian journalists to have asked French president Emmanuel Macron questions over the aborted submarine deal and Scott Morrison’s conduct. Macron, when asked if he thought Morrison had lied to him, replied “I don’t think, I know”. The claim opened a fresh wound in the diplomatic relationship, with private text messages Macron had sent Morrison leaked to News Corp publications the following day, a move that infuriated the French even further. Asked on ABC radio if leaking the private messages had been wise, Birmingham attempted to turn blame on the Australian media. “People could ask questions as to whether it was wise for journalists to pressure the French president … in regards to the comments he made,” Birmingham said in an interview with ABC radio on Friday morning, when asked about the ongoing spat. “I don’t want to get into any of those sorts of things.” Challenged over describing Macron as being “pressured” into making comments, when he had simply answered questions, Birmingham said he was focused on the “bigger picture”. “I don’t think any of these things help us to be able to move forward, which is what I want to make sure we do in the relationship. We have to simply make forward that we get on, and make sure Aukus is a success, as I am sure it will be.” In a later interview with Sky News, Birmingham said he believed the travelling Australian media focused too much on the French fallout, and not enough on Australia’s net zero by 2050 commitment, a pledge most developed nations had made years ago. He then raised the issue of whether the impromptu press conference had been in the “national interest”. “Each journalist can question themselves whether all they pursue is in the national interest or otherwise,” he said. “But of course it’s their job to question, I get that.” Asked if he was suggesting the Australian media had been unpatriotic in its questioning, Birmingham doubled down on his claims. “…Journalists work to their ethics, their decisions,” he said. “I’m not going to run commentary in relation to all of those, I think what is in Australia’s national interest, are the decisions our government has made and those decisions are not going to be mattering in decades to come about what was said or done this week. In the decades to come, it’s going to be about the fact that we have nuclear powered submarines in the water.” Morrison refused to answer any more questions on the spat. “We have moved on from that issue, that is what I said when I was in Dubai,” he said on Friday. The attempt at blame shifting is just one more chapter in the saga which has been running since September, when the Aukus deal was announced. The French said they found out about the plans through media reports. Morrison insisted he had called Macron, later admitting he had not spoken directly to the French president, but had sent a message. Macron has insisted the French had no warning the Morrison government was scrapping the $90bn contract, in favour of a strategic alliance with the United States and the United Kingdom, which includes the possibility of shared nuclear submarine technology. Morrison said he had been as transparent as possible. In a bid to make amends, US president Joe Biden told Macron the announcement of the security and technology pact Aukus had been “clumsy”, adding he had been “under the impression that France had been informed long before, that the [French] deal was not going through”. The Australian government has insisted it is time to “move on” and is moving to refocus on raising the benefits of the new alliance, including with Asean partners.The Australian government will not join more than 40 countries committing to phase out coal power, with the energy minister declaring Australia was focused on developing technology not “wiping out industries”. The pledge at the Cop26 climate summit to end the use of coal power – by the 2030s “or as soon as possible thereafter” for the wealthy, and the 2040s by developing nations – was backed by five of the biggest 20 coal power users: South Korea, Indonesia, Vietnam, Poland and Ukraine. A separate group of countries, including the US, Canada and the UK, pledged to end overseas investment in coal, oil and gas by the end of next year. Neither statement was signed by Australia, China, Japan or India, and the phase-out dates for coal power were later than the British hosts of the summit – which had set a goal of “consigning coal to history” – had suggested. But supporters of the push said the formal commitment regarding coal remained a significant step – one that was unimaginable a few years ago. The Paris agreement, the global climate deal signed in 2015, does not explicitly mention the need to stop using fossil fuels. They said it built on a previous G20 commitment by all major economies, including China, to stop public financing for new dirty coal plants overseas from this year. Asked whether the deals meant the end of coal was in sight, Angus Taylor – Australia’s emissions reduction minister – said the government’s focus was “not on wiping out industries”. “It’s on bringing down the cost of low-emissions technologies and making sure those low-emissions technologies can deliver for Australians and for our customers throughout the world,” he said in Glasgow. “We will supply the products our customers need to bring down their emissions over time. This can’t happen overnight, let’s be clear about this. There is a sensible pathway here, Australia will be part of it.” Richie Merzian, a former Australian climate diplomat who is now the climate and energy program director with the Australia Institute, said the new commitments on coal in Glasgow were “beyond anything we have witnessed before” and would have ramifications for Australia. Twenty-one countries had for the first time committed to phasing out existing and not build new coal power, he said. “The Australian government is trying to push Australia backward while the world moves forward,” he said. “Indonesia, the world’s largest thermal coal exporter, has signed up to the … transition to phase out coal and Vietnam, an Australian coal client, is pulling the handbrake on new initiatives. This is just the start.” The Morrison government’s 2050 net zero emissions plan has been criticised for not including new policies to reduce emissions in the short term as the scientific advice says is necessary, and relying on new technology to become cheap enough to make deep cuts in the 2030s and 40s. The federal resources minister, Keith Pitt, on Thursday announced 10 new potential areas for offshore oil and gas exploration along the Australian coast had been opened for expressions of interest. It coincided with a new report by Climate Analytics that said the rollout of gas for heating, electricity and cooking was turning it into the “new coal”, and calculated its worldwide use must be slashed by nearly a third this decade to avoid disastrous climate effects. Gas is often described as having half the emissions of coal when burned, but research has found its impact on the climate is greater due to methane leakage. A separate paper found more than half Australia’s fossil fuel assets could become worthless by 2036 if the world pursued a net zero transition. Mathias Cormann, Australia’s former finance minister, used a speech to Cop26 on Thursday to urge countries to stop subsiding fossil fuels. In his latest about-face on climate policy since becoming the head of the OECD, Cormann said “more comprehensive policy action on climate” was needed to translate the increased political ambition on show in Glasgow into “real outcomes”. That included removing “distortions” that diverted investment away from the transition to net zero emissions, he said. “Too many policies still encourage emissions-intensive investment, production and consumption,” he said. “Inefficient government support or subsidies not only have a negative impact on our collective efforts to achieve net zero emissions, but also on our biodiversity, water and air quality.” Cormann was a part of the cabinet that last year backed a so-called “gas-fired recovery” from the pandemic, and dedicated funding for a feasibility study into a new coal power plant in Queensland. The Morrison government has dedicated hundreds of millions of dollars to gas developments, including helping businesses open up the potentially vast Beetaloo Basin gas field in the Northern Territory and pay to build a new gas-fired power station. Cormann cited OECD data that direct support for fossil fuel production across 50 advanced and emerging economies increased by 5% in 2020, partly due to government bailouts for state oil and electricity companies. Taylor is due to leave Cop26 on Friday. Australia’s delegation will then be led by Jamie Isbister, the ambassador for the environment, during the second week of talks.Deni Varnhagen’s AFLW career is on hold after the dual premiership player was moved on to the Adelaide Crows’ inactive roster following her refusal to take the Covid-19 vaccination. Varnhagen, a registered nurse who works in ICUs, reiterated her unwillingness to receive the jab earlier this week, describing the Covid vaccine as a “medical experiment” and claiming that “coercion is not consent”. The defender’s stance means she will be barred from playing for the Crows once the new season starts in January – in line with the AFL’s vaccination policy. Varnhagen fails to meet requirements set out in the league’s recent directive that all AFLW players must receive their first vaccination by 19 November and be fully vaccinated by 17 December. Being placed on the inactive list does not sever the player’s ties with the club, but they are classed as being unable to fulfil their obligations. Unless she reverses her decision, it is unlikely she will play again for the foreseeable future while the vaccine mandate is in place. The Crows’ chief executive, Tim Silvers, said the club’s decision was inevitable given Varnhagen’s stance. “The AFL’s initial vaccination deadline is still a fortnight away, however, Deni has made it well known she is against vaccination in this instance,” Silvers said on Friday. “We have a team-first approach and the timing of this decision has been made in the best interests of the team and its preparation for the upcoming season. “Our club supports the league’s policy and we strongly encourage people to be vaccinated for the benefit of community health and safety. We would like to acknowledge and thank Deni for the significant contribution she has made to our women’s program over the past five seasons.” Varnhagen, a member of the Crows’ inaugural squad, played 31 games for the club and won two premierships – in 2017 and 2019. She had joined other healthcare workers at this week’s protest in Adelaide against mandatory vaccination, where she wore a white singlet that said “freedom to choose” and held up a placard with the words “I love being a nurse. Coercion is not consent.” “I’m scared for all of us nurses, we’re all terrified, we love working and want to be back working,” she said on Tuesday. “There’s a lot that’s in the news that isn’t speaking the truth.”People really, really love Daniel Johns. The Spotify podcast delving into the life and music of the enigmatic Silverchair/Dissociatives/Dreams frontman, Who is Daniel Johns?, has supposedly overtaken Joe Rogan on that platform for listens in Australia. But what’s most notable about the podcast is that it exists at all. Johns has had a difficult relationship with the media and is notoriously averse to interviews – possibly because the few he does are always such high-stakes affairs. Last time he was in the public eye he was being grilled by Andrew Denton on national TV; now he’s letting podcasters into his childhood bedroom to fossick through his teenage diaries. Kudos to podcast creators Kaitlin Sawrey, Amelia Chappelow and Frank Lopez for getting this level of access without some sort of elaborate heist. Across five weekly episodes – the third launched on Wednesday – Johns and various important people discuss his life and work, jumping from his childhood in Newcastle, to stalkers on international tours, to the reactive arthritis which sidelined him for two years. There’s a chat with lifelong influence and Smashing Pumpkins frontman Billy Corgan; and in an upcoming episode, Natalie Imbruglia. It’s like you’re wandering through Johns’ brain and being distracted by whatever catches his attention. It’s been suggested that this five-part podcast, whose third episode launched on Wednesday, tells the Australian equivalent of Britney Spears’ fame-trauma story – and there are definite parallels between these two artists, both thrust into an unrelenting global spotlight in their teens, and both saddled with significant trauma as a result. Johns was just 14 when Silverchair’s Frogstomp came out – is it any shock that 30 years of attention might have left him not entirely comfortable in his skin? Johns agreed to the project as a way to launch new music without having to play live – although the only hints thus far have been some tantalising passages of instrumental piano, and background bursts of sound. But the deeper reason to undergo such scrutiny appears to be a desire to be understood – while maintaining a safe distance. Who is Daniel Johns is explicitly not a Silverchair podcast: in fact, it’s entirely possible that devoted fans of the ‘Chair will be feeling rather more ambivalent about them after listening to this. Obviously the band are talked about throughout – the entire third episode is essentially about the artistic triumphs, industry pressures and medical catastrophes around Diorama, the album generally regarded as Johns’ masterpiece to date. And there are extensive interviews with people close to the band including Paul Mac (who played keys with Silverchair and was Johns’ partner in the Dissociatives), and producers Kevin Shirley (Frogstomp), Nick Launay (Freak Show, Neon Ballroom and Young Modern) and the legendary Van Dyke Parks (who did the orchestral arrangements for Diorama and Young Modern) – as well as longtime manager John Watson. But there have been two very notable absences so far: bassist Chris Joannou and drummer Ben Gillies, Johns’ childhood friends and Silverchair bandmates. In the podcast, Johns says he wouldn’t consider a reunion “for a million dollars and with a gun to my head”, and there’s no Silverchair paraphernalia in his house at all (his parents have hung onto it, though). This doesn’t seem like someone who is just a bit over his old band; it’s as though he wants to put as much distance as possible between the past and the present. From the stories told by Johns and Watson, it’s not a surprise. The band became famous before Johns felt he had any sense of himself as an artist – and what 42-year-old wants to be compared with their 14-year-old self? More than that, what Johns experienced was downright traumatic – from the utterly obsessive adoration of potentially suicidal fans, to the anorexia he articulated in Ana’s Song, to the violent bullying he suffered at school. “It was so brutal, I was scared every day, everyone wanted to bash me,” he tells Sawrey. “You go on the road and everyone would love me, and I’d go back to school and everyone would hate me – and they wonder why I have a mental condition!” The absence of his ex-Silverchair bandmates is the yawning vacuum at the heart of the podcast. That’s especially true of Gillies: Johns speaks warmly about the popular drummer, who took him under his wing when Johns was forced to repeat year three (not least because “Ben was the coolest guy in primary school”). Gillies changed his life, Johns says, and the obvious affection with which he speaks of his oldest friend makes their seeming estrangement genuinely heartbreaking. The final two episodes will take listeners to the end of the band, covering Johns’ four-year marriage to Natalie Imbruglia and whatever comes next – and perhaps a clearer picture will emerge. At this point, however, the question of who Daniel Johns is remains as opaque as ever. • Who is Daniel Johns is available to stream on SpotifyVictorian police officers involved in the fatal shooting of a man suffering a mental health episode watched body-worn camera footage of the incident before writing their witness statements, the state’s coroner’s court has heard. The man, known as XY, was shot on the Monash Freeway in Melbourne’s south-east in May 2020. Counsel assisting the coroner Catherine Fitzgerald told a hearing this week the investigation into XY’s death found an emergency call centre operator failed to log information that he was suspected to be armed with a knife. That meant police called to respond to the man’s mental health crisis did not know he was potentially armed. Those officers later used body-worn camera footage to prepare their witness statements, Fitzgerald told the court. “A number of the members who interacted with XY had activated this equipment and recorded the incident with XY that led to his death. It is apparent that different members were then given access to body-worn camera footage when preparing their witness statements,” Fitzgerald said. “Victoria police have been requested to provide a statement outlining any [policies], procedure or training that concerns the use of such evidence in the preparation of witness statements. It is also anticipated that a witness from Victoria police will need to be called to speak to that issue.” On the day of the shooting, assistant commissioner Bob Hill said police had attempted to negotiate with XY – who he described as “distressed” and “agitated” – before the man advanced on them with a knife. “We tried to actually calm the male down,” Hill said. “At a point during that course of negotiation, the male has produced a knife and advanced on the police members. “It was during that encounter that, firstly, our police attempted a tactical withdrawal. At that point in time, the male continued the advance. There was then a non-lethal force used upon the male to stop him advancing. That was unsuccessful. Then the police resorted to lethal force, a semi-auto firearm was then discharged.” Hill said he believed at least two shots were fired and XY was shot in the chest. He died at the scene. Fitzgerald told the court this week that XY had no diagnosed mental illness but his mental health had been “deteriorating, largely in response to the onset of the Covid-19 pandemic and other personal stressors in his life”. A previous coronial hearing heard that XY had become “paranoid and fixated with the pandemic”, stopped working, increased CCTV surveillance around his house and turned off the wifi at night because he believed it could be used to spy on him. On the morning of 28 May last year, his second eldest child sent a text message to a staff member at their school that caused concern the family was being held against their will. The staff member subsequently spoke on two occasions to XY’s wife. During the second conversation, his wife said that XY had just left the house in the car with a knife and told his family “this was the last time that they would see him”, Fitzgerald told the court. The staff member phoned triple zero and told the operator XY had left the house with a knife and was threatening to kill himself. The staff member made multiple mentions of the knife to the operator from the emergency services telecommunications authority (Esta), Fitzgerald said, but a statement from the authority confirmed that information was not provided to police. “The statement confirmed that the information regarding the knife was not accurately recorded in the event chronology by the initial call taker, and was not broadcast to attending police units subsequently by the call dispatcher,” Fitzgerald said. “The handling of that information by Esta staff, as well as what was known or could have been known about it by attending police members, will be an area of examination at the inquest.” The Andrews government has been criticised for failing to properly resource Esta, and the authority has struggled to deal with a surge in calls linked to the pandemic. Marty Smyth, the Esta chief executive, resigned in October after he had reportedly lobbied for more than 40 extra staff in the recent budget. The state’s attorney general, Jaclyn Symes, said in the days after Smyth’s resignation that the authority would be independently reviewed, but that the government would also be providing additional resources. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.orgHospitals were overwhelmed during last year’s lockdowns, with wait times for emergency departments and surgeries blowing out despite dramatically reduced patient volumes. This year’s public hospital report card, released on Friday, showed that unless urgent action was taken, backsliding or barely improved performance would be as “good as it gets” for the hospital system, the Australian Medical Association president, Dr Omar Khorshid said. “What’s remarkable about this year’s report card is it shows hospitals continued to struggle in 2020 when Australians stayed home, and we weren’t dealing with the highly contagious Delta variant or high Covid-19 hospitalisations,” he said. “What we had was a once-in-a-generation event – a dramatic reduction in hospitalisation from accidents, injuries and illness. “But … since the data … was collected, volumes have not only returned to normal, but grown, and we will continue to have Covid-19 on top of it. ‘Good as it gets’ is about to get much worse.” Australians seeking emergency treatment within 30 minutes only had a one-in-three chance of being seen on time in the ACT, the report found, while patients in South Australia and Western Australia had a one-in-two chance, and New South Wales patients had a 75% chance. “This report card is really … disappointing, because even in the best possible scenario, hospitals struggled, and we know that it’s so much worse now,” Khorshid told the ABC on Friday. “What that says for the future is that we just don’t have the capacity to deliver good, quality healthcare when people need it. And that’s regardless of Covid.” Just 69% of Australians hoping to leave the emergency department in four hours or sooner were treated within the timeframes, even though the number of patients dropped by 1.4% from 2019 to 2020. And despite there being a hold on non-urgent elective surgeries, only 75% of category 2 patients were treated within the recommended timeframe. “What this means is that 25% of people will wait longer than 90 days for surgeries, which in this category can include treatment for an unruptured brain aneurism, decompression of a spinal cord and treatment for ovarian cysts or unhealed fractures,” Khorshid said. “If you’re in Tasmania, you’ve got more than a 63% chance you’ll be waiting longer than that – hard to believe for a world-class health system.” • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Khorshid said “no single jurisdiction” improved its performance on wait times in the public health system. “It was expected that performance would improve across the board. The fact that it only improved a little, in a few places … should really worry all Australians,” he said. A key measure of a hospital’s capacity to cope – the number of beds available – has also been on a downward trend for the past 27 years, and hasn’t improved during the pandemic. “Our hospital staff … do not have what they need to continue to care for Australians with non-Covid-19 conditions in a timely manner, and continue to tackle Covid-19 as well,” he said. “Performance will be improved if we give hospitals the beds, the staff and the resources to do it … It’s time we … developed a national partnership to give our hospitals what they need to do their job.”Health officials are urging the Aboriginal community in Moree to come forward for Covid testing and vaccination as cases multiply after a funeral and wake last week. The Moree local government area has recorded 54 cases and has one of the lowest Aboriginal vaccination rates in New South Wales. Hunter-New England public health physician Dr David Durrheim said the low vaccination rate was “really disturbing”. “We’ve seen a huge impact on Aboriginal people in these areas and we know that this has been linked to some super-spreader events, particularly a funeral, a wake, a number of very large social gatherings and a celebration,” Durrheim said. “There are many people who are at real risk with comorbidities, who will actually develop severe Covid disease,” he said. “We really urge people in the Inverell and in the Moree area … you have some of the lowest vaccination rates in the state. It’s time to turn that around. It’s time to actually be done with Covid-19. It’s time to roll up your sleeves get vaccinated.” Moree shire has a first-dose rate of 86.6% and 76.4% of the population is fully vaccinated, but the Aboriginal double-vaccination rate in the region is 66%. The Queensland premier, Annastacia Palaszczuk, has moved Moree shire out of its border bubble for the next seven days, and said residents of towns close to the border, like Mungindi and Boggabilla, will no longer have access except in exceptional circumstances. “What we do know is a large number of people who are testing positive are unvaccinated and that is of concern,” Palaszczuk said. “We will try to get supplies to the communities in NSW rather than having to cross to get supplies into Queensland. “It is really important that we ensure the safety of those townships across our Queensland border. I think people will understand that. It is the right thing to do at this particular point.” Local state MP Adam Marshall said the community had stepped up in the last two days to get tested and isolate. He said it is “great news” that not one of the 54 active cases have been hospitalised or placed in ICU. • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morningAny move by the Australian government to crack down on anonymous accounts on Twitter would be ineffective and fail to reduce the amount of abuse on the platform, the social media firm has said. Last month prime minister Scott Morrison decried the “coward’s palace” of social media, and threatened more regulation of the companies in response. “Social media has become a coward’s palace where people can just go on there, not say who they are, destroy people’s lives and say the most foul and offensive things to people and do so with impunity,” he said. “Now that’s not a free country where that happens. That’s not right. They should have to identify who they are and you know, the companies, if they’re not going to say who they are, well, they’re not a platform anymore. They’re a publisher.” The government, through the Online Safety Act, has also imbued the e-safety commissioner with powers to force social media companies to hand over the personal information of people the commissioner alleges are engaging in bullying behaviour online. These new powers will come into effect at the start of 2022. Kara Hinesley, public policy director for Twitter in Australia and New Zealand, told a panel on online anonymity on Friday that banning anonymous accounts would stifle speech for vulnerable people who need to remain anonymous online. She said it would also prove to be ineffective, and would not reduce the amount of abuse. Hinesley, speaking at the event convened by Twitter, pointed to a 2004 Korean law, overturned in 2012, which required the largest Korean-based websites to collect ID information for people posting on their websites in a bid to reduce election information, and later cyberbullying online. When it was overturned, the court found there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate that there had been a decrease in hateful comments, defamation or online bullying as a result of the policy. Hinesley said it also presented the dangers of companies being required to store identification information of its users. “What did in fact happen was there was a breach of 35 million South Koreans’ national identification numbers that was stolen. So this law was actually repealed in 2012. And was something that was found and to chip away and erode at those freedoms,” she said. Hinesley said anonymity online should not be equated to abuse and harassment online. She pointed to research Twitter released in August about racist abuse on the platform towards England players during the Euro 2020 final. She said the company’s research found 99% of the accounts that were banned for more than 1,600 tweets of abuse were not anonymous. “Anonymity and abuse are not connected in a way that they’re being connected right now, both through legislation and the public debate. So I really want to make sure that that’s what we’re separating out.” Prof David Kaye, former United Nations special rapporteur on the promotion and protection of the right to freedom of opinion and expression said anonymity and pseudonymity have been essential to public debate throughout history. “It’s been essential to individual human development in repressive societies – the ability to seek information or receive information in a kind of cone of privacy, if we want to think of it like that, under the blanket of anonymity,” he said. “It has allowed people historically to explore their heritage, to explore their sexual orientation, their gender identity, and we could go on and on, and anybody could come up with examples where a failure of anonymity or publicity of one’s persona might lead to real harm.”The big banks have begun jacking up fixed interest home loan rates even though the Reserve Bank of Australia has not increased official rates in a decade and on Friday signalled it was unlikely to do so until 2024. Even with official rates frozen at record lows, banks say wholesale funding costs are increasing, in part because of the RBA’s decision earlier this year to stop lending them money at concessional rates. Interest rates could start to creep up in 2023, a year earlier than previously expected, the RBA said. But an increase in the cash rate in 2024 remains the RBA’s central assumption, it said in its most recent statement of monetary policy. It said it may be forced to raise the official rate a year earlier, but only if inflation and wages growth exceed its current expectations. The RBA said that its “central scenario” remained that wages will be growing by more than 3% a year by 2023, ending a pattern of stagnation that has seen growth stuck below that level since March 2013. It predicted underlying inflation would be about 2.25% next year, increasing to 2.5% by 2023. “Similar to wages growth, this would represent a meaningful pickup in underlying inflation relative to the experience of recent years,” the RBA said. However, it said there were “other plausible scenarios” where wages growth and inflation were higher. “If this were to eventuate, an increase in the cash rate in 2023 could be warranted,” it said. “However, in the board’s view, the latest data and forecasts do not warrant an increase in the cash rate in 2022.” It said that the economic outlook could also be grimmer than expected if Australia is hit by a new Covid-19 variant, or vaccines wearing off. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Banks have not waited for an increase in the official rate, which the RBA board left unchanged at a record low of 0.1% when it met on Melbourne Cup Day. NAB was the first bank to charge more for home loans, raising fixed rates by up to 0.2 percentage points last Wednesday. Westpac followed on Thursday this week and the Commonwealth Bank hiked its fixed rates on Friday morning, ahead of the RBA’s statement. Bankers say that money has become more expensive even though the RBA has not raised the official cash rate in a decade and has kept it at 0.1% since November last year. This is partly because in July the RBA shut down its Term Funding Facility, which provided $188bn in cheap money to the banks during the Covid-19 pandemic. Wholesale rates are also increasing because traders expect the RBA to raise the cash rate in the future, with the ASX’s cash rate tracker pointing to a rate above 1.2% by April 2023. CBA raised its fixed rates by between 0.1 percentage points, for a five-year fixed term, and 0.5 percentage points, for a four-year one. “These changes reflect the steep increase in funding costs over the past few weeks as well as upgraded economic forecasts,” a CBA spokesperson said. On Friday, Westpac increased its fixed rates by between 0.1 percentage points, for four- and five-year fixed periods, and by 0.21 percentage points for loans with a three-year fixed period. “In making these decisions, we consider multiple factors including the need to manage pricing changes in a sustainable way,” a Westpac spokesperson said. NAB increased its fixed rates by 0.1 percentage points for all terms between one and four years and increased five-year rates by 0.2 percentage points. At the same time, it lowered its standard variable rate by 0.4 percentage points, to 2.29%.A Berlin couple who dedicated themselves to spiriting Jewish families and political dissidents out of Nazi Germany via a clandestine network disguised as an English-language tutoring service have been honoured in the German capital for the first time since their story fell into obscurity half a century ago. A commemorative plaque was installed on Thursday by Berlin authorities at Pariser Strasse 54 in the Wilmersdorf district, outside the former home of Max and Malwine Schindler. Their legacy was rediscovered two years ago through a cache of letters and photographs found in a garden shed in Australia. When Max – unrelated to the industrialist Oskar Schindler portrayed in Steven Spielberg’s 1993 Hollywood drama Schindler’s List – lost his job at Neukölln city council after the Nazi’s banning of the Social Democratic party (SPD) in 1933, he concentrated his mind on setting up an underground network to help those suffering Nazi persecution escape Germany. Having taught himself English while recovering from a shrapnel wound in the first world war, Max set up a language tutoring service as a cover for dashing around Berlin to visit Jewish and politically suspect families in their apartments. Lancashire-born Evelyn Parker, a former pen-friend of the Schindlers’ son, Rudolf, was recruited as a conversation coach to assist with the operation. “In January 1934 I had an SOS,” Parker wrote in her memoir. “Max was starting a language school and an English library and needed my help.” “So, off I set … The bulk of our students were prospective refugees, most Jews, we taught them the requisite amount of English … and did anything else for them we could.” For Jewish Germans, who were subject to growing waves of repression and violence after 1933, emigration to countries like Britain or the US was legal but highly complicated, requiring proof of independent wealth or a guarantor who would financially support them at the other end. The language-learning cover allowed the Schindlers to link their students into progressive circles in the UK. The couple were active members of the SPD and had built up contacts within its British political equivalent, the Labour party, and associated groups. In 1937, for example, stalwarts of the co-operative movement in Darlington provided board and lodging for the teenager Klaus Wilczynski, whose mother had sought Max’s help. After the Nazis began to forcibly remove Jewish citizens from Berlin in 1941, the Schindlers began to illegally shelter families who had not managed to leave Germany in their spacious and labyrinthine apartment on Pariser Strasse, to hide them from the Gestapo. They cooked food for others. “Your attitude towards the Nazi system and your convictions led you to courageously demonstrate willingness to help us when most other ‘friends’ failed to do so,” Ernst Lachmann, a Jewish dentist, later wrote in a condolence letter to Malwine upon Max’s death in 1948. “Your apartment was a refuge for us; we were able to flee there and be saved. Malicious neighbours and housemates didn’t deter you from appearing with us in your air raid cellar.” The Schindlers’ legacy was rediscovered two years ago when Frances Newell, the daughter of their former conversation coach Parker, chanced upon a cache of letters and photographs telling of the couple’s endeavours in her garden shed in Victoria, Australia. Further research by archivists at Berlin’s Silent Heroes memorial centre corroborated the story, leading to the Schindlers being honoured with one of 12 historic plaques the city of Berlin installs on an annual basis. While the exact number of people saved by the Schindlers is unknown, at least seven people testified after the end of the war that they had been aided by the couple. Their testimonies led to the widowed Malwine being honoured by the Berlin senate as an “unsung hero” in 1963. In one of the first “culture of remembrance” programmes of the postwar era, Malwine was one of 760 former anti-Nazi activists who were invited to a public ceremony and given some financial support. The lack of a physical monument meant she and the others were soon forgotten, however. Malwine, who died in 1973, lies buried in an unmarked grave in a Wilmersdorf graveyard. Max’s final resting place is unknown. The Schindlers outlived Rudolf, who was sentenced to forced sterilisation by the hereditary health court in Berlin, for the alleged crime of schizophrenia, and later died in circumstances that remain unclear.“The Schindler story is about friendship, indomitable courage and ingenuity in the face of oppression,” said Newell. “It provides a window into the past and affirms the possibility of ordinary people making a difference.”Cuts to the budget of the UN’s relief agency for Palestinian refugees – including a halving of the UK grant – means the agency is close to collapse, the head of the agency, Philippe Lazzarini, has said. The UK has cut its core grant by more than 50% from £42.5m in 2020 to £20.8m in 2021. Lazzarini, the commissioner general of UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA), which serves Palestinian refugees in the West Bank and Gaza but also in Jordan, Syria and Lebanon, said the agency was in an existential crisis due to a $100m (£74m) shortfall this year, but also because of a method of long-term funding that has proved unsustainable. He said the mood among Palestinians was one of distress, boiling despair and hopelessness. When the UN agency is struggling financially to deliver the most essential services it creates a deep sense of abandonment, he said. The UK was the third largest overall donor to UNRWA in 2020, but its latest cut starts to put the UK in the second tier of contributors. The agency operates about 700 schools catering for 550,000 children, and provides health centres and social welfare to Palestinian refugees and their descendants. “It is a direct impact of this policy decision to reduce the aid budget from the equivalent of 0.7% of gross national income to 0.5%,” Lazzarini said. “It has a humanitarian impact. It has a human development impact. We calculate the decrease in aid as the equivalent of more than 70,000 boys and girls in our schools.” Lazzarini, who was in London to urge the Foreign Office to rethink the cuts, denied the organisation was bloated. “We have had the same resources as 2013, and yet over the years we have had many demands placed upon us, so we have had no other choice but to go for drastic austerity measures to keep services afloat,” he said. He said the agency’s core $800m budget needed to be put on a more predictable footing and there would be a special conference in Brussels this month to urge donors to end the annual hand-to-mouth funding of the agency. UNRWA was hit hard in 2018 when Donald Trump halted US funding, leaving other countries to scramble to fill the unexpected deficit. But the re-engagement of the US under Joe Biden has been offset by the lack of multi-year commitments as yet from the Gulf countries, and by decreases from other countries such as the UK. The Gulf contributions have fallen $200m in 2018 to $87m in 2019 to $37m in 2020, and so far the Gulf states have only offered $20m for this year. “It is not a short-term problem. Our current funding model is leading the agency to a collapse,” Lazzarini said. “It has become so unstable it is causing an existential threat to the organisation. Year after year, we are in an ever more exacerbated situation. “Right now at the beginning of November, I have nothing in my bank account. I do not know how I will cover the costs and salaries and that means thousands of teachers and thousands of health workers, and that means losing critical services in a highly unstable environment. “We started this year with a critical liability. I cannot print money. I cannot borrow money. All I can do is delay and build up.” Lazzarini said UNRWA was “irreplaceable” when it came to providing education to Palestinian refugees. “It is a good question what happens to these children if we cannot educate them, and the schools are shut. There will be a void. We would enter into uncharted territory, and the question is, who will fill this gap in places like Gaza, in the refugee camps in Lebanon. We do not have the answer.” Faced by repeated criticism of anti-Israeli bias in the school curriculum, he said: “Every year we have tens of schools that are rewarded by the British Council for the quality of their education. By investing in the education of more than 500,000 boys and girls in the region, we are not only investing in the future but in the stability of the region.” He accepts that in the Trump era it was open season for critics of the organisation. “We are subject sometimes to vicious political attacks normally through the lens of the school curriculum, but in reality it is because there is a naive view that if the agency is weakened or eliminated then an obstacle to lasting stability will have been addressed. “It is not UNRWA that is perpetuating refugee statehood. Refugee statehood is perpetuated by the absence of a political solution, and there is no Palestinian, I promise you, that wants to remain a refugee after such a long time.” • This article was amended on 5 November 2021 to clarify that the UN agency supports Palestinian refugees, not all Palestinians.Opposite Cressbrook Mill, the rusty gate to the old millpond had a shiny padlock and a stern new notice: “No public access”. And in smaller letters: “Conservation area”. I felt a stab of disappointment. More often than not, ducking in here, I’d see the electric blue flash of a kingfisher. There was a spot along the wall where I could peer over, but the view was restricted. Nothing doing. So I crossed the road and slipped past William Newton’s august Cressbrook Mill to a second millpond, where the Wye, flowing through Water-cum-Jolly, brims against cliffs of dusky pink limestone. There’s something playfully contrived about the name Water-cum-Jolly. And it does seem a recent invention. When the geologist William Adams passed through on St Swithin’s Day in 1841, no one he met could give a name to the place. The much-missed writer Roger Deakin thought it “a fiction on the part of the map-makers”. But he also thought it fitting, perhaps because there’s something playfully contrived about the place as well. The millpond he swam in to cure his blues was, after all, hollowed from the rock with explosives. Yet despite all the mill workings, the old leat and rusting sluice gates, this narrow dale with its dizzying perspectives still feels deeply natural. There are rafts of water mint along the water’s edge. The shallows of the pond blend into low banks thick with crack willow, stirred by the breeze. In summer they shelter thick clumps of comfrey and butterburs, now subsiding into the soupy black earth at winter’s approach. There are water voles too, and with thoughts of a low profile I crouched against a curved wall of limestone to keep watch. As I did so, the roar of the river below the pond’s dam suddenly flipped. It now seemed to be coming from behind me, from actually inside the cliff itself. Surprised, I angled my head to check my hearing, eyes still fixed on the water, and as if by magic a brown trout materialised, peering up at my confusion from the river’s lazy flow. And I swear it was laughing. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryHeadlines in the run up to Cop26 have promised new technologies, including electric cars, flying taxis and heat pumps to warm our homes. But we can do more – starting with the streets around us. Jon Burke, a decarbonisation policy consultant, has likened the private motor vehicle to an invasive species. It grows to dominate our transport systems, choking out alternatives, and erodes the diverse social fabric of neighbourhoods. While electric vehicles will reduce climate-changing emissions and exhaust pollution, they will not relieve our congested roads and will not tackle air pollution from tyres, brakes and road wear. Redesigning our villages, towns and cities to favour walking and cycling can help the climate crisis, air pollution and the urban noise that plagues the lives of so many people, as well as improving our health through daily exercise. This goes beyond debates on cycle lanes and low-traffic neighbourhoods. Cities around the globe including Sydney, Portland, Paris and now many in China, are embracing the “15-minute city”. This places shops, schools, health centres and the everyday necessities of life within an easy walk, cycle or public transport trip, reducing the need for car use and home deliveries. A study from Barcelona’s Institute for Global Health adds to evidence on the benefits from reclaiming the urban space devoted to traffic. Much-quoted research from the 1980s found that recovery from surgery could be helped simply by seeing trees from the hospital window. More recent studies have found that people live longer and have fewer heart problems if they have green spaces in their neighbourhoods. The World Health Organization (WHO) therefore recommends that we have access to 0.5 hectares of public green space – about two-thirds of a football pitch – within 300 metres of our homes. The Barcelona researchers looked at satellite images of more than 1,000 European cities. They found that 62% of people were living in areas with less green space than recommended. Meeting the WHO recommendations could prevent 43,000 early deaths a year across 31 European countries studied. Mark Nieuwenhuijsen, who led the research, said: “Any greenery that can be introduced is good: green roofs and vertical gardens, green school yards, green corridors, street trees, park and pocket parks, community gardens and other measures such as rerouting traffic, digging up asphalt and replacing it with green space, across the board.” Globally more than 50% of people live in cities. In the UK it is 80%. Pathways towards healthy, low-pollution and low-carbon cities should be a priority for the forthcoming Cop26.The Big Narstie Show 11.05pm, Channel 4 Big Narstie is back to upend the stale chatshow format with his own beloved brash brand of TV. Mo Gilligan – who is fast becoming a leading name in British comedy – joins the grime MC once again, welcoming Katherine Ryan and the rapper Digga D into the chaotic late-night fold. Plus, there is a special appearance from the one and only Idris Elba. Happy Friyay to that. Hollie Richardson Richard Osman’s House of Games Night 8pm, BBC One It’s the final – and that means … well, it’s just the usual gently amusing quiz, but with a token winner demurely announced at the end. This sort of chummy timewaster feels like it should have Una Stubbs or Kenneth Williams on it, but we continue to make do with Ed Balls, Janette Manrara, Steph McGovern and Ben Miller. Jack Seale Mr Mayor 8.30pm, Sky Comedy An avocado shortage hits Los Angeles, wreaking havoc among health-crazed Californians and providing Ted Danson’s businessman turned mayor with a fruitful opportunity for a PR win. Tina Fey’s influence over this quippy comedy – originally intended as a 30 Rock spin-off – means that even an insomnia B-plot zips along with about six jokes per minute. Henry Wong The Last Leg 10pm, Channel 4 Debrief the week that’s been with Adam Hills, Josh Widdicombe and Alex Brooker. Tonight, comedians Jessica Knappett and Munya Chawawa join the trio to dissect (read: poke fun at) the events of the last seven days. HR The Graham Norton Show 10.35pm, BBC One Graham Norton favourite Miriam Margolyes is here to talk (probably very, very rudely) about her autobiography This Much Is True, while Paul Rudd, Halle Berry, Ron Howard and Stephen Fry are sure to make excellent foils. Ali Catterall BBC New Comedy Awards: The Final 11.25pm, BBC One Send in the clowns … The three judges need to pick a new king or queen of comedy who makes ’em laugh in the final round. HR Film choice A Cop Movie (Alonso Ruizpalacios, 2021) Netflix Here’s a curious experiment in documentary-making. Following Mexico City cop Teresa, this initially feels like staged reality – a night-time callout to a woman in labour is shot in dramatic fashion – as we also meet Teresa’s colleague/boyfriend Montoya. It is soon revealed that they are actors, with their training compared to the real officers they are playing. Through all this genre-twisting, a depressing story of hard work, underfunding and quotidian corruption emerges. Simon Wardell Attack the Block (Joe Cornish, 2011) 2am, Film4 Before they found global fame in venerable sci-fi franchises, John Boyega and Jodie Whittaker starred in this small but pleasingly formed 2011 alien invasion horror. His teen street-gang leader and her frazzled nurse have to join forces on Bonfire Night when their south London estate is overrun by furry extraterrestrials with glow-in-the dark gnashers. The corridors and lifts of the high-rises and the surrounding concrete jungle of car parks and raised walkways are used to atmospheric effect. The seasonal fireworks come in handy, too. SW Breaker Morant (Bruce Beresford, 1980) 9.55am, Great! Movies Action A righteous anger permeates this war drama, featuring Edward Woodward at his most compelling (The Wicker Man excepted). His English-born Harry Morant, an Australian lieutenant fighting in a guerrilla unit of the British army during the Boer war, is accused at a court martial of war crimes after the killings of prisoners and civilians in the Northern Transvaal. Despite the facts of the case, Beresford prints the legend: pointing up the Australia v British empire angle, he shows us a man, driven to extremes by conflict, who was just following orders. SW Live sport Premiership Rugby Union: Leicester Tigers v Bath Rugby Fri, 7pm, BT Sport 1. From Mattioli Woods Welford Road.Andrew Garfield is smiling beatifically and clasping his hands together as if in prayer. The pose suits an actor who has cornered the market in the holy and heroic, from a Jesuit priest in Silence to a Seventh-day Adventist saving lives on the battlefield in Hacksaw Ridge; from a man left paralysed by polio in Breathe to a credulous innocent who dies surrendering his organs in Never Let Me Go. He is a remarkable actor, but watch too many of his movies back to back and you are liable to hear celestial trumpets. His prayer-like gesture of gratitude comes in response to my promise not to ask whether he and his fellow former web-slinger Tobey Maguire will be appearing in the new Spider-Man: No Way Home. “I appreciate that,” says the 38-year-old, speaking over Zoom from Calgary, where he is shooting the murder-and-Mormons series Under the Banner of Heaven. There seems no point posing the Spidey question when he has greeted each identical inquiry this year with a display of shrugging bafflement that may or may not be genuine. (Let’s see when the movie opens next month.) Besides, there is enough to discuss without speculating about projects in which he may not even appear. Mainstream, the first of his three new movies, is a kind of Network for the internet age. Garfield plays a street-corner situationist who becomes a superstar when a video of him haranguing shoppers while dressed as a rat goes viral. He also howls at the moon, pretends to be a ninja and runs through Los Angeles naked but for a giant prosthetic penis. The film couldn’t be any wackier if people started vomiting emojis. Oh wait, they do. Such exuberance may be in short supply today, he warns me. “A few of us went up a mountain yesterday. It was an insane 11-mile climb, so now I’m slightly not-a-person.” He is slumped on a sofa, his notoriously sculptural hair nowhere to be seen; in a classic can’t-be-arsed move, he is hiding his locks under a baseball cap. But if this is him on half-speed, it is still impressive. Just wind him up and watch him go. Take the subject of Mainstream. “I had a lot of fun creating a really extreme character and I haven’t had a chance to hang out in those regions of myself – the ego and the id – in such an extreme kind of uncensored and shadowy, dark way, so what was appealing was that I got to go to very outlandish, outrageous, unlikable – or not even that, beyond likability or unlikability; that wasn’t even a consideration. It was attempting to reach the places that great liberated artists like Kanye West can sometimes get to, where he just goes beyond any form of delineation or box-making or pigeon-holing; it just is, it’s that id place, those pure unconscious primal urges.” Splendid. Now breathe. Even admirers of Mainstream won’t be expecting it to figure in the Oscars race, whereas it will be a pity if Garfield isn’t nominated for one of the other two. In Lin-Manuel Miranda’s adaptation of Jonathan Larson’s musical Tick, Tick … Boom!, Garfield hurls himself into the role of that frantic, gifted playwright, who died in 1996 just hours before the off-Broadway opening of his soon-to-be-hit-show Rent. He is also excellent in The Eyes of Tammy Faye as the corrupt televangelist Jim Bakker, opposite Jessica Chastain as his doting wife, Tammy Faye. Aside from the misunderstood modern noir Under the Silver Lake, where Garfield was an amateur gumshoe prone to voyeurism and stalking, Mainstream and The Eyes of Tammy Faye represent the first time he has played anyone who could be described as a jerk. “Let me see if I can correct you,” he says. “Um. Yeah. No. Maybe my character in Red Riding exhibits some self-centred kind of …?” On the contrary: in that Channel 4 crime drama from early in Garfield’s career, his character goes out in a blaze of glory, martyring himself for the cause of justice. “He does, yeah, you’re right. For whatever reason, I’ve found myself more in heroic, altruistic, champion-of-the-light kinds of characters and stories.” He understands the desire to see performers explore moral ambiguity: “Tom Hanks is one of my favourite actors and I would love him to expose those darker regions of humanity that we all have in us.” Hanks has admitted that villains “require some degree of malevolence that I don’t think I can fake”. Does Garfield have malevolence in him? “I think if I said no, I’d probably have a nightmare tonight in which I’m shown all my malevolence. Any denial of it would probably pique its interest: ‘Oh, you reckon?’ I think we are vastly unknowable unless we meditate 18 hours a day and/or go on mushroom trips to discover all the nooks and crannies of ourselves.” What have his own mushroom trips taught him? “Ah, that may be a bit too personal to go into.” In 10 words or fewer? “Haha! Yeah, right. I’m definitely aware that I’m not aware of the majority of what I am.” Unlike his Silence co-star Adam Driver, who can drop anchor anywhere between tenderness and savagery, Garfield is on the side of the angels – literally so in his Tony-winning performance on stage in Angels in America. As with the actor, so with the man. He is warm, conscientious and affable – I could happily have talked with him for another hour or two – but he also comes across as a bit of a goody-goody. “Really?” he laughs. “I don’t agree with that! I don’t think I present as goody-goody. But that’s your story and you can stick to it if you want.” I challenge him to name the last time he behaved like an arsehole, or used his fame to gain advantage. He can even treat this interview as a forum in which to apologise to someone he wronged. “That’s very sweet of you,” he says. “And now I have to prove I’m not a goody-goody.” His eyes search the room. “I don’t think I’ve ever used my fame to be an arsehole. I think I would be able to admit it. Maybe I might have used it to get a table at a restaurant occasionally.” Come on, I tell him, everyone says that. It is the equivalent of Theresa May running through fields of wheat. “I’m sorry!” he says. “I guess I’m a goody-goody, then. Maybe that’s the extent of it.” The worst you could say is that he misspoke during an interview at the National Theatre in 2017. Referring to his preparation for Angels in America, he described himself as “a gay man right now, just without the physical act” – that old dilettante routine, of which LGBTQ+ people have justifiably grown sick. Leaked emails in 2015 also described him refusing to leave his hotel room for a prestigious Sony jamboree at which the release date for his third Spider-Man outing – later scrapped, after the critical and commercial disappointment of the second – was due to be announced: “Here we are about one hour away from our gala event and Andrew decides he doesn’t want to attend. He has a rather scruffy beard and he just wants to be left alone.” Still, it is small potatoes compared with some of his colleagues; Mel Gibson or Shia LaBeouf he is not. Mainstream and The Eyes of Tammy Faye demonstrate that media attention can be toxic. How has he avoided being corrupted by it? “Well, I will co-sign that,” he smiles. “I appreciate you saying that. I think I’ve surrounded myself with things that make the deeper parts of me come alive rather than the ones that will be a coke-filled orgy of a moment and will then feel like total shit the next morning. I know that shit doesn’t last.” He gives some of the credit to his mother. “She would always go back to nature and find herself being nourished by the small, natural things in life, in that pantheistic kind of way – the rabbits at the bottom of her garden – rather than anything flashy or fancy. I’ve had that awareness since I was a kid, so maybe it was her.” His mother died of cancer two years ago. Knowing the end was near, Garfield flew home from the set of The Eyes of Tammy Faye to be with her for the final weeks of her life. “It was the best possible version,” he says. “Me losing her rather than her losing me.” What was she like? “She was someone who had an awareness of the beauty that’s around us, and the kindness she could exhibit to someone in the street or at the store. That’s a good life. That’s a life well lived.” It was she who nudged him towards acting when he was having a tough time at school. “What a dangerous, bold, loving, soulful thing to do. She knew I probably wouldn’t make any money from it, but she saw her son was having trouble and was not feeling a sense of joy about being alive. And it turned out to be the best worst decision she ever made, because now I’m talking to you about her and she’s embarrassed somewhere.” Garfield’s mother was British and his father is American. He was born in Los Angeles and his family moved to Surrey when he was three. “I was raised in a sports household. Very competitive with my older brother. My dad’s a swimming coach, I did gymnastics and swimming, rugby and cricket and football.” What he experienced as a sports prodigy, he says, was “a micro version of the Simone Biles thing”. He has been thinking a lot lately about Biles, the 24-year-old US gymnast who withdrew from five of her six Olympics finals this year to safeguard her mental health. “The fact that she decided to publicly honour her own fallibility may be the most inspiring move she could make. Most of us seeing that will go: ‘Oh my God! That means I can fail. I don’t always have to be ascending.’” He had a similar epiphany. “I said: ‘I don’t want a big fat Russian gymnastics coach to be sitting on my back while I do the box splits at the age of nine. I wanna go be a punk with my friends and go skateboarding and listen to Rage Against the Machine and be a bit of a fuckup for a minute.’ There was a natural inclination to own being a fucking idiot.” Hearing this, it is hard not to think back to him in that hotel room, nursing his scruffy beard and refusing to play ball with the bigwigs. His spell as Spider-Man now seems like a source of anguish. Speaking about it in 2017, he said: “I got my heart broken a little bit.” How so? “I went from being a naive boy to growing up,” he says. “How could I ever imagine that it was going to be a pure experience?” He gives a dry, joyless laugh. “There are millions of dollars at stake and that’s what guides the ship. It was a big awakening and it hurt. “Comic-Con in San Diego is full of grown men and women still in touch with that pure thing the character meant to them. [But] you add in market forces and test groups and suddenly the focus is less on the soul of it and more on ensuring we make as much money as possible. And I found that – find that – heartbreaking in all matters of the culture. Money is the thing that has corrupted all of us and led to the terrible ecological collapse that we are all about to die under.” He cracks up suddenly at his own portentousness, a full-blown goofy guffaw. “I’m just kidding, I’m just kidding!” Pause. “I mean, it’ll take a bunch of years before that happens.” Even the apocalypse doesn’t sound too bad coming from Mr Goody-Goody. • Mainstream is available on digital download in the UK from 8 November; Tick, Tick … Boom! is in cinemas on 12 November and on Netflix from 19 November; and The Eyes of Tammy Faye is in UK cinemas from 4 February 2022It was hailed as the biggest search-and-rescue operation in the eastern Mediterranean for a decade. But the bid to save hundreds of refugees on a stricken ship in the Aegean Sea has led to allegations that the operation bore all the hallmarks of an illegal pushback before the Greek coastguard was forced to change tactics. Only days after 382 asylum seekers disembarked on the island of Kos, criticism has mounted over their “unnecessarily prolonged” ordeal at sea. Dr Apostolos Veizis, who heads the humanitarian aid organisation Intersos Hellas, said: “These were men, women and children seeking protection and they should have been taken to a safe port after the vessel sent out a distress signal. “The nearest port was just a few miles away. Instead, they were kept on the vessel for four days, an unnecessarily prolonged period without access to basic services.” The Turkish-flagged Murat 729 had been heading for Italy when it ran into engine trouble off Crete and issued a mayday call on 28 October. Onboard were Pakistanis, Afghans, Bangladeshis, Syrians, Iranians and Lebanese – the biggest single influx of asylum seekers in years – taking a route that has become increasingly popular for Europe-bound refugees. More than 100 vessels, ranging from yachts to decommissioned cargo ships such as the Murat, are thought to have traversed the sea south of Crete this year. By 8.30am that day, Tommy Olsen, who runs Aegean Boat Report, a Norwegian NGO that monitors people movement in the area, had received the first pictures and videos from passengers asking for help. “You could see the boat drifting off the island and a Hellenic coastguard patrol alongside it,” he told the Guardian from his home in Tromsø, north of the Arctic Circle. “It was packed with people and the shores of Crete were clearly visible.” What puzzled Olsen, who claims to be contacted by people in distress – “the victims of pushbacks” he says – up to 10 times a week, was the refusal of local authorities to accept they had located the vessel. “Why Greek officials would insist they had not found the boat and then begin towing it away from Crete seemed very strange,” added Olsen, a veteran of migrant solidarity work on frontline Aegean islands. “It instantly made me think that what we were in fact seeing was not just another pushback but the biggest pushback in years.” Hauled in the direction of Turkey, the stricken ship spent the next three days being dragged across the high seas by the Greek coastguard. “Every hour I’d get the boat’s geo-locations and you could see it going back and forth,” he said. “From 2pm on Thursday until the early hours of Sunday when the passengers were permitted to disembark it travelled 500km [300 miles]. All that time people were sending messages that they weren’t even being given water and that some were very sick.” Greek authorities first acknowledged the Murat on Friday 29 October, saying it was in international waters off Crete and that Athens had appealed to Turkey to take it back. The freighter’s appearance had come against a backdrop of escalating tensions between the two countries over irregular migrant flows. Friction has risen as boats carrying migrants and refugees have set out, reportedly unhindered, from the Turkish coast despite Ankara agreeing to prevent illegal flows under a deal with the EU in 2016. Since March 2020, when Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, encouraged thousands of migrants to enter Greece – triggering a crisis that would see the EU scramble to reinforce its land and sea borders – the Aegean has allegedly become a theatre for pushbacks, with human rights groups claiming that thousands have been forcibly moved into Turkish waters before getting the chance to apply for asylum. “What is of particular concern in this case is that the government was attempting to return people who wanted to seek asylum in Greece before an asylum procedure had taken place,” said Minos Mouzourakis at Refugee Support Aegean, an NGO offering legal assistance to refugees and asylum seekers. “That is a breach of EU law and fundamental rights.” Pushbacks were among the issues at the top of the agenda when the Greek migration minister, Notis Mitarachi, held talks in Ankara this week. Kyriakos Mitsotakis’s centre-right government in Greece has vigorously rejected the claims about pushbacks – attributing them in large part to Turkish propaganda – but the leader accepts his administration pursues “tough but fair” border management policies securing the EU’s external frontier. Explaining the length of time needed to bring the cargo ship “to safe anchorage”, migration ministry officials in Athens laid the blame squarely with Ankara’s refusal to respond to repeated requests for the vessel to be sent back. But critics contend that the odyssey the refugees were subjected to, as the standoff unfolded, is also at odds with the Greek government’s version of events. Shortly after the asylum seekers were brought ashore, Mitarachi praised the Hellenic coastguard, saying: “Greece stepped up, providing immediate humanitarian support to people in need as we always do.” Aid groups, piecing together the sequence of events, believe it was logistically impossible to push the ship back because it was so big and would have required the Greek coastguard also entering Turkish waters. Once it became clear a pushback was impossible, Athens resorted to appealing to Turkey, said Olsen, whose organisation is among a network of NGOs accused by Greek officials of aiding and abetting people smugglers – allegations he strongly rejects. “We now know there were 136 children among the passengers and people with special needs,” said Veizis. “Instead of the Greek coastguard, which is a rescue service, bringing them to safety, the government chose to keep them onboard and move them around as it tried to come to a deal with Turkey. Deals are for business, not humans seeking international protection.” It was, he insisted, the lack of safe and legal passage to Europe that was forcing so many to seek such dangerous routes. Installed in their barbed wire-encircled reception centre in Kos, those onboard the Murat will be given the right to apply for asylum. The process is not expected to be easy: all must undergo 14 days of quarantine even if none, so far, have tested positive for Covid-19. On Wednesday, coastguard officials began taking their details. Already Mitarachi has made clear his intentions. Announcing a meeting with the ambassadors of Pakistan and Bangladesh next week, the migration minister said he would request the return of all who were undeserving of asylum to their home countries. Pakistani and Bangladeshi nationals accounted for 252 of the ship’s passengers.No one doubted it, not even Boris Johnson. The attempt to rescue his friend Owen Paterson from a mild penalty for a breach of the parliamentary code was an abject failure. The Tories’ short-lived attempt to tear up the independent system for combating parliamentary sleaze has been scrapped. After the government’s U-turn, MPs were due a fresh vote over whether to suspend Paterson from the Commons, but he has now resigned from the “cruel world of politics”. The real worry is that the prime minister clearly had no clue what was wrong. He seemed not to get the point of ethics. Nor presumably to see that his volte face has now led to Paterson’s previously unnecessary resignation. Johnson has now had two years of constant brushes with Westminster’s ethics police – on holiday gifts, expenses, flat decoration and Priti Patel’s bullying – but in each case he just shrugs. He says, in effect, my will is the law. At such moments, we must ask who guards the guardians. Downing Street has clearly treated parliament as a populist assembly, a lapdog to executive power. That 250 Tory MPs on Wednesday night, after damning dozens of ordinary MPs such as Keith Vaz and Ian Paisley for unethical behaviour, could obey Johnson’s orders to bail out his friend is, if anything, more awful than Johnson’s own decision. I suppose it is to the credit of Tory MPs that they slept on their decision and now recognise their guilt, swiftly protesting. But what did they think they were doing? Do they regard it as acceptable for a private company to think it worth paying one of them a sweetener of £100,000? For Johnson seriously to have proposed (and for his MPs to have accepted) a hand-picked Tory “ethics” committee to replace one with whose decision he disagrees would be laughable were it not outrageous. All power corrupts, the more absolutely it grows. Johnson last year forced the resignation of the ministerial standards officer, Sir Alex Allen, by rejecting his censure of the home secretary, Priti Patel, for bullying her staff. He found himself at odds with the Electoral Commission over his use of political donations to refurbish his flat, which even his aide Dominic Cummings thought “unethical, foolish, possibly illegal”. Two years ago, Johnson had to be dragged to the supreme court and stand corrected over his refusal to recall parliament. Now he has tried effectively to sack the House of Commons parliamentary commissioner for standards, who was reportedly soon to open another inquiry into his expenses. The prime minister plainly has a dysfunctional relationship with the law. The cabinet must surely have opposed the original Paterson decision, yet failed to influence it. The same must have applied to the Tory party chairman, Oliver Dowden, and the leader of the house, Jacob Rees-Mogg, along with senior colleagues as Michael Gove or Rishi Sunak. They must have known it was wrong, yet they appear to have been Johnson’s lackeys. So who does the prime minister listen to? Johnson’s most reckless decision as Tory leader was the sacking of the half dozen of his predecessor Theresa May’s senior colleagues who shared one thing in common: they were more able than him. He therefore saw them as a threat. The result has been two years of ineffective cabinet government. That left only the cabal, the oligarchy that forms round every prime minister, the courtiers that inhabit No 10. Even powerful leaders have whisperers in their ear, sometimes elder statesmen wiser than they are, sometimes courtiers whose cast of mind has rendered them briefly indispensable. Churchill had field marshal Alanbrook, Thatcher had Willie Whitelaw, Tony Blair had Alastair Campbell. All needed someone who in a moment of crisis could tell them, “You are mad”. Of Whitelaw, Thatcher famously said: “Every prime minister needs a Willie.” On entering office, Johnson was obsessed with loyalty alone, a serious defect in a leader. He bizarrely brought from his Brexit office the eccentric fanatic, Dominic Cummings, who lasted less than two years and presided over universal factionalism. With him had come an aide from Johnson’s London mayoral office, the property developers’ favourite lobbyist Edward Lister. After Lister suddenly resigned in January, he quietly joined the crony peers’ list and became Johnson’s “envoy to the Gulf”. No one seemed secure. The press officers Lee Cain and Allegra Stratton lasted months under Johnson, not years. Johnson’s private secretary Simon Case, formerly a palace official, lasted three months before moving to be cabinet secretary while a relatively junior official, Dan Rosenfield, supposedly succeeded Cummings in charge of “strategy”. No one in Downing Street, I am told, would say boo to a goose, let alone a prime minister. The talk now is that a chief whisperer in Johnson’s ear is Lord Geidt, formerly the Queen’s private secretary. He is said to have won the prime minister’s confidence and was in April duly appointed as Alex Allen’s successor as “independent adviser on ministerial interests”. A month later, he exonerated Johnson of any breach of the ministerial code or conflict of interest in the vexed issue of flat decoration. To Johnson this is a cardinal test of loyalty. It is hard to believe he would not have consulted so close an adviser as Geidt over the initial Paterson decision. Opinion polls declare that the public is unmoved by the ethical contortions of the ruling classes. So what? They should matter, at least to a Britain that loves hypocritically to lecture other nations on the evils of corruption. Johnson may have recoiled from his foolishness, but he was clearly guilty of trying to strip parliament of its role in overseeing the professional behaviour of politicians and ministers. He wanted to be the sole adjudicator of that behaviour. In many countries, the national assembly would have its rights in these matters constitutionally embedded. Not in Britain. In many, there would be a role for the supreme court. Again, not in Britain. Those who share the Downing Street sofa with Boris Johnson do so unknown. Those who advise the prime minister may do so in secret, unaccountable to parliament. The result is a mess. Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnistA British company being launched at the Cop26 summit on Friday will unveil technology it claims could enable zero-carbon emission flights running on liquid ammonia by 2030. It aims to build lightweight reactors to “crack” the chemical to produce hydrogen to burn as fuel, a design it says could allow existing planes to be modified to store liquid ammonia rather than kerosene. Hydrogen is currently seen as the only possible “clean” fuel for future long-haul aviation, but the difficulty of safely storing it in fuel tanks, either as a gas or highly cooled liquid, means aerospace manufacturers have argued that vastly different planes would be needed. Small reactors could be retrofitted into passenger planes to allow the hydrogen to be obtained from ammonia, according to scientists on the UK’s state-funded Science and Technology Facilities Council, who have demonstrated that a mix of cracked ammonia can burn with similar properties as the kerosene normally used as jet fuel. The new joint venture, as yet unnamed, will combine their findings with rocket engine technology from Reaction Engines, with seed funding from cleantech investor IP Group. They believe the first sector likely to adopt their technology is shipping. Ammonia has already been seen as a cleaner fuel for the maritime sector, and could be a readily available fuel, as a product that is currently widely transported and stored globally. However, most of the world’s ammonia is produced from fossil fuels in an energy-intensive process that is responsible for 1-2% of global carbon emissions. To be truly carbon-neutral, the new aircraft would have to run on “green ammonia”, produced from water and air using renewable energy. Cracking the ammonia using the reactors on the plane produces hydrogen and nitrogen, and the emissions are water and nitrous oxides (NOx). NOx is an indirect greenhouse gas and can lead to the formation of health-damaging air pollutants such as particulate matter. The cost of ammonia, or hydrogen, would far outstrip kerosene as a jet fuel, but the firms hope carbon taxes and legislation will alter the future economics. Aviation and shipping currently account for 5% of worldwide CO2 emissions and their impact is expected to grow without significant technological or behavioural change. The British government last year set up a jet zero council with the aim of decarbonising flight, with Boris Johnson suggesting that the UK could build an actual zero-emission transatlantic plane by 2050. The industry has signed up to a net zero pledge for 2050, which relies heavily on offsetting and sustainable fuels. Cracking ammonia onboard, if proved feasible, could give zero-carbon flight 20 years earlier, the new joint venture suggests, although large challenges would remain to decarbonise production of ammonia, reduce NOx, and tackle the effects of aircraft contrails that contribute to global warming. Bill David, STFC senior fellow and professor of energy materials chemistry at Oxford, said: “I am excited about the impact that our technology can have in enabling low-impact transitions in hard-to-abate energy sectors. “Playing to the complementary strengths of ammonia and hydrogen, our cracker technology can rely on the global ammonia infrastructure to provide, at scale, blended ammonia-hydrogen fuels that mimic fossil fuel performance and offer affordable retrofitted energy solutions.” David said that they were “on a journey” to show NOx emissions could be reduced with the right mix and temperatures. Ammonia itself is a large part of the AdBlue used to reduce NOx emissions from diesel combustion engines. Robert Trezona, head of Cleantech, IP Group, said the combination of technologies was “a profound breakthrough” with “myriad applications”. He added: “This is a credible, amazing combination of science and engineering … it’s a possible thing.” The firm will aim to raise tens of millions in funding from other investors next year to build larger scale demonstrations - initially very much on the ground, Trezona said: “This works – but we know we need to show hardware to get investment.”Picks of the week Slow Burn The sixth run of Slate’s podcast on pivotal moments in history focuses on the LA riots of 1992. Joel Anderson expertly guides listeners through Rodney King’s brutal beating at the hands of the LAPD in 1991 and the chaos that erupted the following year, drawing powerful parallels with the current moment. Interviewees include King’s family and friends, and the man responsible for capturing the infamous footage of him. Hannah J Davies Power: Hugh Hefner “How did this little man in a silk robe bend the world around his fantasies? And did he understand the cost others paid to bring those fantasies to life?” Journalist Amy Rose Spiegel delves into the murky legacy of Hugh Hefner, speaking with some of the women who made Playboy and unpicking some big social questions. She also discusses evidence that claims he was controlling and abusive (along with other famous friends). Ultimately, she asks: what can the Playboy saga tell us about sex and power? Hollie Richardson Carrie Low VS. “By the time I did the third interview, I was starting to question – are they believing me?” Canadian investigative journalist Maggie Rahr and CBC examine a rape case in Nova Scotia, which left its victim, Carrie Low, wondering whether the police were on her side. Chilling yet humane true crime. HJD Not Another Love Song With Matt Edmondson The very definition of background listening, this new series sees the Radio 1 DJ feed his new songwriting hobby with the help of chart-topping friends. First up, he collaborates with James Arthur on a ditty dedicated to hay fever. HR Car Crash Eddie Robson and Sara Pascoe’s charming 10-part romcom follows Grace and Elliot, who meet on a blind date for a magazine. As Grace (Aimee Lou Wood) points out, such things only tend to go viral when they’re really bad. Cue her showing up late and loose-lipped to meet Elliot (Alfred Enoch). HJD Producer pick: Rewriting the North Chosen by Hannah Moore Manchester’s Portico Library has tasked five artists from the North of England with telling the stories of the places they call home, in beautiful sound, with new episodes released every three weeks. Released this week, episode one follows broadside ballad singer Jennifer Reid, who presents her A to Z of Lancashire dialect, a rollicking collection of rolled vowels and hard consonants, interspersed with her childhood memories of the county. Episode two takes us to the East Yorkshire coast, where writer Adam Farrer provides a meditation on loss, touring a town that’s destined to fall into the sea – and unearthing the remains of a whale that washed up on its shores one Christmas Eve. Each short episode serves as a love song to places that have long been overlooked, and ways of life that are at risk of being forgotten. Talking points If you’ve got Cop26 and the climate emergency on the brain, you could do worse than listening to Amy Westervelt’s insightful investigate series Drilled. The environmental journalist has also recently launched a separate series, Rigged, looking at the murky history of disinformation. Why not try: Anxiety Bites | Nice Try | The Negotiators Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureThe return of the international super-rich to London amid the easing of coronavirus pandemic restrictions has fuelled the highest annual growth in property prices in the capital’s most expensive district since 2015. Average home prices in “prime central London” – which stretches from Chelsea to Camden and Notting Hill to Westminster – have risen by 1.1% since the start of the year, according to research by the estate agent Knight Frank. It said prices had risen consecutively each month for the past six months “something last achieved before the Brexit referendum in 2016”. Tom Bill, Knight Frank’s head of UK research, said the jump in demand for luxury London housing was mostly being driven by the return of rich overseas buyers as coronavirus lockdowns and travel restrictions lift. “It’s the gradual return back to normality,” Bill said. “People from all over the world are coming back to London, people from the Middle East, Europe, the same roster of countries you would expect. They are back in London in much greater numbers and looking for homes, but there is uncertainty about rising Covid case rates. “There is a sense that buyers who put everything on hold, are coming back on the path to buying.” The number of new prospective buyers registering in London in October was 56% higher than the same month a year earlier. “We are not on the verge of the sort of dramatic double-digit bounceback in prices seen after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008,” Bill said. “But the prime London property market is resuming an overdue recovery that was interrupted by the pandemic.” Rupert des Forges, Knight Frank’s head of prime central London developments, said: “The pandemic has not altered London’s status as a global safe haven.” He said members of the international jet-set elite were buying new-build properties as well as characterful older houses. “West End developers have received over £250m of offers in the W1 postcode alone in the last month,” he said. The agents said rich people’s desire to “escape to the country” during the height of the pandemic had “left some central London bargains in its wake” which were now being picked up. Last summer agents reported surging sales of remote vast country estates and former castle properties, which until Covid-19 struck had become increasingly hard to shift. Savills, which has 320 staff in a unit dedicated to such estates, said it had sold 21 estates valued at £15m-plus in a nine-month period. For comparison, just one such property sold in the whole of 2019.Cricket Australia has confirmed the postponement of this month’s scheduled one-off men’s Test against Afghanistan in Hobart until the situation in the Taliban-ruled country becomes “clearer”. Australia’s first-ever Test match against Afghanistan had been placed in doubt after the Taliban’s seizure of power, with concerns raised over the status of women’s cricket in the country. Under the Taliban regime, Afghan women would be banned from playing sport, an official in the hardline Islamist group said at the time of the shift in government. Following consultation with the Afghanistan Cricket Board and other relevant stakeholders, CA agreed to postpone the match, which had been scheduled to start on 27 November. “CA is committed to support growing the game for women and men in Afghanistan and around the world, however, given the present uncertainty, CA felt it necessary to postpone the Test match until a later time when the situation is clearer,” CA said in a statement released on Friday. “CA looks forward to hosting Afghanistan players in the BBL this season, who are great ambassadors for the game, and to hosting both the Afghanistan women’s and men’s team in the not too distant future.” The match had been scheduled as a key part of Australia’s preparations for this summer’s Ashes series, which starts in Brisbane on 8 December. An extended Australian squad will now play an internal three-day match from 1 December at Redlands in Brisbane. England’s touring party will also play at Redlands, with a three-day warmup match against the England Lions confirmed to begin on 23 November, before a four-day match at Ian Healy Oval, also in Brisbane, starts a week later. The five-match Ashes series begins across town at the Gabba before moving to Adelaide and then Melbourne for the traditional Boxing Day Test and Sydney in the new year. Doubts remain over the location of the fifth and final Test, scheduled to be played in Perth from 14 January, given Western Australia’s strict Covid-19 regulations and that the players will be flying in from New South Wales. But on Friday, after outlining the state’s reopening roadmap, Western Australia premier Mark McGowan said he was confident the series finale at Optus Stadium would go ahead as scheduled. That is despite Western Australia’s borders not being expected to reopen to interstate travellers until a 90% double vaccination rate is reached – likely in late January or early February. “I understand the police and the health officials are working with Cricket Australia on all of those matters,” McGowan said. “We conducted sport for the last two years, whether it is both types of football, cricket, basketball, netball … all those things have been happening over the course of last two years subject to rules. “So that is something that will be worked on jointly and we are confident it will be a good outcome. I am sure we will be able to hold other sporting events. “Over the last two years, police and health are put in place rules that require various forms of quarantine … and we have done it consistently and allowed all the sporting codes to operate in a Covid-safe way.”Top story: PM’s judgment questioned Morning everyone. I’m Martin Farrer and these are the top stories today. Boris Johnson has become engulfed in a sleaze crisis following a humiliating U-turn that saw veteran Tory MP Owen Paterson resign from parliament after Downing Street ditched a bid to shield him from lobbying claims. A furious reaction from backbenchers forced the prime minister to withdraw his backing from Paterson less than 24 hours after ordering MPs to support a controversial amendment tearing up House of Commons anti-sleaze rules to protect the now ex-member for North Shropshire. As he quit, Paterson said the past two years had been an “indescribable nightmare”, but colleagues called the fiasco an “own goal” by No 10. Many questioned Johnson’s judgment in trying to revisit the anti-sleaze rules. Labour tried to pile more pressure on the government by calling for an inquiry into business secretary Kwasi Kwarteng’s remarks about standards commissioner Kathryn Stone. The Paterson affair is the latest in a long list of very public U-turns by Johnson since he became prime minister, including over Covid lockdowns and free school meals. Our commentator Simon Jenkins says it shows that Johnson does not have advisers, but rather courtiers. * * * ‘Stop Covid-19 hanging around’ – People could help to stop the spread of Covid-19 this winter by keeping their windows open for 10 minutes every hour when they are socialising at home. A government-funded campaign will encourage us to “stop Covid-19 hanging around” by ventilating homes to help disperse virus particles. A study suggests that new cases may have peaked in the UK but concerns are growing that Europe is entering another deadly phase. The World Health Organization said uneven vaccine coverage and a relaxation of preventive measures have brought the continent to a “critical point” with 500,000 more deaths forecast by February. * * * Morgue horror – An electrician who admitted murdering two women in 1987 also sexually attacked scores of corpses in a hospital mortuary, in what prosecutors say is the worst offending of its kind in British legal history. David Fuller, 67, pleaded guilty to murdering Wendy Knell, 25, and Caroline Pierce, 20, in separate attacks in Tunbridge Wells, police said. His trial heard that he also sexually assaulted women’s corpses in the mortuaries at Kent and Sussex hospital and Tunbridge Wells hospital while working there. Police have detected at least 99 potential victims of Fuller, in what is believed to be the worst case of necrophilia in British legal history. * * * Emissions warning – The CO2 emissions of the richest 1% of humanity are on track to be 30 times greater than what is needed to keep global heating below 1.5C, research warns. Amid anger at some leaders using private jets to travel to the Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow, the study says the wealthiest people on Earth are on track to release 70 tonnes of CO2 per person a year. They will account for 16% of total emissions by 2030, up from 13% of emissions in 1990. After 40 countries committed to phasing out coal use in Glasgow, the focus has turned to gas with activists saying its use must be slashed by nearly a third this decade to avoid disastrous climate effects. Indonesia has questioned the terms of a Cop26 deal to end deforestation by 2030, days after joining more than 100 countries in signing up to it. * * * Tough gig – The number of adults in England and Wales working for gig economy companies has reached 4.4 million and is now two-and-a-half times bigger than in 2016. Almost 15% of working adults now get paid by platforms such as Deliveroo, Uber and Amazon’s delivery arm Flex, research for the TUC claims, compared with about 6% in 2016 and just under 12% in 2019. * * * Grape gripe – We’ve had shortages of computer chips, petrol and timber, but now things are getting serious: world wine production is expected to fall to one of its lowest levels on record after harsh weather battered vineyards in Europe’s major wine-producing regions. The conditions “severely impacted” production in Italy, Spain and France, resulting in “extremely low” production volumes, an international wine body has said. Today in Focus podcast At the UN climate summit in Glasgow, global environment editor Jonathan Watts examines the emissions-cutting pledges from world leaders as time runs out to prevent catastrophic global heating. Lunchtime read: Andrew Garfield: ‘I’m no goody-goody’ With his new films Tick, Tick ... Boom! and The Eyes of Tammy Faye tipped for Oscars success, the actor Andrew Garfield discusses his inner malevolence, his mother’s death – and his “heartbreaking” time as Spider-Man. Sport Yorkshire have been suspended from hosting international cricket and face the prospect of additional financial sanctions following the club’s botched handling of Azeem Rafiq’s racism allegations. The former Yorkshire and England captain Michael Vaughan has revealed he has been accused of racism by Rafiq but strongly denies the claim. West Ham have condemned footage of their fans apparently singing an antisemitic song towards a Jewish man on a plane and vowed to issue those involved with bans from the club. Son Heung-min, Lucas Moura and an own goal put Tottenham 3-0 up against Vitesse on Antonio Conte’s debut in charge but the new manager then witnessed his side’s frailties in the 3-2 Europa Conference League win. Daniel Amartey swiftly cancelled out Victor Moses’s opener to give Leicester a 1-1 draw against Spartak Moscow but they were left to rue Jamie Vardy’s spot-kick miss. Eddie Howe is on the verge of being confirmed as Newcastle United’s new manager after agreeing a deal in principle with the club’s Saudi Arabian-led owners. If the lineup for England’s rugby union match against Tonga hasn’t produced many ripples, a radically reshuffled leadership group hints at a change in tone, writes Robert Kitson. The feelgood factor has returned to the Australia camp after a crushing win over Bangladesh boosted their hopes of reaching the T20 World Cup semi-finals. Cameron Norrie is unlikely to qualify for the ATP Finals in Turin after he bowed out of the Paris Masters in the third round, losing to Taylor Fritz of the United States in an intense two-set tussle. Lewis Hamilton has insisted he would never deliberately take out his rival Max Verstappen in order to win the Formula One title. And in an interview with the Guardian, Republic of Ireland international Katie McCabe has spoken about Arsenal’s exciting signings and the need to keep breaking barriers after her country’s equal pay deal. Business The pound has dipped again overnight to $1.348 after falling heavily in the wake of the Bank of England’s surprise decision to keep interest rates at their record low level of 0.1%. Sterling is doing a bit better against the euro at €1.168, while the FTSE100 is set to open up 0.1%. As China Evergrande faces another do-or-die debt deadline next week, Xi Jinping is piloting a local property tax that he hopes can deflate China’s massive housing bubble. But is it already too late? The papers The Guardian leads on the sleaze scandal – “Tories plunged into crisis after sleaze rules U-turn” – as do many others. The Times splash head reads “No 10 faces party backlash after suspension U-turn” and the Telegraph has “Paterson quits after backlash from MPs”. The Mail says the nation is aghast and asks “Is anybody in charge at No10?, although it leads on the morgue deaths: “Horror at the morgue”. That’s also the lead in the Mirror: “How many more victims?”. The Yorkshire Post leads with the county cricket race row: “Sponsors ditch club as racism scandal deepens”. The FT says the City was caught out by the non-rate rise – “BoE sends investors scrambling by keeping interest rates on hold” – while the Express has “Game-Changer! World’s first pill to fight Covid”. The Record leads on “Cops attack Gers fans”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe American prison has a long cultural history, depicted in movies from The Shawshank Redemption to The Green Mile. They are generally portrayed as harsh, dehumanising places populated by hardened criminals and vicious guards. Who better, then, to demystify prisons and those who live in them than artists themselves? “We’ve had this glorified TV version of what a prison is in America and sure, it’s not a cakewalk, but it’s also humans in there – our fellow humans,” says Brian Roettinger, a graphic designer based in Los Angeles. The 44-year-old and his partner at P–R Studio, Willo Perron, 47, will next month feature as guests artists running classes for prisoners in California in what Roettinger calls “an opportunity to humanise them and maybe lend a hand to make the thing less scary and intimidating”. The project is a collaboration between the Prison Arts Collective (PAC), a university-based programme that offers an arts curriculum in 12 California state prisons, and the global talent agency Huxley. Guest artists include photographer Tyler Mitchell, American artist Sterling Ruby, British-trained fine artist Issy Wood and cartoonist David Ostow. Their subjects will include scriptwriting and creative storytelling, cartooning and illustration, collage making and creative mindfulness. For their part, Perron and Roettinger will teach logo design and typography from 10 December. Roettinger says: “We’re planning on everybody working together to rebrand the Prison Arts Collective: thinking about how that logo and colour palette could communicate, creating it as a traditional branding project and going through the process and step by step on how we approach that.” The guest artist programme is made up of 15 individual lessons over 15 weeks. The PAC will initially teach the new programne in one prison and eventually bring it to a dozen men’s and women’s California state prisons. Such work is a statement of faith in the transformative power of art and the redemptive potential of self-expression. Perron reflects: “The arts are a way to channel and deal with with emotion and I think a lot of people that wind up in these difficult binds have just reacted or and didn’t have the outlets. “We all need multiple different types of outlets from therapy to being able to talk to people. The arts is a great way to channel anything from sadness to anger to glee. [This is] to give people one of the tools to go to instead of something that could turn violent.” America has the highest incarceration rate in the world. When Huxley approached the design duo about taking part, they did not take long to say yes, having previously worked with a prison reform foundation led by the rapper Jay-Z. Perron says: “The things that need the most attention in this country are probably healthcare and the prison system. We’re designers at work and we’re not in government or anything but it gives us the opportunity to do something that hopefully can help and push things forward a little bit from what our skills are. “It’s people that get involved and have a contact and a sense of responsibility to what’s happening versus ‘This is where we throw our trash and we don’t know where it goes’. This is how we deal with with our society’s woes: we just put people in boxes and throw away the keys. And obviously it’s not worked and we have to start looking at it in a real way.” He adds: “Society makes our problems, society makes our criminals. We’re all intrinsically linked to everybody’s decisions. For us to think that the simple solution is to lock people away and not deal with that is at best medieval.” The non-profit PAC began in 2013 and reaches nearly 450 incarcerated participants each semester. Its founding director, Annie Buckley, a professor at San Diego State University where it has its headquarters, says the response of incarcerated participants has been overwhelmingly positive. “People feel that it’s like an oasis for them within the prison, where they can relax for a bit and just feel safe and relaxed in their space and creativity,” she explains in a phone interview. “We might take it for granted on the outside but for them it’s quite profound. “The sense of connection is really powerful: for them to connect with a university student who’s coming in to teach who they might not otherwise have met. To have that interaction about the arts through the class is something that is quite meaningful. Third is the ability for them to shape an identity that’s positive around being an artist or being a writer or being a student.” Buckley recalled that one participant told her that his daughter now refers to him as “an artist” with her friends at school “which I thought was so powerful to be able to refer to that instead whatever she used to say concerning her father being in prison”. The programme includes inmates ranging from those convicted of minor offences to those serving life sentences. “We don’t ask them why they’re there or what they’ve done because really the focus of our programme is about shifting identities and not having people only be known by the worst thing they’ve ever done. It’s to experience being in a collaborative, inclusive community and experience themselves as artists and students and collaborators and peers.”Homebuyers have been given a few more months to lock into the record low mortgage rates that have helped keep the housing market booming during the pandemic, experts have said, after the Bank of England held the base rate at 0.1%. Lenders had been repricing their home loans upwards in recent days amid speculation the rate would rise to 0.25%, and many of the cheapest deals have been withdrawn. However, while there are no longer three- and five-year mortgages for sale at interest rates below 1%, borrowers with large deposits still have a large choice of loans priced at less than 2%. Experts said while the cost of debt remained close to record lows, house prices were unlikely to fall. However activity and growth would slow as rises reduced borrowers’ disposable income. “While the best deals may now already be history, the decision not to raise interest rates will give homebuyers further opportunity to lock into the low interest rates that have given a booming housing market oxygen during the past 16 months,” Lucian Cook, the head of residential research at the property firm Savills, said. “With the stimulus of a stamp duty holiday behind us, any rise would be expected to contribute to a slowing in price growth and activity over the next 12 months.” David Fell, a senior analyst at the property firm Hamptons, said the recent increases in the cost of mortgages would “remind buyers that rates don’t only move in a downward direction”. However, he added: “For the average first-time buyer the current upwards pressure is likely to equate to tens rather than hundreds of pounds extra in monthly mortgage payments. I don’t think at this stage it will make much difference to most people’s buying decisions.” Dominic Agace, the chief executive of the estate agency chain Winkworth, said speculation about rising interest rates had not affected the sentiment of would-be buyers. “The market has naturally cooled since the end of the stamp duty but with such a low base for mortgage rates and proposed small increase in interest rates, this hasn’t altered the outlook of buyers,” he said. Stamp duty holidays across the UK have fuelled a market that was already busy as people made lifestyle changes after the first lockdown of the pandemic. As the final phase of the tax break came to an end in England at the end of September, sales slowed but the latest house price indices have shown price growth has continued. On Wednesday, Nationwide said annual price inflation was running at 9.9%. Typically at this time of year the housing market grows quieter in the run-up to the winter months. Anthony Codling, an analyst and chief executive of the property website Twindig, said he expected the market to be quiet for “at least a couple of months” and that some of next spring’s activity may have been pulled forward by the stamp duty incentive. He said if lenders continued to compete for mortgage business and kept rates down, there could be enthusiasm from buyers after the winter. Although short-term mortgages may remain cheap, borrowers could be squeezed by the rising cost of living, which will feed into lenders’ affordability checks. Any rise in a lender’s standard variable rate could also have an impact, as these are typically used to stress test new borrowers’ finances before mortgages are agreed. Reducing what people are allowed to borrow will mean there is less money for them to spend on a property, which may not cause a problem for those with savings, but could reduce the number of buyers able to enter the market with low deposits. Cook said: “Gradual rate rises are unlikely to put undue pressure on household finances but they are likely to limit the level of mortgage debt lenders will advance at the point of purchase, especially when a mandatory stress test on affordability is undertaken.” Fell said if there was a big rise in interest rates that would make a difference to the housing market. “Any significant rate rises over the next few years have to potential to reduce or even reverse price growth through squeezed affordability as well as buy-to-let investors re-discovering the opportunity for higher returns outside of property.”It was the headline-grabbing announcement of the first day of Cop26: India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, pledging his country would go net zero by 2070. The declaration proved divisive. Some in the British press were scathing, describing it as a disappointment, as it was several decades behind the 2050 commitments made by the west, and 10 years behind China’s 2060 target. But many observers celebrated, calling it highly ambitious for a developing country of 1.4 billion people – which is still yet to emit the majority of its emissions – to commit to net zero at all. Others were dismissive that a target 50 years in the future would have any impact on action and policy in India today, when it mattered most. Scientists say that the world needs to go net zero by 2050 to mitigate the worst effects of the climate crisis. But as many people have emphasised, a net zero commitment – which refers to the amount of greenhouse gas being emitted by a country being balanced out by the amount being removed – means something very different for India than it does for the western nations pushing hard for the commitment. Unlike the US and Europe, India, the world’s third largest emitter of greenhouse gases, is still years, if not decades, away from its peak in terms of emissions, energy use, per-capita income and coal use. There is still not adequate universal access to electricity, especially in rural areas where power cuts and load shedding are frequent. Less than 50% of the infrastructure it will require to be developed has yet to be built; an additional 300m vehicles will be on India’s roads in the next two decades; Indians will be running 240 million more energy-guzzling air conditioners by 2030; and the country is expected to have a larger increase in energy demand in the next 20 years than anywhere else in the world. Currently, 70% of the energy driving India’s development is generated by coal, much of it coming cheaply from domestic mines. Tim Buckley, director of energy finance studies for South Asia at the IEEFA, said it was “hypocrisy” to expect India to commit to the same net zero pledge as the developed countries that, historically, have created most of the emissions causing the climate crisis. “We in the west caused the problem, yet the west has been singularly unimpressive and uncommitted in delivering on our side of the bargain in terms of action and financing,” he said. “Why should the burden to solve this fall on millions of poor people in India? For the world to reach net zero emissions by 2050, the developed world must deliver net zero by 2040 at the latest, in order to buy time for the developing world to deliver a decade later.” Buckley emphasised that, unlike in the US, Modi did not have the “luxury of huge financial resources” to pass trillion-dollar bills to invest in climate action and technology to meet net zero. He said: “India will do more than its fair share, I am sure of that, but largely because it is now economically sensible to do so, not because of any moral persuasion from the west.” Many people have speculated that the 2070 date is simply a continuation of the “China+10 years” rule that India has applied to various climate commitments in the past; China, about a decade ahead of its peak than India, has committed to net zero by 2060. It is also in line with recent reports by the International Energy Agency (IEA) and the Indian thinktank the Council on Energy, Environment and Water about feasible scenarios for how and when India could reach net zero. Even these scenarios are ambitious; according to the IEA report, clean energy investments in India will have to rise $30bn (£22bn) to $150bn by 2030, and the number of electric cars and bikes sold will have to go up from 1% to 40% in the next eight years, to make 2070 net zero possible, requiring massive investment. “For a country like India, committing to net zero transition could potentially have implications on growth, on the economy and on energy availability for industrialisation and urbanisation,” said Siddharth Singh, an Indian energy researcher. “It makes it more risky and expensive to commit to net zero, so that’s why it is a very big deal.” But Navroz Dubash, of the Centre for Policy Research, was among those sceptical of the significance of the 2070 net zero pledge, which he saw more as a response to the “incessant diplomatic drumroll” from the international community than a concrete realisation of a true carbon neutral future for India. “I don’t think that a net zero pledge, 50 years into the future, will do a whole lot to change what India does today in terms of policy,” said Dubash. “Frankly, you can have a net zero scenario for any date that you pick and for a rapidly developing country like India, whose future could take many pathways, it is more important to focus on locking-in a low carbon trajectory now through 2030 pledges.” It is seen as essential for the world that India does not follow a similar pathway to China, whose emissions rose very sharply as it developed and are now being brought down punishingly steeply. The focus is therefore on avoiding, rather than reducing, emissions; meaning a shift away from fossil fuels to renewables to drive development. “What we want for India is a shallow emissions curve, not a mountain,” said Dubash. India is already on the frontline of the climate crisis, with more and more regions grappling with extreme heat and extreme weather events. Yet the pathway to net zero is far from certain and its pledge to lock in a low-carbon future, as it continues on a path of economic growth and urbanisation, is mired in huge obstacles – in particular its reliance on coal power. Renewable energy is at the forefront of India’s climate agenda. Among the other pledges made by Modi at Cop26, which built on promises made in Paris in 2015, was a commitment to 500 gigawatts of non-fossil fuel capacity by 2030 and a commitment that 50% of electricity capacity would come from renewables by 2030. But questions remain whether renewables can reliably meet the unprecedented rising energy demand of Indians in the same way that coal can. Solar and wind are already much cheaper than fossil fuels in India, where solar capacity has increased by five times in the past five years. But unlike coal it is intermittent, and scaling it up to use as a replacement for fossil fuels is mired with expensive and technical issues. Pricey lithium batteries are required for storage so it can also be used to power electricity at peak evening times when the sun is not shining and wind is not blowing, driving up the cost up by more than double. There are challenges in integrating it into the electricity grid, which will involve large investments to solve. The building of off-grid rooftop solar panels has also been very lacklustre across India. Hydro power is also inconsistent, and the building of hydro-power dams in the Indian Himalayas has been blamed for destabilising the fragile region and causing recent catastrophic disasters. The absence of a mention of an end to coal in Modi’s Cop26 speech, and India’s refusal to sign the commitment at Cop26 on Thursday to phase out coal-fired power, was seen by observers to highlight that the transition away from coal remains an unresolved problem. Over four million of its citizens’ livelihoods rely on domestic coal; it generates vast revenue for the government; it is one of the country’s only reliable domestic energy resources as India has no natural gas; and coal is also precariously tied up in the banking sector. Multiple coal-fired power plants already in the works are still being built despite India’s Cop26 pledges, and approvals are being given for new domestic mines to be opened up. “Given the massive surge in fossil fuel prices, it is economic suicide for Modi not to make these big commitments to renewables,” said Buckley. “But until battery prices have come down to affordable levels, and until the grids been modernised, India is going to need coal for many years to come.” Modi has also been accused of making “grand statements” about climate on the world stage, while on the ground enabling a systematic unravelling of environmental laws and regulations for big industry, which has seen protected wildlife areas and coastal regions opened up for development and ecologically diverse forests uprooted to make way for open-cast coalmines. “Neutral by 2070 means we are all doomed,” said Sreedhar Ramamurthi of the environmental group Environics. He said the Modi government had recently opened up and sold off dozens of new areas for coal mining by private companies, and had “an obsession with infrastructure which is of no use to the poor and reflects no serious concern for the environment”. But much of India’s net zero success also hinges on one other major thing: finance. While some of its biggest private companies, including Reliance, Adani and Tata, have already begun significant investment in renewables, India will need billions of state funding in technology and infrastructure that the government, which has suffered ongoing economic decline and devastation by Covid, simply can not afford on its own. Modi, in his speech, called out the international community for a failure to stand by their financial commitments, and proposed a $1tn fund to help developing countries such as his decarbonise. “It was a political signal that says: look, accountability goes two ways here,” said Dubash. “You’re asking us for net zero, so we’re going to start counting money as carefully as you’re counting emissions.”Children in the UK ate fewer vegetables, took less exercise and experienced worsening emotional difficulties following the Covid outbreak, according to a research study. A biennial survey conducted by investigators at Cardiff University found that primary school-age children reported a sharp increase in “elevated or clinically significant emotional difficulties” in early 2021, compared with the same survey conducted in 2019. The survey between April and June found that 27% of children in year 6 showed significant emotional difficulties, compared with just 17% in 2019, while reporting little change in behavioural difficulties. Children from poorer backgrounds were nearly twice as likely to report emotional and behavioural difficulties compared to those from affluent families. Kelly Morgan, a social science research fellow at Cardiff, said the impact of the pandemic was likely to leave a “lifelong footprint” on the mental health of children as they grew older, based on evidence from previous international studies. “From our findings, children and their families were extensively affected over the course of the pandemic,” Morgan said. “We know that it was illegal for children to meet others to play at some points, but also that children were deeply concerned about the health of their family and others.” The survey highlighted the important role schools have played during and after the pandemic. Of the children surveyed, 90% said they felt cared for by their teachers and 80% said there was at least one adult in school they could talk to. Prof Graham Moore, who led the study, which was funded by the Welsh government and examined data from 1,863 children in 76 schools, said it showed that good relationships were maintained between teachers and their pupils. “These connections remained consistently strong among the children we surveyed, demonstrating the vital role education professionals have played for young people during the pandemic. “It’s plausible that if teachers and support staff hadn’t done such a good job of connecting with their pupils in this way, we would be dealing with an even greater mental health crisis among our children,” Moore said. The study revealed that in terms of diet and exercise, the 10- and 11-year-olds surveyed were “consistently less healthy” during the pandemic than in previous years. The proportion of children eating daily portions of vegetables dropped from 52% in 2019 to 41% in 2021, while those eating fruit every day dropped from 59% to 47%. Eating vegetables remains more popular among middle- and upper-income families: the survey found that while 52% of children from upper-income households had daily vegetables, only 35% of those in low-income households did the same. Morgan said the 18 months of disruption to family routines may have left parents struggling to buy and keep perishable foods such as fresh vegetables on a regular basis. “On top of all that, many children relied on schools for breakfast and lunch, which could explain some of the drop in fruit and vegetable consumption,” he added.Inside a wooden boathouse on the shore of Loch Craignish, a mass of fronds sit in two 1,000-litre tanks. The fronds are seagrass, and they are filled with seeds. Next to the tanks is a Heath Robinson-style series of pumps. The laboratory may be low-tech, but it is the headquarters of a pioneering, community-led climate experiment. The goal is to restore the loch’s once-thriving seagrass meadows. “We are trying to create a seismic change in the health of this sea loch,” says Danny Renton, of Craignish Restoration of Marine &amp; Coastal Habitats (Cromach) and founder of Seawilding, a charity backed by people living in the surrounding villages in Argyll and Bute, about three hours’ drive from the Cop26 summit in Glasgow. “Seagrass sequestration of carbon is 35 faster than the rainforest. It’s an amazing carbon sink,” Renton says. “It draws carbon dioxide from the water as part of photosynthesis, and traps it in the mud.” Britain has very little rainforest to soak up carbon dioxide emissions but it does have roughly 11,000 miles (17,700km) of coastline, dotted with salt marshes and seagrass. Both habitats, alongside tropical mangroves, are the best understood stores of “blue carbon” – the carbon held in marine ecosystems (as opposed to the “green carbon” of terrestrial habitats). These blue carbon ecosystems sequester up to 2% of the UK’s carbon emissions a year, mostly in soil and, if undisturbed, can store it for millennia. In Scotland, blue carbon stores sequester 28.4 MtCO2e (tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent) a year, about three times more than Scotland’s forests combined. But while rainforests, peatlands and other habitats on land are well known for their importance in the climate crisis, coastal wetlands remain overlooked. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) includes them in national greenhouse gas inventories, but they are also among the most threatened ecosystems on the planet. A study earlier this year concluded that 92% of the UK’s seagrass has been lost in the past two centuries, with 39% disappearing just since the 1980s, thanks to pollution from industry, mining and farming, along with dredging, bottom trawling and coastal development. The few patches of seagrass that remain in Loch Craignish are fragmented. “Loch Craignish is very typical,” says Renton, examining a map of the 10 remaining meadows. “Most lochs have had damage to the seabed by bottom trawling and aquaculture, with pollution, like nitrates, entering the water.” The loch once had beds of huge native oysters and scallops. Its seagrass meadows provided nurseries for herring and cod. Now, most of that has gone. Indeed, seagrass, which covers about 0.1% of the ocean globally but provides 18% of its carbon storage, is shrinking by 7% each year – equivalent to a football pitch worth vanishing every 30 minutes, according to a 2020 UN report. Renton’s aim is to enhance the meadows by half a hectare this year. It is part of a wider rewilding project that has reintroduced 220,000 oysters to the loch, to provide a habitat for wildlife and act as a water filter to allow seagrass to photosynthesise better. As well as climate sinks, wetlands protect coasts from storm surges and increase biodiversity. Underwater seagrass meadows, for instance, can also harbour up to 40 times more marine life than bare seabeds. But restoring seagrass, even by half a hectare, is labour-intensive and complex work. In August, 40 volunteers in wetsuits and snorkels swam over the remaining meadows to collect fronds full of seeds, which are now maturing in the tanks. After maturity, hundreds of thousands of seeds were filtered through pumps, then placed in tiny hessian bags, 50 in each, and planted, at one-metre intervals on the bed of the loch. The bags, weighted with sand to make them sink, help protect the seed from predators. With the survival rate of seagrass seeds at about 10%, it could take between five and seven years before the new seagrass growth connects with the old growth to form a meadow. “That’s why it’s so complex,” Renton says. With the pressure on countries and companies to reach net zero, blue carbon is gaining international attention. Projects, mainly involving mangroves, are using “blue carbon credits” to fund their work. Renton has been approached by companies keen to fund the Loch Craignish project in exchange for carbon credits. But he says it is “too early” to consider quantifying, let alone verifying, how the restoration work affects carbon storage. “We don’t have a verifiable metric to offset carbon emissions,” he says. “We know carbon sequestration can be extraordinarily effective, but there’s a lot we don’t know.” Estimating how much carbon seagrass restoration can soak up is just one problem. Labour-intensive seagrass restoration is expensive and has a lower success rate compared with mangroves and salt marshes, according to recent research. Although Project Seagrass, a marine conservation charity that set up the Loch Craignish laboratory, aims to mechanise the more labour-intensive aspects, including gathering the seeds, the report in the journal Nature concluded that large-scale restoration of seagrass meadows is “feasible” but “remains challenging”. Richard Unsworth, Project Seagrass director and associate professor at Swansea University, acknowledges that the science behind blue carbon is still developing. But he says: “It is an important part of the complex jigsaw to fight climate change.” In July, more than 7,000 marine and climate scientists, human rights experts and others urged world leaders to include legally binding targets for blue carbon in their emission-reduction plans. There is no time to lose, Unsworth says. “Up until a few years ago, no one was bothering to look at the amount of carbon in marine sediments. There is not much data in Europe, let alone the UK,” he says. “They are poorly mapped, poorly understood and not protected.” For now, he is doing what he can. A consortium, including Project Seagrass, WWF and Swansea University, has been planting more than 750,000 seagrass seeds in Dale Bay in Pembrokeshire, with the aim of eventually restoring 3,000 hectares (12 sq miles) of meadows in the UK by 2030. That area of seagrass could suck up the emissions of 3,000 small cars, create a habitat for billions of small animals, support 4,700 more fish than bare sediment, and increase sediment strength tenfold to prevent erosion. “It’s a win-win,” says Unsworth. “It has to be part of a vision to improve nature as a whole.” Tomorrow – Part 3: the future of blue carbon • This article was amended on 7 November 2021. An earlier version stated incorrectly that Britain has no rainforests.Pick of the week Dopesick “You don’t chase a market,” says a drug company executive, “you create it.” It’s the statement at the heart of this bleak, striking series telling the story of the American opioid addiction crisis from the perspectives of the predators who punted an addictive drug (OxyContin) to doctors and patients; the patients themselves; and the cops trying to get to the bottom of the scandal. Essentially, it’s the story of a transitional point in US capitalism, where the amoral marketeers of a dangerous product fed upon the decline of older kinds of industry such as mining – and the despair left behind by their passing. Michael Keaton stars as troubled doctor Samuel Finnix; Rosario Dawson is a driven DEA agent. Disney+, from Friday 12 November *** The Shrink Next Door Marty Markowitz (Will Ferrell) is a people-pleaser. So when he has a panic attack and his sister suggests seeing a psychiatrist, he agrees. It’s then that he meets Dr Isaac Herschkopf (Paul Rudd), who spots his passive, obliging streak and spies an opportunity. This black comedy based on a hit podcast tells the true story of how the manipulative shrink took ownership of his client’s life for three decades, eventually occupying his home. It’s nicely performed – Rudd in particular manifests Herschkopf’s slippery, jittery charm perfectly – and a darkly fascinating insight into doctor-patient power dynamics gone awry. Apple TV+, from Friday 12 November *** In My Skin Here’s a second, concluding series for this touching drama starring the excellent Gabrielle Creevy as Bethan, a Welsh teen whose cockiness and immaturity at school belie the challenges of her home life. Bethan’s mum, Trina, has bipolar disorder, her father, Dilwyn, is abusive, and much of the time Bethan is the only grownup in the room. Now, Trina’s health is improving and Bethan is enjoying a more normal teenage life but difficult choices soon return. A big-hearted and compassionate tale whose first season was deservedly showered with Welsh Baftas. BBC Three, from Sunday 7 November *** Animal To UK eyes (and ears), a nature series on Netflix is never going to enjoy quite the cachet of a David Attenborough extravaganza. This lavish Netflix affair (from the makers of the spectacular series Night on Earth) attempts to replicate the gravitas of Attenborough with celebrity charisma – famous voices include Bryan Cranston, Rashida Jones, Rebel Wilson and Pedro Pascal. Expect to get up close and extremely personal with, among other photogenic beasts, a mother lioness, a kangaroo joey and a young giant Pacific octopus. Netflix, from Wednesday 10 November *** Curse of the Chippendales Due to assumptions made about gender and commodification, the all-male 80s erotic dancing troupe the Chippendales were presented as a more “innocent” proposition than an equivalent group of women might have been. Sure enough, it all seems rosy at first as this series tells the story of the group’s ascent, via lashings of luxuriant mullets and baby-oiled six-packs. But darkness lingered just below the surface; the era-specific, VHS-fuzzy nostalgia eventually gives way to a timelessly grim tale of dysfunction, disillusionment and murder. Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 12 November *** Always Jane Trans life is too often portrayed in terms of struggle and strife. So while this new four-part docuseries, offering an intimate portrait of transgender teen Jane Noury as she navigates various challenging personal issues, verges on gushing in places, that’s fair enough under the circumstances. Happily, Jane is facing life with the support of what appears to be an incredibly loving and supportive family – the series balances issues unique to Jane with a cheerful and pretty universal depiction of functional everyday family life. Amazon Prime Video, from Friday 12 November *** 90 Days: Single Files You might already recognise a few of these faces from the endless minor variations on the 90 Day Fiancé formula in which couples have three months to decide whether or not to take the plunge and get married. This latest spin-off series sees several of them renewing their frenzied and hysterical attempts to find love via a simulation of dating apps (literal gun shots go off during one dinner date). It’s blatantly and shamelessly exploitative of their various foibles but likely to be guiltily addictive fun if wallowing in trash is your kind of thing. Discovery+ , from Friday 12 NovemberThroughout the 2021 United Nations climate change conference, the Guardian will be publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. Rasmus Poulsen, eastern Greenland We’ve already started having problems with snow and ice cover and we know it’s going to get worse. It used to be that March was a good sledding month and April a very good month. In 2018 some people were still mushing in the first week of June, but in 2019 I could only take the sleds out twice in the whole of April: it rained, the snow disappeared, the ice became unstable. Then this year I was busy until May … And the season is starting later, sometimes much later. It’s the unpredictability that’s hard for a small business – you don’t know when you’re going to have to cancel. There’s a long-term worry here for the dogs. This is a protected breed of working dog that has one purpose: pulling sleds. If there’s less need for sleds, there’s less need for dogs. There are half as many Greenland dogs on Greenland now than there were 20 years ago. Guys who rely on their dogs for a big part of their winter income, they’re putting older ones down now in a bad season, and buying new ones when they need them again. Because it’s a huge budget, keeping a team of dogs – mine cost more than 31,000 Danish kroner (£3,550) a year just for food, and if you can’t offset the cost … The problem is we need a large population to avoid illness and in-breeding. Climate change is clearly endangering the traditional ways of life. It’s not something we talk about a lot every day here, but certainly we see it every day. We look at old photographs and we see that now there is less and less ice, less and less snow. We see new species of animals arriving: there are pilot whales up here now, that’s new, and also humpback salmon and halibut. I’m not a wildlife expert but even I can see that these things, too, are changing, and fast. My business – and my prices – will not be able to stay the same. When the ice no longer comes up to the shore in the town here, and you need to travel kilometres overland to reach it … it’s more time, more effort, more money. There will be new activities, for sure: there have been people seriously prospecting for gold up in Kangerlussuaq this year; that was pretty much impossible before, because of the permafrost and the ice layers. But now gold mining on Greenland is looking feasible. So Greenlanders will adapt. They always have. I will adapt. But yes, climate change is really affecting us all a lot, already – and it will affect us more.Catching just a glimpse of a blue whale is thrilling – at up to 30 metres long, it is the world’s largest animal. So when Dylan deHaas sent his drone up after hearing a whale spout in the near distance, he was stunned to see a group of four of the giant mammals in his frame. The Perth photographer had been with his wife, Sarah, relaxing on a boat off the coast of Margaret River on Australia’s south-west tip on Tuesday morning, when they encountered the massive beasts. “I spend a lot of time in and around the ocean, but I had no idea of the group, it was only when the drone went up that I could see them,” deHaas said. Boats must maintain a 100-metre distance from whales in the area, however deHaas said the whales were less than 200 metres from the coast, and were so large that their presence in the water could still be felt. “We were just chilling in the boat, relaxing, and the next minute we heard the spout.” “It was pretty insane to see them all, it was spectacular.” DeHaas said he had only seen a blue whale once before in his life, and that it was something Sarah had always wanted to see. “She’s never seen one before, so as soon as we realised it was a blue whale, she started crying,” “It’s super rare to see them in a group of four,” deHaas said of the whales, which had come from waters around Indonesia and were on their way to Antarctica to feed in the coming months. Since posting his images to social media this week, deHaas has been surprised by the response, which included being contacted by Tourism Australia. “It really was stunning.”The poet and now novelist Adam O’Riordan was born in Manchester, teaches there, and has declared that the city “has always had a central place in my imagination”. His 2010 debut poetry collection, In the Flesh, opened with a poem called “Manchester”, which O’Riordan described as an “obsessional imaginative remaking” of his home town in its Victorian industrial prime, complete with its “million windows and the smoke-occluded sun”. He again summons a late 19th-century incarnation of the city to open The Falling Thread, his debut novel, which follows the lives of Charles, Tabitha and Eloise Wright, children of a Manchester cotton mill owner, in the quarter century or so leading up to the first world war. Poets who write novels are sometimes commended for not writing “a poet’s novel”, by which reviewers mean something where fine description and precise attention to language come at the expense of plot. The Falling Thread is full of fine description and, yes, a poet’s precise command of language, but it also offers plenty of plot. Two wars are quickly referenced and it takes just a handful of pages for Charles and his sisters’ governess Hettie to move from hesitatingly stilted conversation, to hands touching for a little longer than necessary, to sex – soundtracked by “the leisurely contralto of a blackbird … growing louder and louder” . Soon the family doctor is declaring that “young Charles here is the father”. The couple are promptly packed off to America to marry and avoid scandal at home. Charles leaves Cambridge and his studies in natural science; Hettie has to transform herself into a future mistress of the house. These major life events are given their due, but O’Riordan is also very good at capturing the way lives are recalibrated and roll forward, with the what-might-have-beens receding over the years. Charles’s trajectory, of course, appears to have been less dramatically rerouted than Hettie’s. Back in Manchester with his wife and son, he eventually takes over the family business, displays some political ambition, writes letters to the Manchester Guardian and sits on boards. He progresses from being a student of natural science to someone who gets a cactus named after him in the local botanical gardens. Hettie never quite manages to shake off a sense of anxiety, while Tabitha goes on to become active in the women’s movement and then charitable work, and Eloise enrols at art school, leading to excursions into American, European and Cornish bohemia. The big backdrops to the novel are the worlds of industry and commerce, art, and the natural sciences. All these milieu offer the impression of solidity while being equally subject to rapid change, whether via the vicissitudes of capitalism or the imagination of the avant garde. What is permanent and what is not is constantly under review, as much by the simple passage of time as by more directly presented alternatives to the status quo – women’s suffrage, say, or homosexuality. Birds pipe up all the time as a kind of early warning system of events both large and small. The first world war bookends the main narrative, but it is as peripheral for the reader as it is for the characters. O’Riordan cleverly manages to maintain this sense of distance while simultaneously evincing a low-level background dread as to the coming loss and change. Interaction with the Europe that will soon be shattered is taken for granted by the bourgeois Mancunians, whether by Eloise and her art crowd or Charles knowing that Brahms had once performed in the Zurich concert hall he attends for a trade conference. America also looms, with the economic centre of gravity having long shifted west and its postwar cultural leadership already inevitable, as evidenced by the breezy confidence of a midwestern patron of the arts who takes Eloise under her wing. As the siblings’ lives are played out, so O’Riordan’s facility for observation and empathy edges The Falling Thread towards the more traditional model of a poet’s novel. He captures the broad canvas of a vibrant city, as well as the fine grain of daily life, from noticing the cook’s “pale wrists ploughing the yellowish dough” to evoking the relaxed and knowing humour between grownup brothers and sisters and the near impossibility of Hettie ever truly being able to share in it. His characters’ lives are full of drama and dynamism and reverses, but O’Riordan has an uncanny ability to make it all feel less like plot and more like convincing biographies unfolding before us. His novel ultimately becomes a deeply satisfying meshing of the vast sweep of history with the familiar textures of lives as they are lived. • The Falling Thread is published by Bloomsbury Circus (£14.99). To buy a copy go to Bloomsbury.com.The Los Angeles Rams’ commitment to bucking orthodoxy is admirable. Rather than following the regular old blueprint of slowly and methodically building through the draft, the Rams are instead looking to microwave success year in, year out. They do not care for the recent fetishization of draft picks. They want good players, not high-value picks. And they want them all right now. On Monday, the Rams shipped out a second- and third-round pick to acquire former All-Pro pass-rusher Von Miller from the Broncos. For any other franchise, it would represent a seismic move: a pair of valuable draft picks in return for what is effectively a 10-game (they hope) rental. For the Rams, the Oprah of draft equity, it was a humdrum Monday. You get a draft pick! And you get a draft pick! It didn’t even matter that the Rams couldn’t absorb Miller’s cap hit. Adding a soon-to-be free agent for a second-round pick would have been a costly sum all of its own. LA tacked on the third-round pick so that the Broncos would absorb $9m of Miller’s remaining salary, allowing the Rams to sneak Miller under the cap. This is what it looks like when a team goes, as they say, all in. It is normal in basketball and baseball: teams selling their future to better their odds ever so slightly in the now. Yet in the NFL, with a hard cap and a settled draft order, picks are the must-have commodity – all the more so since the 2011 CBA applied cheap salary slots to the draft order. But Les Snead, Sean McVay and the Rams brain trust don’t care about the standard mode of operating. Ever since McVay was hired, the Rams have tried to remove doubt from the talent acquisition business: targeting high-end targets with multiple drafts picks. Better to burn valuable picks on established players in their prime than take a swing on a couple of college kids who could turn out to be busts, the theory goes. Veterans who have already proven themselves in the league such as Jalen Ramsey, Brandin Cooks, Matthew Stafford, and now Miller have all been acquired for future considerations. The Ramsey deal changed everything. Once the Rams had committed two first-round picks, a fourth-rounder and a mega-money extension to a corner in his prime years, they shifted from a franchise with a medium-term vision into one that had a championship-or-bust mindset. Such is the way with a hard cap sport: once winning time arrives, you have to cash in. Now the Rams are pushing that logic to its extreme. The team knew Jared Goff, their young quarterback, wasn’t good enough. But rather than jump back into the muddy waters of the draft, they moved Goff and a pair of draft picks to Detroit for Stafford, a known commodity who would help elevate the team’s ceiling. Adding Miller saps the team of long-term flexibility, too. And. They. Don’t. Care. The Rams 2022 draft outlook currently looks like this: Round 1: Traded to the Lions Round 2: Traded to the Broncos Round 3: Traded to the Broncos; own a compensatory pick via Brad Holmes hire Round 4: Traded to the Texans Round 5: Own Round 6: Traded to the Patriots Round 7: Own plus the Dolphins’ pick There is a commonly held belief that teams should be perennially building for the long term, that they should forever be laying the foundation for a potential dynasty. That’s silly. A team only gets so many shots at winning it all. Planning for a two-decade-long run is folly. Over the course of the past 60 or so years, the NFL has had five true dynasties: The Packers of the 60s; Steelers of the 70s; the Niners of the 80s; the Cowboys of the 90s; the Patriots of the 2000s. Only the Patriots were able to push their peak across 20 years. Only one team – the Patriots again – were able to do so in the era of free agency. Unless you land the finest coach and quarterback of the respective era, you have no shot at sustaining contention over a 10-year period. And there’s no shame in admitting that. The Carroll-Wilson Seahawks have been to two Super Bowls, winning one. That’s not a failure. The Manning-era Broncos and Manning-era Colts each went to two Super Bowls, winning one apiece. Not a failure. There is a sense of humility to the Rams not chasing prolonged success, in admitting they cannot out-draft the entire league on a yearly basis. Instead, the Rams are allowing the rest of the league to reveal the difference-making players before they go and chase them on the trade market. Miller may not be the difference this season, but he does tip the odds in the Rams favor. The Rams already have a good defense. They finished top in the league in efficiency last season and currently sit ninth in the league in EPA/play, right alongside the Bucs. By adding Miller, the Rams can build a defensive structure that complements their league-leading offense. Prioritizing that above an unknown rookie seems like a well-placed bet. Like any league with a playoff system, the best team does not always win it all in the NFL. That’s why teams are so fervent in their belief to plan for the long term. Find the right quarterback, and you buy yourself 10-to-15 years’ worth of lottery tickets, offense proving to be more stable on a year-to-year basis than defense. Build a component core each season, the theory holds, and one of these years, your number should come up. It’s sound logic. But the Rams’ decision-makers aren’t buying it. They’d rather have five tickets for this season, thank you very much. In the end, though, they will be measured by the same standard as everyone: Did they win it all or not?The story of the past 500 years can be crudely summarised as follows. A handful of European nations, which had mastered both the art of violence and advanced seafaring technology, used these faculties to invade other territories and seize their land, labour and resources. Competition for control of other people’s lands led to repeated wars between the colonising nations. New doctrines – racial categorisation, ethnic superiority and a moral duty to “rescue” other people from their “barbarism” and “depravity” – were developed to justify the violence. These doctrines led, in turn, to genocide. The stolen labour, land and goods were used by some European nations to stoke their industrial revolutions. To handle the greatly increased scope and scale of transactions, new financial systems were established that eventually came to dominate their own economies. European elites permitted just enough of the looted wealth to trickle down to their labour forces to seek to stave off revolution – successfully in Britain, unsuccessfully elsewhere. At length, the impact of repeated wars, coupled with insurrections by colonised peoples, forced the rich nations to leave most of the lands they had seized, formally at least. These territories sought to establish themselves as independent nations. But their independence was never more than partial. Using international debt, structural adjustment, coups, corruption (assisted by offshore tax havens and secrecy regimes), transfer pricing and other clever instruments, the rich nations continued to loot the poor, often through the proxy governments they installed and armed. Unwittingly at first, then with the full knowledge of the perpetrators, the industrial revolutions released waste products into the Earth’s systems. At first, the most extreme impacts were felt in the rich nations, whose urban air and rivers were poisoned, shortening the lives of the poor. The wealthy removed themselves to places they had not trashed. Later, the rich countries discovered they no longer needed smokestack industries: through finance and subsidiaries, they could harvest the wealth manufactured by dirty business overseas. Some of the pollutants were both invisible and global. Among them was carbon dioxide, which did not disperse but accumulated in the atmosphere. Partly because most rich nations are temperate, and partly because of extreme poverty in the former colonies caused by centuries of looting, the effects of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases are felt most by those who have benefited least from their production. If the talks in Glasgow are not to be experienced as yet another variety of oppression, climate justice should be at their heart. The wealthy nations, always keen to position themselves as saviours, have promised to help their former colonies adjust to the chaos they have caused. Since 2009, these rich countries have pledged $100bn (£75bn) a year to poorer ones in the form of climate finance. Even if this money had materialised, it would have been a miserly token. By comparison, since 2015, the G20 nations have spent $3.3tn on subsidising their fossil fuel industries. Needless to say, they have failed to keep their wretched promise. In the latest year for which we have figures, 2019, they provided $80bn. Of this, just $20bn was earmarked for “adaptation”: helping people adjust to the chaos we have imposed on them. And only about 7% of these stingy alms went to the poorest countries that need the money most. Instead, the richest nations have poured money into keeping out the people fleeing from climate breakdown and other disasters. Between 2013 and 2018, the UK spent almost twice as much on sealing its borders as it did on climate finance. The US spent 11 times, Australia 13 times, and Canada 15 times more. Collectively, the rich nations are surrounding themselves with a climate wall, to exclude the victims of their own waste products. But the farce of climate finance doesn’t end there. Most of the money the rich nations claim to be providing takes the form of loans. Oxfam estimates that, as most of it will have to be repaid with interest, the true value of the money provided is around one third of the nominal sum. Highly indebted nations are being encouraged to accumulate more debt to finance their adaptation to the disasters we have caused. It is staggeringly, outrageously unfair. Never mind aid, never mind loans; what the rich nations owe the poor is reparations. Much of the harm inflicted by climate breakdown makes a mockery of the idea of adaptation: how can people adapt to temperatures higher than the human body can withstand; to repeated, devastating cyclones that trash homes as soon as they are rebuilt; to the drowning of entire archipelagos; to the desiccation of vast tracts of land, making farming impossible? But while the concept of irreparable “loss and damage” was recognised in the Paris agreement, the rich nations insisted that this “does not involve or provide a basis for any liability or compensation”. By framing the pittance they offer as a gift, rather than as compensation, the states that have done most to cause this catastrophe can position themselves, in true colonial style, as the heroes who will swoop down and rescue the world: this was the thrust of Boris Johnson’s opening speech, invoking James Bond, at Glasgow: “We have the ideas. We have the technology. We have the bankers.” But the victims of the rich world’s exploitation don’t need James Bond, nor other white saviours. They don’t need Johnson’s posturing. They don’t need his skinflint charity, or the deadly embrace of the bankers who fund his party. They need to be heard. And they need justice. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistWith Manchester City desperate for an equaliser against Crystal Palace last weekend, Jack Grealish was taken off. He was also taken off as City sought goals against Paris Saint-Germain and Liverpool. Grealish has started nine of City’s 10 Premier League games since his move from Aston Villa and registered two assists – in the 5-0 win over Arsenal and the 4-1 win over Brighton – and one goal – in the 5-0 win over Norwich. It’s a crude measure and the season is only a quarter gone, but Grealish is yet to deliver game-turning moments in the biggest games or when the pressure is on. But he is at least doing better than Jadon Sancho, who has started only three league games for Manchester United since he joined from Borussia Dortmund and completed none of them. He hasn’t scored and he hasn’t registered an assist. Worse than that, if the switch to a back three is more than a short-term fix, it’s very hard to see where he has any place in a side that have suddenly done away with wingers. Saturday’s Manchester derby, quite apart from all the other intrigue, is a meeting of two highly gifted left-sided English forwards who made expensive summer moves and are struggling to adapt to their new environments. Except it probably won’t be because if Sancho is used at all it will almost certainly be from the bench, by which time Grealish may have been substituted. Grealish is far less of a worry. Wide players at City often take time to settle and get used to the system. Raheem Sterling, Leroy Sané, Riyad Mahrez and Bernardo Silva were far better in their second seasons at the club than their first. Pep Guardiola makes unusual demands and it’s only natural that it should take time for his players to become accustomed to that, perhaps especially if, like Grealish, they have been used to being the creative hub of their team. The way João Cancelo operates is a further complication. At Villa, Grealish had Matt Targett overlapping from full-back, offering a passing option and potentially creating space by drawing the opposition full-back away, but Cancelo often goes infield, acting almost as an auxiliary playmaker. Remarkably, Cancelo (who has admittedly played 149 more minutes) has had more touches in the final third than Grealish this season. If Grealish seems less involved creatively than he might be, it may be for the very good reason that he is holding his position, offering a defence against the counter, to allow the attack to develop from different angles. (Whether Grealish is a wide player at all is another issue: the suggestion in the summer was that Guardiola saw him as an option through the centre, but experiments as a false nine have so far failed to impress.) Guardiola seems unconcerned, saying that Grealish has come “for four or five years” and that “step by step he will get it”. And it is also true that, as Guardiola said, “he’s facing teams that are set back so, so deep it’s more difficult to find spaces than before [at] a team that typically counterattacked”. But still, particularly in those games when City have seemed blunt – against Tottenham, against Southampton, against PSG, against Palace – the sense has been of Grealish slowing attacks, of his determination to cast off his previous individuality and submit to the system leading him to take the safer option; balancing the individual and the system is never straightforward. “His positions are always good and he plays [with a] really good football perspective,” said Guardiola. “He creates free men when he has the ball. Every time he has the ball João and Rodri are alone and they can use him or do it the next time so in that time it’s really good. When he gets the ball it always has sense with everything he does. With the confidence and a little bit more time he will be aggressive.” Grealish’s pass accuracy notably is up on last season, but key passes, shots and dribbles are all down. Which may, ultimately, all be to the good; it’s just that at this stage it feels as though what made Grealish special, his impishness, his capacity for the brilliant or unexpected, has rather been lost. And he doesn’t have the directness of Sané, the player he in effect replaced in the squad. Sancho, meanwhile, has simply looked lost. Shots, key passes, dribbles are all dramatically down on last season. For him the issue is the opposite to that faced by Grealish. At Dortmund he was part of a highly systematised structure. Under Lucien Favre, Dortmund pressed hard and high. Sancho knew the triggers and knew where and when to move in relation to other players with and without the ball. It is the absence of that sort of precise organisation that has characterised Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s time in charge at Manchester United, in the past two seasons in an attacking sense and, since the arrival of Cristiano Ronaldo, defensively. Sancho, having been used to having a detailed blueprint, is suddenly having to improvise in a way that is unfamiliar to him. Of course, there is a left-sided forward who is used to bearing the creative burden and devising his own solutions – it’s just that he’s busy trying to subjugate himself to an unfamiliar structure. And that is the oddity of the two biggest transfers of English players this summer: the individualist has gone to a system club and the system player has gone to a club without structure. Both may yet perhaps adapt, but could it be that United and City each signed the wrong player, that Grealish would be better under Solskjær and Sancho under Guardiola? • The caption on a picture was corrected on 5 November 2021 to reflect the fact that Manchester City drew at Liverpool, rather than losing.Was becoming an artist everything you expected it to be when you first started, and who inspired you the most to get into music? MYWORLD2014 I went to uni and did music and I went to the Brit school, but I didn’t really have any expectations. When you’re that age, you’re gigging and recording music, but you’re doing it because it’s what you do, and it just snowballs from there. I would say my dad definitely [got me into music]. He has a really, really wonderful voice and was a musician in his earlier life, making kind of Beach Boys vocal harmony music. When I was younger, he used to teach me guitar and piano and actually had good advice for me. I’d say, unlike most of your fans, my favourite song of yours is Disappear from your first album. I think it’s an amazing bit of songwriting and storytelling: “I woke up one day to find that I had disappeared” is just beautiful. I wonder, unsubtly, if during your [five-year] public absence from music you again felt that you’d disappeared? What’s it like now to reappear? OhWellPartOne I’m quite a shy person naturally; it’s kind of stressful when you feel like you’re being looked at all the time and eyes are on you. I needed time to dip out of that, because I’m not sure whether it’s very natural. Going back into things I’ll definitely do more of that, because there were times when I felt like I couldn’t take a day off. It’s exciting to be releasing music again and coming back into it with a different lens. The genres that you came up on [dubstep and UK funky] are pretty much dead now. How would you classify your new music? OooohYehhh They’re not dead [laughs]! With any genre, music naturally evolves. Every couple of years everyone’s like “UK garage is coming back” – it’s never left! I get that it’s probably not in the mainstream, but it’s in different forms. House will never die and we’ve got [African house style] amapiano at the moment. I just did Ministry [of Sound], like 2,000 people, and that was a UK funky rave; you still hear UK funky in every DJ set, every time it just goes off and makes people happy. I guess my new EP is a bit slower, though. There’s no intense dancefloor stuff that I’ve had before. It’s got a bit more of an R&amp;B vibe to it, and those syncopated rhythms I love dancing to. It’s a bit more chilled out. America ruined dubstep. Discuss. Paulie_Walnuts It’s a funny one because I went on tour in America and at one point I was like: “This is actually bonkers, I’m in a dubstep rave in California.” But how Americans do club music or club culture – and this is obviously a generic statement because it’s the birthplace of so much club music – is not the same as it is here, for that market and the EDM world. It’s so amazing to travel through America and see their club subcultures; I felt like I was accessing some secret world. But I don’t think they really understood me. I wasn’t for the EDM people, and I wasn’t poppy enough to be a pop star out there. So I think it’s a kind of mixture; I’ll just say: I don’t know! Would you ever consider Eurovision if the chance came up? A slightly cut-down version of Perfect Stranger would be immense as an entry. Crossvader My dad was in Eurovision back in the 70s! He lived in Germany for a while, and appeared as part of a band called the Les Humphries Singers, there were 20 of them or something like that; I don’t think they did very well unfortunately [they came 15th in 1976]. I’m a very competitive person and we get zero points every year. I wouldn’t put myself through that at all. Whose music do you prefer: Adele or Ed Sheeran? WordChazer Ed Sheeran’s new song has been stuck in my head for like, three weeks. But I think I’d have to go with Adele, just because I feel like she’s our queen or something. I think there should be a petition to sack the Queen and get Adele in. Do you feel like the music world you’re returning to has changed over the last few years? If so, for good/bad/both? Eelsupinsideya One hundred per cent. I feel like an old granny going into meetings, they’re talking about DSPs (digital service providers) and all this jargon. I’m like: what? But I think it’s exciting as well because there’s not as many rules. Some of the people that I follow on Instagram haven’t even got music out, but they’re making money by putting up content. I feel quite old school; it’s gonna take a bit of catching up to figure out what’s going on. I do miss CD sleeves, though. I know we can still buy physical copies, but I feel like vinyl is different. I’m just attached to CDs, I don’t want to throw them away. Do you feel like Jess Glynne sort of stole your mojo? I think you’ve got a much more interesting voice, but maybe the UK only has room for one flame-haired dance queen at once? DrRic55 No, I feel like her music is quite different to mine. There should be more flame-haired redhead singers; there’s never enough! How did you cope with the pressure of being the anointed “face/voice of dubstep” when the genre crossed over? Do you think the mainstream exposure was good for the scene in general? jonbeat I don’t know whether I would say “the face”, but I was happy feeling like I was bringing a piece of London, or shining a light on that kind of world. And I think it’s inevitable with anything that crosses over, things build, build, build, and then [the genre] settles into another realm because things are always changing. I think people that love dubstep and go to dubstep raves are still going. They don’t care what the songs in the Top 10 are; they’re not bothered it exists in a different space. Now that clubs have reopened, when the lights go on at the end of a night out, which song would you choose to have playing while you keep on moving? sharmadelica They need to bring back playing slow jams at the end of the club night. It needs to be something really old school like Jaheim, maybe Just in Case. I’d do that, though there should be no lovemaking on the dancefloor. Can you get on all the rides at Alton Towers, or have you had to buy a pair of tactical platform trainers? LiquidFootballFC Yeah, I can get on all the rides [laughs]! I do really love a theme park. I’m 5’3”, I think it comes in quite handy being small because you can manoeuvre around. Only thing: being people’s armpit height is horrible. That and not being able to see anything. Manze’s or Goddard’s? zblargx I’m very passionate about pie and mash. I would have to say Goddard’s. Sort of controversial as it’s not very traditional, but it’s because they do an apple pie and crumble with custard. So if you get pie and mash you can get that afterwards. You can get frozen pies from Goddard’s as well; the business model is just out of this world. • Katy B’s new EP, Peace and Offerings, is out nowThe prosecution: Ameen We had a shortlist of baby names, but my wife has thrown one of them out for no good reason Our baby is due next February but we’ve already disagreed on lots of names. There were times when I said, “No, this name reminds me of this person I don’t like” or my wife, Naila, said the same. Naila knows the sex of the baby whereas I don’t, but we finally made a shortlist of both boys’ and girls’ names to keep things exciting. I was happy with it. We recently went for a scan and afterwards Naila changed her mind about one name. She said a friend told her this particular name reminded her of a famous musician who makes terrible music, and that the child might get bullied. I got really defensive right there in the hospital. The name is associated with one of the greatest conquerors in Islam, our religion. I like it. It’s crazy to discount it for such a silly reason. But she didn’t budge and we both had to take some time to cool down. We had a silent walk home. A name is very important in Islam: it’s something that remains with a person beyond their life. We believe that on the day of judgment, God will call you to him, so you want to be proud to stand up and answer. Naila and I agreed that we don’t want a name that sounds lovely in Arabic but has a silly meaning in English. Until our disagreement I thought the shortlisted names we had agreed on together were perfect. Naila was wrong to throw it out of the window without discussion. We hadn’t argued about baby names before this but I know Naila is finding it difficult to choose. I think she’s feeling anxious about becoming a mum. Every name is a risk. Six months down the line there could be someone out there with the same name as our baby who commits the crime of the century. The important thing is that our child has their own identity and their own legacy. We both need to sit down and talk about it rather than discounting each other’s ideas. And Naila needs to stop giving other people power over her name choices. The defence: Naila I just want the best start in life for my kid, and I don’t want them to be bullied for their name We both want an Arabic name for our baby and added the name of a famous Islamic warrior to our list. But I soon remembered this was also the name of a really annoying guy I once went to school with. My friend also reminded me that it’s the name of a famous musician who I think makes really terrible music. After the scan that day I told my husband this name was off the list. Ameen is usually very laid-back and we had decided all the other names without any debate, but when I blacklisted this one, he got annoyed quickly and said that my reasons for striking off the name weren’t “big” enough. He said: “Why do you care so much about the musician or what people think? It’s a beautiful name from a notable Islamic figure with a great history.” But of course I care. I want the best start in life for my kid: I don’t want them to get bullied. Things got heated between us and people started looking at us arguing in the hospital. I told him that I had a bad feeling about the name and that I didn’t want to compromise. In an Islamic partnership, your child’s name doesn’t have to be Arabic or from the Qur’an, but we wanted one. There’s an emphasis on giving your child a good name that they can live up to. And since we’re raising the child here, we want to ensure the English translation doesn’t mean something awful. But every name that I loved before I became pregnant I can’t seem to stick with now. I’m finding it really hard to imagine my unborn child and my anxiety has been in overdrive, although finding out the sex of the baby has helped. If I change my mind about a name, that really should be it. I know what it’s like to be made fun of because of your name – I’ve seen it happen with my siblings. We need a name we both love. He will just have to set his heart on a different boy’s name, if indeed that is what we are having. The jury of Guardian readers Is Naila being too picky about the baby’s name? You agreed a list of names you were both happy with; now you’re having some pre-birth wobbles in relation to one particular name. It wasn’t ideal for Naila to announce her change of mind unilaterally, but she has every right to do that – and for Ameen to respect her wishes. John, 72 It’s clear and understandable that there are strong feelings on both sides. However, Naila is right, not picky. You need a name you both love. Whatever your reasoning is now, it won’t matter: you’ll know what name feels right when you meet your new baby. Ryan, 34 Naila isn’t being too picky. She’s rightly concerned that whatever name you choose works across cultures. It’s too easy to lose your identity when pregnant. This is one very clear way to demonstrate at a critical point that Naila still has a voice in your marriage. Clare, 57 No, Naila is not being too picky with your baby’s name – certainly no more than Ameen. Both of the parents seem to be overthinking the whole thing. Wait until the baby is born and then decide. Joan, 73 Let go of the name, move on and find one that works for you both. Differences in opinion will continue when you are parents. There will be other times when you feel very strongly about something and have to find a compromise. Amy, 47 You be the judge So now you can be the judge, click on the poll below to tell us: is Naila being too picky with the baby’s name? We’ll share the results on next week’s You be the judge. The poll is now closed Last week’s result Last week, we asked if Isaac should stop telling his girlfriend Nyala, how to drive. 22% of you said no – Isaac is innocent 78% of you said yes – Isaac is guiltyThere were understandable expressions of delight on both sides when Randox Health – now more familiar as simply Randox – signed a five-year deal to sponsor the Grand National from 2017, and again when the company announced a five-year extension to its contract in January 2021. At the time, Dickon White, north-west regional director for Jockey Club Racecourses, which runs Aintree, said: “It’s been a fantastic partnership over the past few years and we’ve been extremely impressed with their operation as well as their dedication to one of sport’s most iconic events.” From JCR’s point of view, Randox has always been everything that Aintree could hope for in a sponsor for the world’s most famous steeplechase. Following on from a series of drink brands – including Crabbie’s, John Smith’s and Martell Cognac – their new partner was involved with neither betting nor booze, and instead promised to make its customers both happier and healthier. For Randox, meanwhile, the sponsorship was a golden opportunity to raise public awareness of its brand, via an association with Britain’s most popular race. The Grand National attracts one of the biggest annual TV audiences for any sporting event – nearly 9m viewers watched Rachael Blackmore become the first female jockey to win the race on Minella Times in March – and is a once-a-year gamble for many more through bookmakers or office sweeps. Following the revelation of Owen Paterson MP’s paid consultancy for Randox, however, which Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, found had led to an “egregious” breach of the rules on paid advocacy, the close association between Randox and the Grand National no longer feels so positive for “the People’s Race”. Paterson resigned as an MP on Thursday afternoon but Randox’s association with the Grand National will, as things stand, be maintained at least until 2026. It will be an annual reminder of the lobbying scandal, which could lead to concerns, for Aintree and racing as a whole, about the extent to which the National’s image might suffer as a result. That, in turn, may also raise difficult and very sensitive questions about the process which led to Randox’s initial sponsorship contract being signed in March 2016. Rose Paterson, Owen Paterson’s wife, was the chair of Aintree racecourse from 2014 until she took her own life on 24 June 2020. Within racing, she was both hugely popular and greatly respected for her dedication and diligence in a key role, and the grief and sense of loss throughout the sport following her death was deep and heartfelt. In early 2016, Paterson was inevitably involved in the search for a new National sponsor after Halewood, the Liverpool-based drinks firm, decided it would not extend its contract via the Crabbie’s brand. The search ended in March 2016, when Randox – a company that had previously had a very low profile, both inside and outside racing – signed a five-year sponsorship deal. Owen Paterson started work as a paid consultant for Randox seven months earlier, in August 2015. The extent, if any, to which his involvement with Randox was a factor in Aintree’s choice of a new sponsor for the Grand National is unknown, and likely to remain so. But the events of recent days also focus attention on the decision by JCR to renew the contract earlier this year, when the parliamentary commissioner for standards had been investigating reports of Paterson’s lobbying activity on behalf of Randox since October 2019. Jockey Club Racecourses is wholly owned by the Jockey Club, which is in turn governed by a royal charter “to act for the long-term good of British racing”. The Queen is its patron and its continuing stewardship of the great majority of racing’s biggest venues, including Aintree, Cheltenham, Epsom and Newmarket, has many benefits for the sport. The Guardian understands that Jockey Club Racecourses believes Randox remains a suitable sponsor for the Grand National and that the process that led to the company taking over the sponsorship was fair and robust. The Guardian also approached Randox, asking if the company believes its continuing association with the Grand National is still beneficial both for the event and the sport as a whole. Randox was also asked to comment on the extent, if any, to which Owen Paterson was involved in the process of awarding the sponsorship contract in 2016. Randox has yet to respond.One of the world’s biggest banks has pulled out of providing financial services to Adani and its controversial Carmichael coalmine, saying the venture is incompatible with its environmental, social and governance rules. The Bank of New York Mellon’s move comes after a campaign by local Indigenous people, who have been occupying the mine site and conducting cultural ceremonies. In a statement, BNY Mellon said that it had never provided funding to the mine or a railway line and port that form part of the project. The bank said that it had provided “third-party administrative services under a small number of legacy contracts with the Adani Group in Australia, which includes acting as security trustee”. Security trustees act as representatives of groups of banks that form syndicates to provide loans to companies. It is understood BNY Mellon provided security trustee services to Adani, now known as Bravus, in relation to the coal port. “After review, BNY Mellon has decided to resign from all legacy transactions with Adani in Australia and will not pursue additional transactions with Adani in Australia,” the bank said. “BNY Mellon has determined this business is not aligned with our ESG [environmental, social and governance] principles. “Upon resigning, we are required to honour our contractual obligations during the unwind[ing] of these transactions until our roles are terminated.” It said client confidentiality rules prevented it commenting on specific customers but added: “For the avoidance of doubt, BNY Mellon is not currently entering into, and does not intend to enter into, any new contracts with Adani in Australia.” The bank’s ESG commitments include “the efficient use of natural resources, mitigating climate-related risks, and leveraging innovative energy solutions”, “effectively managing” relationships with stakeholders including “the communities in which we operate” and “operating with strong ethical business practices”. Pablo Brait, a campaigner with activist group Market Forces, said BNY Mellon was the 104th company to rule out working on the Carmichael project. “No company which claims to care about the climate can justify any involvement with a massive new thermal coalmine, its associated rail line and port, and the company building it,” he said. “The world’s banks, investors and insurers must cut ties with the Adani Group until Adani Group abandons the Carmichael project.” A Bravus spokesperson said its financing arrangements were confidential and added: “Completion of the Carmichael mine and rail project is on track to allow us to export coal to market this calendar year.” • Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A group of Wangan and Jagalingou traditional owners began occupying Adani’s mining lease to conduct a cultural ceremony in late August. Adani has accused the group of being “anti-fossil fuel activists” who are “trespassing under the guise of traditional activity”. However, as Guardian Australia has reported, police called by Adani refused to remove the group in early October, saying they were instead working on negotiating with the two sides towards “a peaceful and non-disruptive resolution into the future”.And with that, we will wrap up the blog for today. Here is what went down: Western Australian police released a statement from Cleo Smith’s family, where they thanked all those involved in the rescue, and said their family is “whole again”. Western Australia’s border restrictions will remain in place until 90% of its 12-and-over population is fully vaccinated. Australia passed the 80% double-vaccinated mark some time today, marked by the prime minister earlier today. The man accused of raping Brittany Higgins in a federal minister’s office has been committed to stand trial. The Northern Territory town of Katherine entered a 72-hour lockdown after it recorded two cases, with Darwin also in a “lockout”. NSW recorded 249 new cases and three deaths. Victoria recorded 1,343 new cases and 10 deaths. The ACT recorded six new cases and one death. The defamation case involving former NSW deputy premier John Barilaro and YouTuber Jordan Shanks (known online as Friendlyjordies) was been settled. A Chinese government spokesperson has called the Aukus deal “extremely irresponsible”. Two Melbourne Cup attendees have tested positive for Covid-19. People from low-risk areas will no longer need to provide a negative Covid-19 test before travelling to Tasmania from 15 December. Sydney’s inner-west light rail will be shut down for up to 18 months after extensive cracks were found in all the trams on the line. Australian entertainment icon Bert Newton will be farewelled by hundreds of relatives and friends at a state funeral in Melbourne next week. The ABC has signed a multimillion-dollar content deal with Google. Western Australia police have released a statement from Cleo Smith’s family, where they thank all those involved in the rescue, and say their family is “whole again”: We would like to take this opportunity to thank all those involved in the rescue of our daughter Cleo Smith. In particular, we would like to thank WA police, all those involved in the initial search, the Carnarvon community, local businesses and of course our family and friends. We are humbled by the love and support that we have received from not only our local community but the whole of Western Australia and across the country. We are so thankful that our little girl is back within our arms and our family is whole again. As we try to get on with our lives, we ask that you respect our privacy. You can read up more on the case in this report from Elias Visontay: So, finally, we have an update from the national cabinet meeting, with details released in a (long and abbreviation-heavy) statement from the PM’s office. On vaccination and booster plans, the national cabinet discussed the rollout, with existing vaccination infrastructure being used to reach as many people as possible. The statement noted that “hesitancy” continues to be an obstacle for both vaccination and booster shot uptake in vulnerable communities: With supplies available, there are significant opportunities available to be vaccinated across urban, rural, remote and very remote areas. Hesitancy continues to be a factor in low uptake, with all jurisdictions introducing measures to reduce hesitancy. The statement also says they discussed the risks of outbreaks in Indigenous communities, noting that modelling will be revised to take into account higher vaccination rates as well as vaccine rates in remote communities. National cabinet agreed that the commonwealth and all jurisdictions will update outbreak management plans, in partnership with the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community sector, and ensure that Emergency Management Australia (EMA) is consulted in the updated planning, and that plans include timely requests for support through EMA where needed, particularly to support localised vaccine acceleration and/or establishing quarantine facilities. The Doherty Institute found that localised health strategies may be required with high case numbers and for key high-risk groups, areas and settings, including Indigenous communities and in schools. Doherty found that surveillance in high-risk areas to identify outbreaks early and contact management can reduce infections, keep schools open and minimise disruptions to face-to-face learning. They also agreed to adopt a risk-based approach to changes to quarantine arrangements for contacts, including differential arrangements for fully vaccinated close contacts in phase 3 of the roadmap, while largely just confirming many of the measures already in there. They confirmed they would “consider risk-based quarantine arrangements for fully vaccinated primary contacts, including no quarantine or minimal quarantine for up to seven days”. Casual contacts will only be required to be tested and isolate if experiencing symptoms, under the revised measures. Finally, the national cabinet also agreed to “release updated Doherty Institute modelling in coming days on health system capacities at living with Covid and surge capacity at different levels of community transmission”. They noted that each state and territory apparently has “sufficient health system capacity to transition to living with Covid”. Ambulance Victoria has doubled the capacity of its triple zero call triage service, which is aimed at freeing up ambulances for only the sickest patients, by directing people who don’t need emergency services elsewhere. It reported improved response times, saying that its average response time to life-threatening emergencies was 13 minutes and 29 seconds, which was an improvement of five seconds on the previous quarter. The Ambulance Victoria chief executive Prof Tony Walker said the emergency service had effectively adapted to the surge in calls that comes with the pandemic: We’ve expanded our secondary triage service with an additional 97 paramedics and [57] nurses – effectively doubling the size of the referral service for less urgent triple zero calls. This vital service frees up ambulances for the sickest patients by connecting patients who do not need an emergency ambulance with alternative care. Earlier today, Northern Territory authorities warned against any anti-lockdown protesters from taking to the street over the weekend, after Darwin entered a three-day “lockout” on Friday morning. Police commissioner Jamie Chalker said police would not tolerate anyone not complying with the restrictions, amid reports of a rally to be held tomorrow. If people continue to act without compliance, then we will be forced into a position where [arrests] may have to be done. If they are unvaccinated, if they’re not willing to demonstrate what the five reasons are, and they’re not going to be sound and reasonable, then they may force us into action. Just building on that announcement about the light rail shutdown, the NSW shadow minister for transport Jo Haylen has released a blistering statement, saying the government’s procurement policy was “in tatters”. She says passengers will be forced to wait “years” for a reliable light rail and that thousands of passengers across the city’s inner west will experience delays and “unreliable services” for up to 18 months. The government’s transport procurement policies are now in tatters. Every single overseas-built tram the government bought has had to be decommissioned. An entire light rail line is now completely out of action. This will cost taxpayers millions of dollars. This is a debacle. It’s time for the government to draw a line in the sand. They bought trains that don’t fit the tracks, ferries that can’t fit under bridges or operate at night, and an entire fleet of trams that simply don’t work. It’s time we started building transport infrastructure right here in Australia again so we can get a quality product and value for money. Sydney’s inner-west light rail will be shut down for up to 18 months after extensive cracks were found in all 12 trams that operate on the line. Transport minister Rob Stokes confirmed the decision, saying he was told this afternoon the trams would need to be decommissioned while the issues were rectified. I want to stress this is the worst-case scenario. It’s my expectation that we rectify these issues much sooner than that, but I did feel it was appropriate to let the public know as soon as I have been advised that the worst-case scenario is 18 months to get these light rail vehicles rectified and back on the tracks. Stokes said the cracking that was identified last week were “actually more significant than first thought and actually related to all 12 of the vehicles”. On that basis, the safety advice has been for these vehicles to be withdrawn from service until they can be fixed. Two positive Covid cases at the Melbourne Cup this week will not stop Stakes Day at Flemington racecourse on Saturday. In a statement, Victoria Racing Club said the two cases were a contractor working at the course and a racegoer, and that both were fully vaccinated and unlinked. The contractor who tested positive worked two full days in the Arbour in the purple zone on the ground floor of the Club Stand. The Department of Health has advised the VRC that patrons and staff who attended the Arbour on Cup Day are considered at low risk. The patron who tested positive attended the deck bar within the green zone on Cup Day and the Department of Health is in direct contact with the patron and their two social close contacts, who are also fully vaccinated. Patrons who attended the deck bar on Cup Day are being contacted directly via SMS by the VRC and staff have also been contacted. Patrons are advised to monitor their health and get tested if they develop any symptoms. The two venues have been deep cleaned and will be ready for safe operation for Stakes Day on Saturday. AAP is reporting that a maximum-security prison in regional New South Wales had to be emptied of inmates after it fell victim to a “horrendous” mice plague. Rodents have been devouring crops and cutting a destructive swathe through properties in the state’s west and south since spring 2020. In June, they caused all 420 inmates at Wellington Correctional Centre in the state’s west to be sent to other facilities after they damaged the building, a budget estimates hearing heard on Friday. Prison staff were working in buildings where cavities and ceilings were full of dead mice, Acting Corrective Services NSW Commissioner Kevin Corcoran told the hearing. “I got gravely ill after attending there and I know others did too,” Mr Corcoran told MPs. There were problems with mites and faeces falling down when he toured the site, he said. “Some of the buildings I went into were just horrendous. I mean, the smell,” he said. “You’re almost throwing up just going into the places people were living. It’s just completely unacceptable.” The mice, which first arrived at year ago, chewed through internal wiring and ceiling panels. Mr Corcoran said the problems were most acute in the staff areas, and the situation “wasn’t so bad” in the inmates’ cells. Nevertheless, Corrective Services Minister Anthony Roberts said removing the inmates and most of the staff was the best solution so remediation works could be done urgently.Asked how he could lose a maximum-security prison to mice, Mr Roberts replied: “We build prisons to keep people in.” Medical device manufacturer Johnson and Johnson has failed in its bid to overturn a landmark ruling about harm caused by pelvic mesh implants, AAP reports. The high court on Friday refused special leave to appeal a ruling finding the company acted negligently and concealed the true extent of complications from the pelvic implants. It means Johnson and Johnson remains liable for millions of dollars in compensation to Australian women. The federal court in 2020 awarded three lead litigants a combined $2.6m in damages over the implants manufactured by Johnson and Johnson subsidiary Ethicon. The court was told the women’s surgeons weren’t warned about or aware of the extent of risks from the devices including severe chronic pain. Johnson and Johnson earlier this year failed in its appeal of the original 2019 finding before heading to Australia’s highest court. Qantas CEO Alan Joyce has called for fully vaccinated travellers to no longer face Covid tests “at every turn”. Joyce was speaking at the airline’s annual general meeting and made comments on measures still in place for international arrivals, who must submit a negative test in the first 24 hours of arrival, and again after seven days. Joyce said the measures were frustrating for travellers, who would “reasonably expect to move freely and easily”. Hopefully these conditions, particularly PCR testing at every turn, is dispensed with as Australia becomes more confident living with Covid. Surely that’s something we’ve all earned. Human Rights Watch have released a statement, urging the Western Australian government to ease border restrictions and allow people who are double vaccinated into the state. The international human rights group says the restrictions are “no longer proportionate”: By this stage of the pandemic, and with widespread access to vaccines, there should be measures in place to allow families to safely travel to Western Australia and reunite with their loved ones. It is no longer proportionate for the West Australian government to make it so difficult for compassionate cases to enter the state. If individuals are double vaccinated and are willing to undergo quarantine, they should not be denied entry to WA. Human Rights Watch is calling on the McGowan government to prioritise compassionate cases and family reunifications, and allow these cases to enter. Governments can restrict people’s movement for compelling public health purposes, but any restrictions on these rights should be strictly necessary and proportionate. A multimillion-dollar deal signed by Google for ABC content under the news media bargaining code will create dozens of ABC jobs in regional and rural areas, ABC managing director David Anderson says. I am pleased to announce today that we have just finalised a multi-year agreement that will see ABC content on the Google News Showcase. In a speech at Charles Sturt University’s regional media summit on Friday, Anderson said the ABC is also negotiating a deal with Facebook. Negotiations with Facebook are well advanced and I am hopeful that we will be able to finalise an agreement with that platform by the end of the month. These agreements will provide a significant boost to our services in regional Australia. When he announced the draft code, the chair of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, Rod Sims, said the ABC and SBS were excluded because they were taxpayer-funded but Labor and the Greens pushed for the public broadcasters to be included. While SBS has reached agreement under the code with Google, Facebook has refused to negotiate with either SBS or the Conversation, saying it had to draw the line somewhere. Police have seized cocaine and more than $250,000 in cash in their hunt to find fugitive Mostafa Baluch, who allegedly cut his ankle monitor after being granted bail for a drug importation charge, AAP reports. NSW police Det Supt Rob Critchlow said two Sydney homes – one in Yagoona and another in Potts Hill – were raided on Thursday night. “What we are finding as we chase this man to bring him back to justice is we are identifying a whole range of offences and a wider criminal group,” Critchlow said on Friday. “The longer he is out the more pressure he is placing upon those he cares about including his family, his friends and his associates.” Baluch, 33, was last seen on the night of 25 October on Sydney’s northern beaches. Last month he was granted bail and released from custody, with strict bail conditions, after he was charged with a string of drug offences over a 900kg shipment of cocaine into Australia. Police believe Baluch is “most likely” still in Sydney. “We are pretty sure we’re not far away,” Critchlow said. He said there were cars linked to Baluch at the properties. Police seized more than $250,000 cash, about 200 grams of cocaine, 485 grams of an unknown substance, mobile phones, and an electronic money counter. So, the WA premier Mark McGowan has released a TikTok video that resembles a Bunnings ad, to encourage people to get vaccinated at particular Bunnings locations across the state. It’s ... something to behold really: The Australian Medical Association’s president Dr Omar Khorshid was on the ABC earlier, discussing hospital wait times. The group has released a report card that looks into public hospitals, and found that despite a drop in patient numbers due to the lockdowns, public hospitals still struggled to see people on time. Khorshid said the pandemic had revealed the limited surge capacity public hospitals currently have: Last year, when of course we were all in lockdown, the demand on emergency departments really plummeted and of course elective surgery was paused and yet the performance of hospitals in some states barely improved and in others it actually continued to decline. When it comes to emergency departments, it is ACT at the bottom of the pile. And the sad thing about this report is it really does show, as it does each year, how much it matters where you live in Australia as to what access to public hospitals you have. When it comes to elective surgery waiting lists, it is Tasmania that has the worst performance in our report card this year. We would like to see the long-term trends reversed. Rather than continuing with a way of funding public hospitals, it really only looks at throughput and where the states pick up the bulk of the tab or just over half the commonwealth a little bit less than half. It’s a system that doesn’t actually in any way encourage state governments to build new hospitals, to employ new nurses and new doctors in order to meet that demand. So we would like to see the funding package actually change in its nature so that it does encourage investment. And also reward hospitals for better performance. The Northern Territory has recorded its second case in two days, after a mystery case emerged in Katherine yesterday. Chief minister Michael Gunner held a press conference earlier today, telling reporters that a household contact of the man who tested positive yesterday had also tested positive. The initial case was a man who works at Royal Australian Air Force Base Tindal, outside Katherine. He and his close contacts have been transferred to the Howard Springs quarantine facility. Gunner urged people to get tested and vaccinated as soon as possible. Australian entertainment icon Bert Newton will be farewelled by hundreds of family and friends at a state funeral in Melbourne next week, AAP reports. The man affectionately known as “Moonface” died aged 83 on October 30 at a private Melbourne clinic after his leg was amputated in May due to a life-threatening infection. The Victorian government has confirmed the already-announced state funeral for the four-time gold Logie award-winning entertainer will be held at East Melbourne’s St Patrick’s Cathedral on November 12. “A fixture of Australian television, Bert brought his wit and energy into our homes over many decades,” the Department of Premier and Cabinet said on Friday. “He was an entertainer in every sense of the word and this send-off will honour his legacy. “Family, friends and colleagues will be able to attend the state funeral service to celebrate Bert’s life and reflect on his contribution to the entertainment industry, numerous charities and the state of Victoria.” Members of the public won’t be able to attend due to Covid-safe requirements, but can watch the service via an online stream. Melbourne-born Newton started in the radio business aged 12 and scaled the heights of Australian entertainment on stage and screen. His TV credits included In Melbourne Tonight, The Graham Kennedy Show, The Don Lane Show, Good Morning Australia, New Faces, Bert’s Family Feud and 20 to 1. On stage he played roles in the musicals Wicked, Annie, Grease and as narrator in The Rocky Horror Show. Newton is survived by Patti, his wife of more than 46 years, children Lauren and Matthew, and grandchildren. And with that, the premier wraps up the presser, but took one final question: How did he feel in Carnarvon yesterday? It was a very uplifting experience. I really like the police officers. They were great people. The commissioner ushered me into a room and there was about 60 men and women in suits, a good-looking group of people, he then invited me to speak to them. They did a wonderful job and everyone I spoke to was nice and had an underlying professionalism that you could feel, when I went to the house. I met Cleo Smith and her family, they were just lovely, kind people ... They were positive. And they were happy. Their daughter has been brought home. She was a happy little girl. McGowan has been asked about the fifth Ashes Test, which is scheduled to be held on 14 January. The premier appeared confident the test would go ahead: I understand the police and the health officials are working with Cricket Australia on all of those matters. And we have [hosted] sport for the last two years, whether it is both types of football, cricket, basketball, netball, all those things have been happening over the course of the last two years subject to rules. So that is something that will be worked on jointly and we are confident it will be a good outcome. I am sure we will be able to hold other sporting events. Over the last two years, police and health have put in place rules that require various forms of quarantine ... and we have done it consistently and allowed all the sporting codes to operate in a Covid-safe way. What if WA doesn’t actually reach 90% double vaxxed? McGowan: Some time in the first half of December we’ll hit 80% double-dose vaccination, and we’ll know exactly when — or we think we will know exactly when — we will hit the 90% double-dose vaccination rate. That will allow us to open up to New South Wales and Victoria and the ACT. It will also allow us to open international borders, subject to all those restrictions I put in place before. Once we set that date, it will be locked in. It will be locked in. But if we don’t, on that date we reach the 90% double-dose vaccination, that means there will be further public health social measures put in place. So, that would mean restrictions on venues, restrictions on workplaces, restrictions when it comes to masks, all those sorts of things that we’re desperately trying to avoid. So I want to stick with Western Australia for now, where premier Mark McGowan is seeking to justify the move to keep borders closed until the state reaches 90% double vaccinated. The problem, a journalist has asked, is that differs from the national plan, which sets out that borders should open up at 80%. McGowan stuck to his guns: New South Wales and Victoria have done completely different things to the national plan over the course of the last three months. Completely different. They have ignored every agreement that was put in place. The commonwealth has accepted that in the case of New South Wales and Victoria, they opened up internationally when the agreement was not that that would happen. So New South Wales and Victoria have done that because [of] their individual needs based upon the circumstances they face. Our circumstances are different to theirs. We do not have community spread, we do not have scores of people dying. We do not have hospitals in the condition theirs are in because of Covid patients. Our circumstances are different and, you know, I am not going to adhere to some set of rules that will result in 200 people dying just because some people say I should adhere to rules that New South Wales and Victoria haven’t. I think if the other states had the choice that we have they would do exactly the same thing. If they had our choice because we do not have Covid and we have the benefit of isolation, the benefit of borders, they would do the same thing that we are. Good afternoon and happy Friday to all. A quick thanks to Matilda Boseley for her expert work again this morning. Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, and there is still much going on, so let’s dive in. With that, I shall hand you over to the wonderful Mostafa Rachwani to take you through the rest of this press conference. See you next week! McGowan: I understand there will be a disappointment for some. I acknowledge some people will be frustrated. They may not be able to be reunited with family from New South Wales or Victoria over Christmas. I know what that feels like. I understand. I won’t be able to see my parents and my brother until the transition in late January or early February. But as difficult as it is, it is for the right reasons. It’s about following the health advice and keeping Western Australia safe. We need to achieve the 90% vaccination rate to safely make the transition. This will ensure we can save hundreds of WA lives. McGowan has confirmed that the state’s international border will also come down at that 90% (12+) vaccination milestone. At the point of transition, travel will be permitted from all jurisdictions across Australia. Arrivals from interstate will be required to be double-dose vaccinated, return a negative PCR test 72 hours prior to departure, and undertake a test within 48 hours of entering WA. All arrivals from overseas will be required to return a negative PCR test 72 hours prior to departure and undertake a test within 48 hours of arrival. International arrivals won’t be subject to quarantine if they’re double-dose vaccinated. But international arrivals who are NOT double-dose vaccinated will be required to complete 14 days’ quarantine in a designated facility. That being said, McGowan has confirmed that some restrictions will be introduced once the borders come down and Covid-19 inevitably enter’s the state. Based on our current health advice, the following baseline public health and social measures will be implemented at the point of transition in late January or early February. Face masks will be required but only at high-risk indoor settings. These include: On public transport, in hospitals and aged care facilities. Proof of vaccination will be required to attend nightclubs, the casino, and large events with crowds of more than 1,000 people, like the footy or a concert. Contact registers and use of Safe WA will still be required at all public venues, as will revised Covid event and safety plans. Entry will be restricted to remote Aboriginal communities, where necessary. These safeguards will complement our vaccination rollout. They will be interim. They won’t last forever. But they will put us in the best position in case of an outbreak. The WA premier says this reopening plan will allow the state to maintain extremely minimal internal Covid-19 restrictions even after the border comes down. Our island within an island has delivered health and economic results that have been the envy in the world and the best in the world. And with a safe transition, we have the potential to keep it that way. In order to ease our controlled border when we hit our 90% double-dose vaccination target, specific safeguards will be required to minimise the impact of the virus. With a 90% rate and zero Covid in the community at the point of transition, Western Australia is in the enviable position to have minimal restrictions in place. McGowan is outlining the modelling used to decide to maintain strict domestic borders until 90% of the over 12 population of WA are fully vaccinated. Put simply, if we eased our borders earlier at 80%, modelling suggests widespread community transmission would result in far more infections, hospitalisations and deaths. Instead, waiting for our vaccination rate to hit 90% double-dose would mean that when the state reaches widespread community transmission, the number of general ward beds that would be occupied are reduced by 70%. ICU beds that would be occupied are reduced by 75%. And the cumulative number of deaths is reduced by 63%. The difference in easing border controls at 90% rather than 80% is 200 West Australian lives are saved. Regions with low vaccination rates may maintain locked away from the rest of Australia once WA border comes down early next year McGowan says. Now, it is a statewide vaccination rate. However, if there are regional areas that don’t have a high-enough vaccination rate, then - pending health advice at that time - intrastate borders to protect those specific regions may need to be introduced. This measure would be in place until the vaccination rate in those regions is lifted to satisfactory levels. Cutting off the Pilbara or any region, for that matter, is not something I want to do. But if that’s what is required to protect the local community and local industries, then we will take that step based on the health advice at the time. So, I’d again encourage all eligible West Australians all over WA to get vaccinated. The sooner you get vaccinated, the sooner the safe transition plan can kick in. It’s in your hands. McGowan: I want to stress the 90% target threshold could be reached earlier or later, but once we hit 80% and then set the specific date for transition, that date will be locked in. To provide everyone with the certainty they need to plan ahead and be prepared for the next stage of this pandemic. McGowan says Western Australia’s border restrictions will remain in place until 90% of the 12 and over population of the state are fully vaccinated. This is potentially still more than three months away. The plan will take effect when Western Australia reaches a 90% double-dose vaccination rate for people aged 12 and above. That is forecast to take place in late January or early February. But as we have announced previously, we will announce the specific transition day after we’ve achieved a double-dose vaccination rate of 80%. That’s expected to be reached in December. As far as world standards go, a rate of 90% will be an amazing achievement. But I’ve always believed we can strive high and get the best result for our state. And given our current vaccination rates, these targets are realistic and within our sights. WA premier Mark McGowan is speaking now, announcing the state’s transition to Covid Normal living roadmap. Today is a significant day for Western Australia. It’s the day we announce our safe transition plan to ease our controlled border and provide a soft landing out of the pandemic. Our approach towards a safe transition plan hasn’t been rushed, it’s been careful, methodical and thorough. The most important thing is it is a cautious and safe plan, based on our expert health advice. The aim is to provide certainty for Western Australians, to provide certainty on how business and our unique way of life can continue, safely, once we further ease our controlled borders, and minimise any impact the inevitable arrival of the virus may have on our state. In the short, medium and long terms. Our transition is a world-first. What’s unique about our plan is that it’s intended for border controls to ease at a point where there is no community transmission in Western Australia, combined with very, very high levels of vaccination. It’s the best time of the week! It’s Weekly Beast time! Read all about Alan Jones’s departure from Sky News, 7News’s potential costly blunder when they published several images of the wrong man when reporting on the arrest of Cleo Smith’s alleged abductor, and all the rest of the week’s media news below: The prime minister has been asked about the joint state and federal decisions made to continue building a number of quarantine facilities; first commissioned to combat Covid-19 leaking from hotel quarantine. The decision we made to go ahead with it, it’s not a short term decision. I will never forget that first weekend, when the events of Wuhan had become very clear, and there were planes on their way to Australia, from Wuhan that weekend. And it’s important that in the future for whatever pandemic we may face in the future, that we have that initial bank of facilities. In Victoria that one’s progressing well. We’ve changed the scale of the one in Queensland [and] in Western Australia ... From our point of view [the projects are] as much about dealing with the current situation - although it can, particularly in Victoria, provide some support because we’re still quarantining unvaccinated Australians coming back into the country. That is still the case, and that could present some challenges. I think it provides a positive contribution, that this is about a longer term capability. And they have been built to be multi-use facilities as well. So they had their own longer-term, not just the shorter term, advantages. Morrison says he has had discussions with Indonesian president Joko Widodo about potentially reducing the number of days Australians are required quarantine when travelling to the country (particularly the popular holiday destination Island, Bali.) They’re looking to see how they can reduce the number of days that would be required with when anyone, particularly Australians going into Bali, and I would expect over time to see that ... but they’re obviously being cautious about that, and that is entirely appropriate for them. But as we know, on the 21st, I was able to announce when I met with [Singaporean] prime minister Lee [Hsien Loong] that we’ll have that open arrangement with Singapore from the 21st of this month. And what that is showing is - particularly here in New South Wales - we’re just taking it step by step and demonstrating how this works. Morrison says a lack of urgency has caused Covid-19 free states such as Western Australia to lag behind in vaccination rates. I think an obvious part of it has been the third wave that hit New South Wales, Victoria and the ACT, I think that’s a very fair assessment. And, you know, when you’re in a state where there’s been effectively no Covid, there’s a different level of urgency in that state compared to what happened here in New South Wales ... And that’s why we were able to secure those additional doses, those Polish doses. So I was very pleased to see the Polish prime minister in Glasgow and to thank him very much. Morrison says he is “quite certain” Australia will reach an 80% over-16 vaccination rate by the end of the day. The prime minister was asked if he was relieved international borders had opened upon his return from Glasgow. Very, I can assure you! It would have been my fifth quarantine in the last 12 months. So I think it’s tremendous. And I think that’s a demonstration of what Australia’s achieved. As I said today, not only are New South Wales and Victoria and the ACT at 80% double vaccinated for those aged over 16, but the whole country will have passed that 80% mark over the course of today, and when we get the figures tomorrow, I’m quite certain that will be confirmed. Apparently, Prince Charles is a big fan of NSW’s infrastructure projects, according to Scott Morrison. When I met with His Royal Highness Prince Charles, at Glasgow, one of the things he raised was the great urban projects that have been done here in partnership with the New South Wales government, and made particular mention of the work that both premier Perrottet has been doing and Rob Stokes was doing as well, and I think that’s a great recognition of what is happening here in New South Wales and in particular in Sydney. And so congratulations, Dom. Perrottet: The prime minister spoke about the pandemic and the economic challenges that we’ve had. It’s been the infrastructure investment in this state that has driven our economic growth and laid strong fiscal and economic foundations prior to the pandemic beginning. We didn’t just turn the switch off ... [there were]9,000 people working on this project ... and this strong pipeline provides certainty for all workers across our state as we head into the future. OK, here is Dominic Perrottet and Scott Morrison speaking from somewhere underground in Sydney, announcing the final tunnelling breakthrough on the M4-M5 Link tunnels. Perrottet: The Northwest Metro in north-west Sydney had been promised for decades and decades and decades, back when I was a kid at school. But we got on with the job. We built that project and we’re on to the next one. There’s wave after wave of these major infrastructure projects here in our state. That will mean that they’re making a real difference to people’s lives today and well into the future. A giant 7.9kg potato found in a New Zealand couple’s overgrown garden may set a new world record for the largest of its kind ever to be discovered. Colin and Donna Craig-Brown’s were doing a spot of weeding in their Hamilton back yard, when Colin’s hoe hit something below the ground. “So I said to Donna this must be one of those white kūmara (sweet potato) that we grew,” he told Stuff, “because some of them just grew massive here.” He tasted it, discovered it was potato and set about excavating it from the soil. You can carbo-load on all the big potato details below: OK, still no press conference from the prime minister yet, but we have got a press release. And, oh would you look at that, all that waiting and the announcement was about bloody train tunnels. Wow! Did you know that the final tunnelling breakthrough on the M4-M5 Link Tunnels has been completed, marking a major construction milestone in Australia’s largest road infrastructure project? But do we care? Hmmmm, harder to say. OK, here is what Scott Morrison had to say about $16.8bn projects in his official statement. This breakthrough isn’t just for a tunnel, but it’s a breakthrough for getting people home sooner and safer and helping workers to move around. As well as the 9,000 jobs this project has been delivering, the tunnel is going to make it easier for people across Sydney to pick up work and jobs that just wouldn’t have been possible before with traffic. As we reopen Sydney and Australia, projects like this bypass and our record $110 billion infrastructure investment are going to give our economy even more of a boost. Cool. Good luck to all the federal, state and territory leaders at the national cabinet today. According to the Queensland premier, they have a novel’s worth of paperwork to get through, so I wouldn’t expect any updates till well into the afternoon. Okay here is a little more information on the two Covid-19 cases detected at Flemington Racecourse over the last week. A contractor working at the track on Derby Day and an attendee at the Melbourne Cup on Tuesday have both tested positive. In a statement, the Victorian Racing Club said both were fully vaccinated, and the cases are not linked, but, patrons at both events have been asked to monitor for symptoms and get tested if they develop. The VRC is working closely with the Department of Health which has been very supportive of the Club’s CovidSafe Event Plan and management of the two cases and the conduct of the CovidSafe event of the Melbourne Cup Carnival. The safety of all patrons, staff, racing participants and horses is the VRC’s top priority. The contractor who tested positive worked two full days in The Arbour in the Purple Zone on the ground floor of the Club Stand. The Department of Health has advised the VRC that patrons and staff who attended The Arbour on Cup Day are considered at low risk. Based on this, patrons and staff are advised to monitor their health and get tested if they develop any symptoms. The patron who tested positive attended the deck bar within the Green Zone on Cup Day and the Department of Health is in direct contact with the patron and their two social close contacts, who are also fully vaccinated. Patrons who attended the deck bar on Cup Day are being contacted directly via SMS by the VRC and staff have also been contacted. Patrons are advised to monitor their health and get tested if they develop any symptoms. VRC is in contact with staff with recommendations for testing. The two venues have been deep cleaned and will be ready for safe operation for Stakes Day on Saturday. Any other patrons and staff who have not been contacted via SMS directly in relation to these cases are not considered to be at risk. A senior Morrison government minister has attempted to blame journalists for the escalation in the French-Australian diplomatic rift. Finance minister and frequent Morrison government spokesman Simon Birmingham queried whether it was “wise” for Australian journalists to have asked French president Emmanuel Macron questions over the aborted submarine deal and Scott Morrison’s conduct. Macron, when asked if he thought Morrison had lied to him, replied “I don’t think, I know”. The claim opened a fresh wound in the diplomatic relationship, with private text messages Macron had sent Morrison leaked to News Corp publications the following day, a move that infuriated the French even further. You can read the full report below: 82% of Victoria’s 15 and over population are now fully vaccinated. OK, this is cute. Restrictions will tighten in the Queensland town of Goondiwindi after three Covid-19 cases were discovered there on Thursday. The area will not go into lockdown, due to high vaccination rates, but Palaszczuk says visitors will not be allowed in hospitals and aged care homes over the weekend. Also for residents in Goondiwindi ... we’ll be putting in restrictions for aged care and hospitals. There will be no visitors just for the weekend and there will be some additional requirements for hospital staff. Palaszczuk says the Queensland government will deliver supplies to the NSW border town of Moree rather than allowing its residents to cross into the sunshine state as restrictions tighten. This comes after the town clocked up 33 Covid-19 cases. Overnight, Moree was removed from our border bubble. There are 33 cases in Moree and there could be more announced today. What we do know is a large number of people who are testing positive are unvaccinated and that is of concern. As you noticed, last night we tightened the restrictions of people being allowed to cross the border and those restrictions will be tightened even further today for essential purposes ... We’ll try and get supplies to the communities in New South Wales rather than having to cross to get supplies into Queensland. We would like to put this in place in the next seven days. It is really important that we ensure the safety of those townships across our Queensland border. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is speaking now. She says there are no new local Covid-19 cases, despite recording three on Thursday. The state did record two infections from international arrivals in hotel quarantine. A second person in New Zealand infected with Covid-19 has died while isolating at home alone, as the country recorded 163 new cases in the community – its highest ever daily number. The man, who was in his 50s, was recently treated in hospital and discharged himself on 3 November. Ambulance medics found him in his home in Mt Eden, a central Auckland suburb, on Friday morning. It is the second death of a Covid-19 positive man self-isolating at home this week, and the fourth death during the August outbreak. Thirty people with Covid-19 have died in New Zealand since the start of the pandemic. Circumstances around his death are being investigated, the director of public health Caroline McElnay said on Friday. The deputy prime minister, Grant Robertson, said he is confident in the self-isolation system, and that it is being continually monitored. But he said both of this week’s deaths are being investigated to identify any improvements that may be needed. There are now 4,034 cases in the outbreak, and 1,723 have recovered. Of Friday’s cases, 159 are in Auckland and four are in Waikato. There are 69 people in hospital, with six of those in intensive care. Nearly 86% of eligible New Zealanders over 12 years old have had at least one dose of the vaccine, with 74% fully innoculated. 7 News is reporting two Melbourne Cup attendees at Flemington Racecourse tested positive to Covid-19. I will try and firm up the details and bring you more information as soon as I can. Scott Morrison is always late. It’s expected at this point. So if you are sitting around wondering where the prime minister is, because his press conference was scheduled for 10.30am, don’t worry – this is just all part of the experience. Morrison and NSW premier Dom Perrottet are holding their press conference at the Sydney Westconnex site (construction sites always add at least 20-30 minutes to any wait time) and we’ll bring you all the updates as they come. Oh! Seems like the press conference has actually taken place, but there is no way to actually beam it back out. In that case, I’ll bring you all the updates as soon as the magical sound wiggles in the air allow it! Make that 48 minutes late. NSW Health has released further details of the three people infected with Covid-19 who died in the latest reporting period. Sadly, NSW Health is reporting the deaths of three people – two women and one man. A man in his 80s from Sydney’s inner west died at Royal Prince Alfred Hospital. He had received one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. A woman in her 90s died at the Mercy Place aged care facility in Albury where she acquired her infection. She had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine and is the sixth death linked to an outbreak at this facility. A woman in her 80s died at the Southern Cross Care residential care facility in Albury. She had received one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. NSW Health expresses its sincere condolences to their loved ones. There have been 533 Covid-19 related deaths in NSW since 16 June 2021 and 589 in total since the start of the pandemic. From 15 December, people from low the risk areas – WA, NT, SA and Queensland – will no longer need to provide a negative Covid-19 test before travelling to Tasmania. The premier says he expects that by the end of the day 90% of the state’s 16 and over population will have received at least one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine. Apologies this one slipped by me when the ACT numbers came out. The territory has recorded another Covid-19 death, their 11th in total. The man was in his 40’s and being treated in the intensive care unit prior to his death. There is now only one remaining person in the ICU in the ACT, they are ventilated. So I guess this is just like ... not happening? China’s foreign ministry is continuing to use the diplomatic dispute between France and Australia to further its own criticism of the Aukus submarine deal. At the daily press briefing in Beijing late yesterday, a reporter from a Chinese state-controlled media outlet asked for a comment on the French accusation that Australia had lied about the nuclear-propelled submarines plan, and the criticism over the leaking of the text message. Chinese foreign ministry spokesperson, Wang Wenbin, replied: I have noted relevant reports. I want to stress that the Aukus nuclear submarine cooperation is not just a diplomatic spat between a few countries, but a serious matter that will create risks of nuclear proliferation and undermine regional peace and stability. It is extremely irresponsible for the Australian government to ignore its international nuclear non-proliferation obligations and the serious concerns of regional countries and the international community in pursuit of its own interests. The Australian government should correct its mistakes, abandon the Cold War mentality, conscientiously fulfil its international nuclear non-proliferation obligations, earnestly safeguard regional peace and stability and give a responsible answer to the international community. The Australian government has said it “remains staunch in our support for the Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)“ and that it will “work closely with the International Atomic Energy Agency to ensure full compliance with our NPT obligations as a Non-Nuclear Weapon State”. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded six new Covid-19 cases in the latest reporting period. A whopping 94.4% of the territory’s 12 and over population are now fully vaccinated. Wow. A peak doctors’ body is urging the Queensland government to mandate Covid-19 vaccinations for all health workers, not just state employees, to reduce pressure on hospitals when the borders reopen, reports AAP’s Marty Silk. An Australian Medical Association roundtable has been considering ways to stem capacity pressure as border restrictions are eased over the next two months. Its Queensland branch is concerned there’s been marginal improvements in capacity and patient waiting times, even though there’s no large virus outbreak in the state, over the past year. Almost one in three patients have to wait more than 30 minutes to be seen in emergency departments, while just under in three patient visits to EDs in the state are completed within four hours, the AMA’s 2021 hospital report card shows. Elective surgery patients who have been admitted within the recommended timeframe has also fallen to 88% from 92%. AMA Queensland president Chris Perry says hospitals are overwhelmed without an outbreak and border travel restrictions will ease no matter what on December 17. When our borders open on 17 December, and we get inevitable outbreaks of Covid-19, we are going to see more pressure on our emergency departments. Most intensive care patients who need ventilating are there for a couple of days. Most Covid patients on ventilation are there for at least a couple of weeks. He warned that there will be capacity pressures hospitals will need to treat both unvaccinated Covid-19 patients along with fully vaccinated people such as those injured in car accidents or assaults. Get up to date on all of Australia’s Covid-19 stats with the amazing datablog by Nick Evershed, Josh Nicholas and Andy Ball below: Scott!? Dom!? Where are you? It’s well past 10.30. FYI there are more strong winds across the east of NSW today. Check on your deck chairs everyone! 367 Collin St flacon update! Comedian Jordan Shanks has apologised to John Barilaro and will pay $100,000 in costs as part of a settlement deal in the defamation case brought by the former deputy premier over a series of videos he claimed were “vile and racist”. In the federal court on Friday Shanks’ lawyer, Matthew Collins QC, read a statement to the court on behalf of his client, who uses the nom de plume Friendlyjordies in his popular YouTube videos, conceding the videos at the centre of the case were “offensive” and apologising. “Throughout 2020 and 2021 Mr Shanks posted many videos about John Barilaro the former deputy premier of NSW. Freedom of expression for political communication is important, but Mr Shanks accepts some of the videos he posted were offensive to Mr Barilaro,” Collins said. “Mr Shanks understands Mr Barilaro has been hurt, and apologises to him for that hurt.” You can read all the details below: We are just standing by now to hear from Scott Morrison and Dominic Perrottet ahead of national cabinet today. Queensland update at 10.15am, Queensland time, 11.15am Melbourne and Sydney time. Here is what the Victorian outbreak graph looks like nowadays. Thanks so much to Josh Nicholas for this! The man accused of raping Brittany Higgins in a federal minister’s office has been committed to stand trial. Bruce Lehrmann, 26, has pleaded not guilty to sexual intercourse without consent at Parliament House in March 2019. He was on Friday committed in ACT magistrates court to stand trial. Lehrmann’s case is next due in the territory’s supreme court on 18 November. A reminder that we are expecting to hear from the NSW premier Dominic Perottet and prime minister Scott Morrison at a joint press conference in about half an hour. The defamation case between former NSW deputy premier John Barilaro and YouTuber Jordan Shanks (known online as FriendlyJordies) has been settled. Reporter Michael McGowan will bring us more details soon. Federal education minister Alan Tudge has avoided stating if he believes Victorian Liberal MP Tim Smith should resign from state parliament after crashing his car while above the legal blood alcohol limit. He told ABC radio Melbourne: [I’ve] spoken to Tim and said he really needs to consider his position ... It’s really up to Tim now, to the electors in Kew and the administrative committee. He’s a talented individual and has a bright future, and I hope that he’s getting support at the moment and needs to make up his mind over the next couple of weeks. As you consider your Christmas table – a bowl of cherries, a plump roasted bird and the cream on your pudding, you may spare a thought for the way the food gets to your table. Because three things this week signal cracks in our food production systems. First, the Fair Work Commission ruled late on Wednesday that farm workers on piece rates must be guaranteed a minimum wage under the Horticulture Award. The Australian Workers’ Union argued that workers should be guaranteed a minimum wage of $25.41 an hour, rather than just paid for the amount of fruit or vegetables they pick an hour. The commission said the current arrangements in the pieceworker provisions of the horticulture award were not fit for purpose as there was widespread “non-compliance” with negotiations under the Horticulture Award. You can read the full report below: A Victorian man has died after the truck he was driving rolled over and was engulfed in flames on a major freeway north of Melbourne. Emergency services were called to reports of a truck that had been driving north on fire on the Hume Freeway in Northwood, near Seymour, about 6.40am on Friday, AAP reports. The driver, who is yet to be identified, died at the scene. The circumstances of the crash are being investigated by police. The Hume Freeway remains closed northbound near Seymour, and diversions are in place. Victoria’s recorded a slight jump in cases, with 1,343 new infections recorded in the last reporting period. This is up 96 from yesterday’s numbers. Sadly 10 people have also died. NSW has recorded 249 new local cases in the latest reporting period. Sadly, three people infected with Covid-19 have died. The Institute of Public Affairs paid to push targeted Facebook ads based on a “faulty analysis” claiming net zero would cause massive job losses in key Liberal and National seats during last month’s Coalition infighting. Last month, as the Coalition debated a net zero 2050 policy, the IPA paid for a series of Facebook and Instagram ads targeting the electorates of Nationals Barnaby Joyce, David Littleproud, Mark Coulton, Ken O’Dowd and Anne Webster, as well as the Liberal trade minister, Dan Tehan. The ads warned the policy “will destroy” huge numbers of jobs in each electorate. In Flynn, O’Dowd’s electorate, the ads warned “net zero emissions will destroy one in four jobs”. Other electorates would lose one in five, one in six or one in seven jobs, the ads claimed. You can read the full report from Nick Evershed and Christopher Knaus below: Just in case you were wondering what the former Nationals leader, Michael McCormack, has been up to lately, the answer is forcing his social media manager to take Instagram style wistful photos of him looking out at bodies of water. One leg raised dramatically, of course. The NSW education minister, Sarah Mitchell, says the state hopes vaccinating children will play a large part in the Covid education strategy in 2022. The big key in this will be vaccination going forward, particularly in our primary school settings ... I remain hopeful that might come on the cards later this year and I think that will have a positive impact going forward. Emergency service volunteers in New South Wales’ far west are under-resourced and under-supported, leaving large stretches of the region without local road crash rescue services, former volunteers say. And as state and international borders open up, traffic is expected to increase, which will lead to more crashes, raising fears about the State Emergency Service’s ability to respond in the region. Graeme McCrabb, a Menindee local and former SES volunteer, said it had been a “downward spiral for five years”. “We’ve been scraping through by the skin of our teeth and at some point that’s not going to be the case,” McCrabb said. Minutes from a Central West &amp; Far West Combined Region Rescue Committee meeting in March reveal widespread problems in local SES units. Many units, including Walgett, Lightning Ridge and Ivanhoe were listed as offline, while others, including Menindee, Nyngan and Cobar, were operating at reduced capacity. You can read the full story below: Scott Morrison will meet with state premiers and territory chief ministers this afternoon for the first national cabinet meeting in more than a month. We’re told the agenda includes an update on international border arrangements and an update on testing, tracing, isolation and quarantine protocols. There will also be an update on vaccination booster shots. Still in the update category: leaders will hear the latest on a few other elements of the Covid response including on the Halton Review, the Doherty Institute work, and health system capacity. Leaders will discuss Indigenous vaccination programs and community Covid readiness. They will also consider the AHPPC recommendation of mandatory vaccination for disability and homecare workers by the end of the year. The meeting is expected to begin at 2pm AEDT. The Northern Territory town of Katherine has gone into a full 72-hour lockdown after the Top End recorded its first community transmitted Covid-19 case. Restrictions in Greater Darwin have also increased, with a “lockout” coming into effect at midnight, whereby only fully vaccinated people are permitted to move freely in the community until Sunday. This comes after a man in his 20s was diagnosed with the virus in Katherine, 320km south of Darwin. Chief minister Michael Gunner said the unvaccinated man had not travelled outside the NT recently and he had contracted Covid-19 locally. We don’t know where and we don’t know when but this is community transmission. He has caught it from someone in the territory but we don’t know who ... Right now this bloke has no idea how he caught Covid and neither do we. The man lives in a rural area south of Darwin and works at RAAF Tindal, near Katherine, where he was infectious for two days, reports AAP. He developed symptoms on Tuesday and came forward for testing on Wednesday before being diagnosed late on Thursday. There are currently five exposure sites, including Monsoons nightclub in Darwin and the RAAF base. People in Katherine and unvaccinated people in Greater Darwin will only be permitted to leave their homes within a 5km area for five reasons. These are: medical treatment, to buy essential good and services, essential work, one hour of exercise per day and to provide support or care to a vulnerable person. Face masks must be worn by all people in Katherine and Greater Darwin. The Coalition’s voter ID bill could be challenged in court as a disproportionate measure that excludes people from voting, constitutional law expert Prof Anne Twomey has warned. The Morrison government insists nobody would be completely prevented from voting but Twomey argues the proposed legislation could still be struck down for the “imposition of additional administrative burdens that make it more difficult to vote or discourage people from voting”. In addition to concerns about the bill’s impact on groups including Indigenous Australians and people experiencing homelessness, Labor is warning the bill “is a recipe for disaster on polling day” because it could add to queues and be inconsistently applied. You can read the full report below: Tehan was asked how concerned he was about the potential for trade to become a casualty of the ongoing spat between Scott Morrison and the French president, Emmanuel Macron. Well, look, I think when you look at our economic relationship with France, and from the recent trip that I had there, we will see the economic relationship continue. It is actually one which is to France’s advantage. We take over $5bn worth of exports by France. We send about over a billion to them. There is a very strong investment relationship and all the meetings that I had, the French investors were still looking to Australia as a great opportunity to invest, and I know the same is for Australian investors here, so I think we will see the economic relationship continue as normal. Obviously the diplomatic relationship – we want to make sure we get that back on an even keel and we will be doing what we can to achieve that. The minister for trade and tourism, Dan Tehan, has been out and about this morning trying to encourage Australians to holiday domestically this summer now that domestic borders are (notionally) coming down. He has just appeared on ABC news breakfast to chat about the government’s new tourism ad campaign. We have been gifted living in the best country in the world and what a great thing to be able to do is to give friends, families a gift of travel this Christmas. And that’s what this ad is all about. We’ve obviously been through a really tough couple of years, and to be able to get out at Christmas now, we are hitting that 80% vaccination rate and I would just encourage all Australians that if you get the opportunity, give someone that you know, that you love, a trip this Christmas or an event or an experience. They will love it and you will be doing the 600,000 people who work in our tourism industry a big, big favour. Hopes that enough of the Great Barrier Reef could escape global heating long enough for it to recover have been challenged by research finding less than 2% of its coral reefs have escaped bleaching since 1998. The world’s largest coral reef system has suffered five mass bleaching events in that time – caused by rising ocean temperatures driven by the burning of fossil fuel – which have undermined its survival. The most recent event was the most widespread yet. In a study released on Friday, James Cook University’s Prof Terry Hughes and colleagues studied the locations of bleaching events and found only 1.7% of individual reefs had avoided bleaching. Almost all of the places that escaped damage were in an area known as Swain reefs in the southern section of the world heritage listed marine park. You can read the full story below: Child vaccines and the capacity of hospital systems to deal with Covid-19 surges will be in the spotlight when national cabinet convenes for the first time in more than a month, reports Andrew Brown from AAP. State and territory leaders will meet with the prime minister, Scott Morrison, on Friday, the first national cabinet meeting since lockdowns ended in Victoria, NSW and the ACT. Leaders will be provided with updates on international border arrangements and quarantine measures during the meeting. Also on the agenda will be an update on Doherty Institute modelling, as well as recommendations from the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee on mandatory vaccines for disability and home-care workers. It comes as the Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, and the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, indicated they would raise the issue of vaccines for five to 11-year-olds. It follows US regulators approving the Pfizer vaccine for the age group. Yesterday Andrews said: Hopefully our federal government’s doing the same, and they can make announcements quite soon about vaccinating our kids. The premier of NSW and I will be putting forward a number of very important things to the PM. The Therapeutic Goods Administration is currently reviewing data provided by Pfizer on whether to approve child vaccines in Australia. Morrison and Perrottet will be teaming up to chat with us at 10.30am AEDT today. OK, can someone please tell me what’s happening with Queensland health officials posting absolutely out of pocket graphics? Yesterday we had Queensland Health encouraging us to “give ourselves a hand”, literally, and now this. I’m obsessed. Good morning everyone, and we did it! We made it to Friday! But don’t start celebrating too soon, we still have a full day of news to wade through before the weekend comes. But never fear, we will get there together. It’s Matilda Boseley on deck and let’s start with travel. As of midnight last night, Victoria has completely thrown open its border to New South Wales, even to those not fully vaccinated against Covid-19. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, and his NSW counterpart, Dominic Perrottet, issued a joint statement overnight making the announcement. Travel between the two states had already been unrestricted for the fully vaccinated from Monday, but from 11.59pm on Thursday, all remaining NSW and ACT orange zones were downgraded to green under Victoria’s travel permit system. The joint statement read: This means, for the first time in more than six months in Victoria, all local government areas in all states and territories across Australia will be green zones for the purposes of entering Victoria. Andrews added: Victoria and NSW have been through so much over the last few months, and we’re pleased that more families will now be able to reunite just in time for Christmas and the holiday season The change allows all travellers and workers to enter Victoria without any testing or quarantine requirements, including unvaccinated people, as long as they apply for a permit beforehand to verify they are not Covid positive or close contact. Now the deal isn’t quite reciprocal just yet. Fully vaccinated Victorians can also freely travel into NSW unless they’ve been to a place of high concern, but those over 16 who are not double-dosed still cannot for recreation or a holiday. OK, without further ado, let’s get this Friday cracking why don’t we.Joe Biden is on record as the first US president to embrace a concept known as “harm reduction” – a public health approach that aims to mitigate harm done by drug use instead of the traditional just-say-no-ism of past administrations. Administration officials have said last week that the federal government will now support harm reduction concepts – like giving sterile syringes to people who inject drugs – in an effort to curb the transmission of infectious diseases. But the Biden administration has appointed Rahul Gupta as the nation’s new director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy despite the West Virginian’s controversial relationship to harm reduction policies in the past. The appointment of Gupta, a personal friend of Joe Manchin, the West Virginia senator, has sparked concern among some drug policy campaigners who see the move as at odds with the administration’s stated aims of a change in focus when it comes to harm reduction policies. The biggest criticism of the new “drug czar” comes from public health experts who recall the role he played in shutting down West Virginia’s largest syringe service program in the state’s capital of Charleston – now home to what the CDC has called “the most concerning HIV outbreak in the nation”. In the wake of the program’s shutdown, which Gupta supported, the state has formalized new legislation that is likely to shut down nearly all of its harm reduction programs despite facing multiple, new HIV clusters related to injection drug use. When Gupta began working as the director for the West Virginia bureau of public health in 2015, the state was entering a new phase of the opioid crisis. Prescription pill usage was trending down, but only because it was being replaced by people injecting heroin and fentanyl. The number of overdoses in West Virginia for that year was more than twice as high as the number of people who had died in car accidents. Nationwide, the increase in injection drug use drove an uptick in new HIV cases, especially in small towns. In rural communities across the nation, where syringe possession without a prescription is often criminalized, people hooked on opioids still face two options: reuse (and perhaps share) already used needles or go into potentially fatal drug withdrawal. One town of 3,700 people in south-eastern Indiana went from having fewer than five HIV cases to 235 seemingly overnight in 2015. Surrounding local governments, desperate to find solutions, decided to buck small town conservatism and try an idea typically found in large cities, one grassroots outreach workers had been using for years: harm reduction. Although these governments couldn’t prevent people from using drugs, they could reduce the harm associated with their use – especially the impact their drug use had on public health. A syringe program was started in Scott county, Indiana, to provide people who inject drugs with sterile syringes. The results were staggering. In less than a year, there was an 88% drop in syringe sharing – a critical victory in controlling the spread of HIV. Public health experts across the nation identified the Indiana program as the first step in preventing HIV transmission among people who inject drugs. After the outbreak in Indiana, the CDC identified 220 counties across the US considered high risk for HIV outbreaks associated with IV drug use. Of West Virginia’s 55 counties, 28 were on that list. Officials in West Virginia’s capital city, Charleston, started a syringe program through the local health department. The West Virginia bureau of public health, led at the time by Gupta, established statewide guidelines and the Kanawha Charleston health department sterile syringe program began operation. But in West Virginia, where Donald Trump’s brand of conservatism led to a state-record shattering 42.2% margin of victory in 2016, the rhetoric of giving syringes to people who use drugs was a hard sell. The KCHD syringe program served nearly 25,000 people in the three years it operated. For a city of 49,000 residents, the program was meeting a massive demand for clean syringes. But, by 2018, conservative politicians and residents alike had successfully rallied against the program. An ugly public feud pitted former mayor Danny Jones and his supporters against the program and anyone who supported it. Jones, who in an interview had professed that people who use drugs should “be locked up until they’re clean”, enacted a series of changes in the program that included putting a police officer in charge of its design. The biggest criticism of Dr Gupta from his time as the state’s public health commissioner stems from an audit of the syringe program that was instigated by Jones. Flouting CDC recommendations that support lowering barriers to access and guidelines set up by his own office, Gupta’s audit called for a suspension of the syringe program because it didn’t require participants to first seek treatment for drug use before accessing clean syringes. Dr Robin Pollini, an epidemiologist at West Virginia University, and six other harm reduction experts nationwide wrote letters speaking out against Gupta’s findings saying his central criticism – that treatment options weren’t being prioritized above syringe access – showed he missed the point of harm reduction entirely. In an interview with the Guardian Pollini said: “The report was arbitrary in faulting the program for not adhering to practices that were not even required by the state certification guidelines” – guidelines written by Gupta’s own office. When Gupta decided to leave West Virginia in 2018, Charleston and the surrounding county had fewer than five HIV cases related to IV drug use. Since then the number of new cases has gone up to 85, prompting the CDC to send in a team of disease intervention specialists. “They warned us there was going to be a massive HIV outbreak”, said April, who contracted HIV in Charleston last year from IV drug use and did not want her last name used. “I thought they were just trying to scare us into not using. But they were right.” She added that she and people she had use drugs with didn’t have to share needles when the program was operational. “But as soon as it shut down, people started selling them just like they did dope.” But beyond the immediate public health crisis prompted by shutting down the state’s largest sterile syringe program, Gupta’s audit’s legacy lives on in the form of new legislation that has made it illegal for harm reduction programs in West Virginia to follow CDC guidelines. Proponents of the bill held up his report as an example of a public health official advocating for higher thresholds on syringe programs. As a result, three of the 28 counties in West Virginia originally identified as high risk for HIV outbreaks have shut down their syringe programs, citing restrictions placed on their programs by the new law. Three years after the KCHD program was decertified by Gupta, people desperate for housing and access to medical supplies are not hard to find on the streets of Charleston. A man named Tommy said clean syringe access has completely dried up since the shutdown of the program. He described how people who are desperate to reuse old needles will use the flint on matchbooks to reshape needles which have been bent from use. He said the current market value for a clean syringe on the streets is about $5. People can get a used one for between $1 and $2. Seeing the devastation caused to her state’s public health by people who misunderstand or outright oppose harm reduction over the past few years, Dr Pollini is left with one question over the newly confirmed head of ONDCP: “Does he have a better understanding of these programs than he did three years ago?” In a statement, a spokesperson for the ONDCP said: “As a practicing physician and former health official, Dr. Gupta has a long history of supporting high-quality, evidence-based services, including harm reduction. Dr. Gupta is strongly committed to advancing the president’s drug policy priorities, including expanding access to prevention, harm reduction, treatment, and recovery support services across the country, as well as reducing the supply of illicit drugs to address addiction and the overdose epidemic.”In Philadelphia in the late 1970s, a two-year-old Johnathan Blake used to be wheeled to his jazz violinist father John Blake’s gigs with saxophonist Grover Washington – where he would sit entranced by the sight, sound and rhythms of the band’s powerful Philly drummer Pete Vinson. Those memories would help to turn Blake into one of the most creatively supportive drummers of recent times, whose perceptive power has been embraced by heavyweights from the Mingus Big Band, Q-Tip and Dr Lonnie Smith, to post-bop innovators Tom Harrell and Maria Schneider. Homeward Bound is Blake’s exhilarating debut for the Blue Note label. Pentad, his new quintet, is a contemporary dream-band lineup with longtime bass partner Dezron Douglas, and three acclaimed young virtuosi in alto saxist and fellow-Philadelphian Immanuel Wilkins, vibraphonist Joel Ross, and the Cuba-born global jazz keyboardist David Virelles. Blake’s ability to float elusively around a groove while implying an emphatic snap that’s felt rather than heard is the constant undertow to this intricate but always open music. The title track emerges from a long-toned sax-led sway to become an enthralling jam, with Wilkins and Ross swapping warmly intricate lines, and Virelles breaking out into typically clipped, concise figures and glistening double-time streams. The soul-jazzy Shakin’ the Biscuits sets the saxophonist blurting exclamatory sounds against a synth-playing Virelles’ shimmery chords, the beautiful South African lullaby Abiyoyo dreamily unfolds over Blake’s lazily handclap-like pulse, and LLL is a contrastingly breakneck postbop sprint. The standout is the quintet’s scorching account of the Joe Jackson night-on-the-town classic Steppin’ Out – double-takingly turning from a respectful nod to an earworm pop hit into an anthemically roaring Coltranesque sermon. Also out this month The great South African composer/pianist Abdullah Ibrahim’s unaccompanied 86th birthday recording Solotude (Gearbox Records) is quiet, pensive – tentative at times – and many pieces have a haiku-like brevity, but new tunes In-Tempo and Once Upon a Midnight stir Ibrahim into more wayward ruminations, and old classics such as District 6 and The Wedding retain their steely lyricism. UK trumpeter and Tomorrow’s Warriors stalwart Mark Kavuma and his band the Banger Factory (with tuba phenomenon Theon Cross) grippingly bridge 1950s Clifford Brown hard bop, New Orleans street music, Duke Ellington and more on Arashi No Ato (Banger Factory Records), and unique guitar innovator Fred Frith confirms none of his command of adventurous atmospherics have dimmed on Road (Intakt), a live trio gig imaginatively augmented by improv-articulate guests Lotte Anker (saxes) and Susana Santos Silva (trumpet).Greta Harris had enough. The 16-person panel she was co-chairing was on the verge of a meltdown after months of trying to draw new boundaries for districts in the Virginia state legislature. The deadline for submitting maps had arrived but there was no plan. The panel was tasked with redrawing political districts, a task that lawmakers across the US undertake every 10 years. In recent years, there’s been a growing alarm at how politicians have taken advantage of that process, distorting district lines to essentially choose the voters they represent and locking in their re-election and party control of certain seats. There’s now a broader recognition of how the practice, called gerrymandering, can essentially rig elections in favor of one party. Ten years ago, Republicans launched an unprecedented effort to gerrymander to their advantage. In the 2010 election, they targeted under-the-radar races in state legislatures with the goal of taking control of those bodies to control the redistricting process. The effort, called Project REDMAP, was remarkably successful. Republicans used their newfound majorities in places like Wisconsin, Michigan, Ohio, and Pennsylvania to draw district lines that would lock Democrats out of power for years to come. In some places, Republicans weren’t subtle about what they were trying to do. In Michigan, A Republican aide bragged about cramming “Dem garbage” into certain districts. This year, Harris’s panel, comprising eight lawmakers and eight citizens and evenly split between Democrats and Republicans, was supposed to help prevent that kind of distortion from happening. But by the beginning of October, things were so bad that the commission couldn’t even agree on how they should start drawing the maps. There were Democratic proposals and Republican proposals, and the panel couldn’t reach a consensus on which to use as a starting point. After a vote to find a compromise failed, Harris quit. “At this point I don’t believe all members of the commission are sincere in their willingness to compromise and create fair maps for the Commonwealth of Virginia,” said Harris, a Democrat. “I will remove myself from the commission at this point.” She then walked out of the meeting with two other Democratic commissioners, denying the panel a quorum. (She has since returned to the commission.) “I never want to be involved in this again. Because this is not right,” said James Amodio, another Democrat who walked out with Harris. Virginia is part of an unprecedented wave of states that are trying new processes this year for drawing district boundaries. Those experiments mark significant wins in decade-long efforts by government watchdogs, civil rights organizations and ordinary citizens to limit the severe manipulation of district lines for partisan gain, a practice called gerrymandering. For years, gerrymandering, which can virtually guarantee election results and diminish the impact of votes, flew under the radar. But activists have spent much of the last decade carefully cultivating widespread awareness of the practice through an aggressive combination of high-profile litigation, legislative pressure and ballot initiatives. Now new challenges in Virginia and elsewhere are undermining those reforms and underscoring how difficult a problem gerrymandering is to solve. The walkout in Virginia was hard to watch for people like Liz White, the executive director of OneVirginia2021, which has spent the last few years persuading Virginians to create the bipartisan commission and give it the power to draw district lines. The effort, which began in the middle of the last decade, required convincing skeptical lawmakers, including Democrats, to give voters a chance to amend the constitution to create the commission and then persuading voters to do just that. In 2020, Virginia voters overwhelmingly approved the measure. “It’s frustrating for sure,” White said of the commission’s recent stalemate. “It’s been challenging to work so hard to get this commission created and implemented and then it’s kind of like watching your baby go off to college.” There may be no state where the pressure is higher than in Michigan, where 13 citizens (four Democrats, four Republicans, and five independents) are drawing the state’s lines. Unlike the Virginia panel, the Michigan commission is entirely independent from the legislature – state lawmakers are barred from serving on it. Three years ago, creating the commission was one of the biggest grassroots victories in the country. A Facebook post from a woman with no political experience grew into a successful effort to gather hundreds of thousands of petition signatures, which grew into a state constitutional amendment, overwhelmingly approved by voters, to create the commission. The political novices behind the effort fought off well-funded opposition from Republicans and allied groups. At the time, Michigan was one of the most gerrymandered states in the country. The Michigan commission has been working on draft maps over the last few months and, with a few exceptions, activists have been largely encouraged by what they have seen. While Michigan’s maps had long been drawn behind closed doors, the commission has done nearly all of its work in the public eye. “Listening to the motivation, watching what criteria are being used and why they’re being used in the meetings, it all seems very genuine. You can follow the paper trail, you can see and listen to why they are making different decisions,” said Katie Fahey, the woman who spearheaded the constitutional amendment. “You don’t have people who are trying to guarantee a 10-year advantage for one party over the other.” But now, the commission faces its biggest challenge yet. The panel has finalized several draft maps for public review and is taking them around the state for public input. They have already drawn strong criticism from Black leaders and activists who say the proposed maps would diminish their voting power in the state. Michigan has a combined 21 state legislative and congressional districts where minorities have a majority. But the proposed maps could have no districts where Black voters comprise a majority, a feature that has raised alarm from the state’s civil rights bureau and Black leaders. The new maps would dilute the votes of people who live in places with heavy minority populations by cracking them into different districts and combining them with predominantly white areas, the state’s department of civil rights wrote in an analysis last month. Those lines drew heavy criticism during a public hearing earlier in October in Detroit, where nearly 80% of the population is Black. The proposed maps link voters in Detroit with voters in suburban, whiter areas. “The Voting Rights Act of 1965 was created to provide an opportunity for Black people to elect representatives that look like them and of their choosing. Your current maps crack Detroit and make this impossible,” Betty Edwards, who described herself as a lifelong Detroit resident, told the commissioners. “We want representatives that look like us, live with us and understand the issues that Detroiters have,” Tonjia Ray, another Detroit resident, told the commissioners in October. The commission’s advisers have said that it’s possible for minority voters to elect the candidate of their choice in districts, even if they don’t comprise a majority of the population. Determining the appropriate percentage of a minority population needed to comply with the Voting Rights Act can be a complex analysis that depends on the unique political characteristics of an area. These kinds of fights over maps were always expected, said Nancy Wang, the executive director of Voters Not Politicians, the organization that led the 2018 effort to create the commission. The Michigan constitution lays out specific, ranked criteria that the commission has to follow; districts have to comply with the Voting Rights Act, be contiguous, reflect communities of interest, not favor any political party, incumbent or candidate, respect county, city and township boundaries, and be compact. But redistricting is an enormously complex effort that often involves tradeoffs between those criteria. Is it worth breaking up two communities if it makes a district more competitive? How do you draw districts that preserve minority communities while also making sure districts are fair? “The commission, what it’s struggling with right now, is to draw maps that reflect communities of interest while achieving partisan fairness,” Wang said. “I don’t think they were having these discussions behind closed doors when they were gerrymandering.” Nextdoor in Ohio, reformers are closely monitoring what happens in Michigan. Catherine Turcer, the executive director of the Ohio chapter of Common Cause, a government watchdog group, has been working for decades to get Ohio to adopt a new process for redistricting. Just as they did in Michigan, Republican lawmakers carved up the state in 2011 to give themselves a majority in the state legislature and a 12-4 advantage in the state’s delegation. Over the last few decades, Ohioans repeatedly voted down redistricting reform proposals, including a 2012 effort to create an independent redistricting commission. But in 2015, Turcer and other reformers in the state achieved a breakthrough. Voters approved a constitutional amendment that gave redistricting power for state legislative districts to a seven-person panel of elected officials from both parties. It required the panel to make its decisions in public and set out several criteria the panel must follow, including one that says districts can’t “unduly favor or disfavor a party or incumbents”. “I look back and I felt like pigs were flying around the statehouse,” Turcer said. But this is the first year that the new rules have been in effect and Turcer watched with horror last month as Republicans ignored the new guardrails and drew severely gerrymandered maps anyway. Overriding Democratic objections, the panel adopted a plan that would give Republicans a veto-proof supermajority in the state legislature. Even though Republicans have consistently received around 54% of the statewide vote over the last decade, Republicans said they should be entitled to as many as 81% of the seats in the state legislature. Their rationale for that was sketchy – they said they were entitled to such a high vote share because they won 81% of the 16 previous statewide elections. Even Ohio’s Governor Mike DeWine, a Republican who sits on the redistricting panel, acknowledged there were problems with the map. “I am sure in my heart … this committee could have come up with a bill that was much more clearly, clearly constitutional and I’m sorry we did not do that,” he told reporters after the bill was passed. The map already faces multiple challenges from civil rights groups. In Virginia, things have not improved much since Harris’s walkout. In addition to the state legislative districts, the panel has been unable to reach any kind of agreement to draw congressional districts. That means that the Virginia supreme court, where Republicans have appointed four of the seven justices, will almost certainly draw all of the state’s districts. But for all the disappointment in Virginia, White and other organizers still say that having a commission in place is far better than the old system where lawmakers drew their districts. Any maps that the Virginia supreme court comes up with, White and others say, are likely to be fairer than the ones lawmakers created on their own. “Everyone in Virginia could agree that the problem they all wanted fixed was one party drawing maps, in the dark, in secret, and this was a solution to that. I mean Virginia has moved past that problem,” she said.The mind of a writer is a strange place, and a mystery writer’s mind is the strangest of all. How does one use a myriad of tiny intersecting events to construct a plot that will puzzle, entertain, surprise, and ultimately satisfy the reader? Carla Valentine reveals the processes by which that mistress of misdirection, Agatha Christie, used what we now refer to as forensics to lend both credibility and complexity to her famous stories. During the first world war, Christie worked in a hospital dispensary, where she learned to mix medicines from precisely measured and often dangerous ingredients. She was, as her autobiography put it, “surrounded by poisons”. Inspired by the adventures of Sherlock Holmes, it was here that her thoughts turned to detective fiction, and she planned her first novel, The Mysterious Affair at Styles, a clever and devious case of murder by strychnine poisoning. Following the success of this novel, Christie decided to go beyond poisons and thoroughly familiarise herself with emerging scientific techniques that were changing the investigation of crime. Valentine has employed her skills as a forensic mortuary technician to tease out the fine details of how Christie wove this knowledge into her stories. Valentine’s book also serves as an exploration of those techniques, including the collection of fingerprints, the interpretation of impressions like footprints or tyre tracks, the analysis of bloodstains and, at the autopsy stage, of the victims themselves. In some areas, notably fingerprints, Christie’s novels, perhaps as a result of her conversations with experts, anticipated innovations before they were formally adopted. Which is not to say that her characters slavishly always followed the rules. While Hercule Poirot, a professional detective, displayed his expertise in fingerprints from the start, Miss Marple, an amateur, was given to improvisation. In The Case of the Perfect Maid she sneakily collected a suspect’s fingerprints using only a pocket mirror and a piece of half-eaten seaside rock. And Poirot himself frequently disdained the practice – articulated by renowned French criminologist Edmond Locard as “‘every contact leaves a trace” – of searching for tiny pieces of evidence, preferring to lie back in an armchair with his eyes closed in order to see the solution with “the eyes of the mind”. Christie’s research and attention to detail makes her work believable, and she brought the latest in forensic science to public attention. She was an avid reader of newspaper reports of criminal cases and engaged in active debate with other eminent crime writers, exchanging ideas and information at their meetings in the Detection Club, founded in 1930. Occasionally, as a storyteller, she bent the rules. Like Sherlock Holmes, she suggests that the expression on the face of a corpse can reveal how the individual died, and their emotions at the time of death. Christie must have known that this is not the case, but we can allow her some dramatic license, and for the most part, she was scrupulously accurate. Valentine has written an engaging and informative book (the Murder Methods Table is grimly fascinating, with 1939’s And Then There Were None claiming the prize for the greatest diversity, from crushing to drowning). She casts new light on Christie’s methods and research and, most importantly, makes sure never to give away the endings. • Sherlock Holmes and the Rosetta Stone Mystery by Linda Stratmann is out now. Murder Isn’t Easy: The Forensics of Agatha Christie is published by Little, Brown (£16.99). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Pick of the week Passing Rebecca Hall’s first film as director is an assured treatment of a 1929 novel by Harlem Renaissance writer Nella Larsen. It’s the tale of two light-skinned Black women in New York and the different ways in which they “pass” for white – interestingly, shot in black-and-white, so all skin tones are shades of grey. Tessa Thompson plays Harlem doctor’s wife Irene, settled in her bourgeois life of charity work and cliquey soirees. Former schoolfriend Clare (Ruth Negga, channelling Tennessee Williams) has concealed her racial identity to the extent of having a white, racist husband. When they meet by chance, Clare brings excitement but also disruption to the emotionally repressed Irene’s routine. Wednesday 10 November, Netflix *** Finch Mr Reliable, Tom Hanks, sprinkles his twinkly-eyed everyman stardust on Miguel Sapochnik’s engaging post-apocalypse drama. His eponymous engineer, alone and ailing in St Louis after a solar flare-inspired disaster has left the planet irradiated and dust-blown, builds a robot, Jeff, to look after his pet dog when he’s gone. But when a superstorm approaches, the trio have to hit the road: destination San Francisco. Jeff (voiced by Caleb Landry Jones) has a distinct Short Circuit air to it, which may endear or annoy as it learns about human and canine foibles alike. Out now, Apple TV+ *** Portrait of a Lady on Fire This sumptuous, sensuous drama from the great French film-maker Céline Sciamma follows Noémie Merlant’s late 18th-century artist Marianne to an island off the coast of Brittany. There, she is commissioned to create a portrait of a young lady, Héloïse (Adèle Haenel), for her intended husband – but in secret, as Héloïse refuses to marry or even sit for the painting. The ruse soon collapses and the two women begin a febrile love affair in an all-female environment free of the male gaze – with the act of seeing and being seen shifting from restrictive to liberating. Saturday 6 November, 9pm, BBC Four *** I Was a Male War Bride What a joy it is to see Cary Grant playing off a strong female lead. To the likes of Katharine Hepburn and Irene Dunne can be added Ann Sheridan in Howard Hawks’s 1949 comedy, set in postwar Berlin. Her US Army officer has a working relationship of “sexual antagonism”, as she dubs it, with Cary Grant’s French captain, which predictably leads to love. Grant’s often subversive take on masculinity in his roles is to the fore here – to the extent of him donning female clothing – in a hugely entertaining caper. Sunday 7 November, 3.55pm, Talking Pictures TV *** Ad Astra Echoes of Apocalypse Now abound in James Gray’s beautiful-looking, portentous sci-fi drama. Astronaut Roy (Brad Pitt) finds his professional insouciance crumbling when he is sent to Neptune to locate the source of energy bursts that threaten the Earth – and which may come from his long-lost father (Tommy Lee Jones, in the Kurtz role). Shot in a stately fashion underpinned by Roy’s pensive voiceover, it is a slow-burning story, punctuated by impressively realised scenes of peril. Wednesday 10 November, Amazon Prime Video *** My Father and Me Documentary film-maker Nick Broomfield’s father, Maurice, was one of Britain’s leading postwar industrial photographers, creating beautifully lit, romanticised images of factory workers (on display from today in an exhibition at the V&amp;A in London). Nick is a more political, off-the-cuff observer of life and, as such, was initially a disappointment to his parent. Here, the son reassesses his relationship with a man who was a conscientious objector, married a Jewish Czech wartime refugee and owned a Gypsy caravan. It’s a family history that also serves as a bracingly honest self-portrait. Wednesday 10 November, 10pm, BBC Four *** Lioness: The Nicola Adams Story Although women’s boxing is now an accepted part of the sporting world (at least on the amateur side), the story of Olympic champion Nicola Adams shows how hard-won that success has been. Helena Coan’s bruising documentary highlights Jane Couch’s attempts in the 90s to normalise female participation, a baton that passed to a gutsy girl from Leeds with ADHD and a violent father (he denies the allegation), who overcame pig-headed resistance to equality from gyms, the media and the boxing authorities. How she still came up smiling is a wonder to witness. Friday 12 November, Amazon Prime Video • This article was amended on 8 November 2021 to correct the spelling of Jane Couch in the preview of Lioness: The Nicola Adams Story.When Patrick Lendrum steps out into a natural grassland, he gets an incredible feeling of vastness looking out over the land – no mountains or trees or forests, just open expanse. “The solitude out there is incredible, and there’s enormous bird diversity in grasslands, the sounds that they make if you’re there in the spring,” says Ledlum, a scientist with the World Wildlife Fund’s northern Great Plains program. “It’s just this natural, incredible chorus and a lot of the species that you see on grass, and you don’t see anywhere else in the world.” Grasslands used to cover a large swath of North America before European settlement. When Europeans arrived, they quickly plowed up about half of the grasslands on the continent and converted them to agricultural use, growing corn, soybeans and wheat. And today, new research shows the rate that the ecosystem is being lost has been increasing. Lendrum led a research team that released a report in September showing that from 2018 to 2019 an estimated 2.6m acres of grassland were plowed up, primarily to make way for row crop agriculture – an area larger than Yellowstone national park. For a few years, the rate of grassland loss was decreasing. But then in 2018 and 2019, the number started to increase again, Lendrum says. “That’s an alarming trend.” It’s also a huge blow for efforts to fight the climate crisis and represents a little reported unfolding environmental disaster in the US. *** There are a web of reasons why more grasslands are turning into crops. Farmers and ranchers make decisions based on global commodity prices. There’s an increased demand for crops for human food, livestock feed and fuel. Biofuels like ethanol boomed in 2009 or 2010 and that increased demand. “Grasslands are mostly used for grazing of livestock and when that balance gets out of line, and crop agriculture becomes more profitable, that’s when we see the resurgence of the tillup,” says Tyler Lark, an researcher at the University of Wisconsin who has studied grasslands for the past decade. Urban sprawl also plays into it: Lark is researching the ways that croplands are being turned into housing – so the total amount of cropland isn’t expanding that much, but it’s being developed for residential use, and crops are being pushed to the periphery. “It’s almost a cascading effect, as we look at future urban expansion,” he says. Lark’s research shows grasslands lost in the past years have been considered marginal, less productive land than other places where farmers could grow crops. At the same time, these marginal areas contain some of the highest-quality habitats – nesting sites for breeding birds and habitat for monarch butterflies. *** There are enormous implications for climate change when people dig up grasses that have been intact for hundreds of years, because grasslands store tons of carbon in their soils. Native prairie grasses have deep roots that stabilize the soil and prevent erosion. When people plow it up, it releases carbon into the atmosphere. It also exposes the soil to the air, which increases erosion and can also lead to nitrate leaching. People often think of forests as natural ecosystems that store huge amounts of carbon, Lark says. But grasslands store immense amounts as well, out of sight, under the ground. “When we plow those up, a lot does become lost. If we can reduce the conversion, that will go a long way in lowering emissions.” Once grasslands have been destroyed for agriculture, Lendrum says, it can take decades or even centuries to restore them. The WWF is working with landowners to convert croplands back into grasslands, but the process is slow and expensive. “Once that piece of grass is initially tilled, it’s very difficult to restore those ecosystem benefits,” says Lendrum. “Carbon in particular, it’s a slow process.” Grasslands can seem like uncharismatic open land waiting for human activity. Everyone knows about the destruction of the Amazon, but grasslands are off their radar, in “flyover country”, Lendrum says. Additionally, people need to eat, and there’s been a long history of moving west and growing crops in the prairies – American history is full of stories of expansion into the middle of the continent to farm food. And that need to generate crops has economic benefits but has to strike a balance with the ecological realities. Lark says the future is really about using the croplands we have already in the most efficient manner, and improving yields. “There is lots of room to expand production without expanding cropland area – it’s just easier to expand area than work on innovation.” There is also an opportunity for leadership in the private sector and corporations, as consumers increasingly take notice. Just as increased attention to rainforests and savannah led to protecting them globally from deforestation, the same level of awareness could be applied to grasslands. Lark says he could see campaigns around native ecosystems, conversion-free supply chains, and products that aren’t contributing to the loss of grasslands. Ben Turner, a natural resource management scientist at Texas A&amp;M University in Kingsville, Texas, says he sees the seeds planted for a more active future: there is a renaissance of research in grasslands. And consumers are becoming increasingly interested in where their food comes from, how animals are cared for, and how the land is managed. “We’re not going to reclaim even a small percentage of all the grasslands we’ve lost,” he says. But farmers can make cropland as functional as grasslands used to be, by diversifying crop systems, integrating livestock with crops, and finding ways to value ecosystem services like pollinators and migratory birds. “What needs to change is the public will to actually see changes happening – and that’s longer-term.”The high costs and lack of access to childcare is preventing many thousands of women from returning to the workforce in the United States despite a widespread labor shortage. Childcare systems in America were already facing significant problems in terms of their expense, the low pay for workers, and lack of accessibility for families before to the pandemic. The Covid-19 pandemic has worsened these issues as childcare centers were forced to shut down, and many closed permanently, have yet to reopen, or have lowered enrollment. Jessica Rapp of Westminster, Colorado, gave birth to her first child in August 2020. Her job as a pediatric occupational therapist did not provide any paid maternity leave. She took 12 weeks off, unpaid, through the Family Medical Leave Act (FMLA). The financial difficulties began after she received high medical bills for the birth, even though she had health insurance. Rapp and her husband are still paying off the medical debt, while she has only been able to return to work part-time due to the high costs of childcare. The couple pays about $1,200 a month for two days of care a week. “Now my son is 14 months old and I would say the past year has been the most financially stressed we’ve ever been,” said Rapp. “The cost of full-time childcare would have been much higher than our mortgage, higher than my salary would have been able to take in.” Even with financial support and childcare help from family, Rapp hasn’t been able to return to work full-time. “I don’t have a choice right now. I feel like I want to work. That should be a good thing, but it’s just not possible now.” In September 2021, more than 300,000 women in the US left the workforce. More than 26,000 jobs were lost in September 2021 for women, while men gained 220,000 jobs. The labor participation rate in the US is still 1.7% lower than before the pandemic in February 2020, including nearly 1.6 million mothers with children under the age of 17 who dropped out of the work force and have not returned. “The care infrastructure was hanging by a thread before the pandemic,” said Kristin Rowe-Finkbeiner, executive director and CEO of MomsRising. “Then that unraveled altogether and it became clear that we absolutely need to invest in childcare so parents can go to work, children can thrive, and childcare workers can earn living wages. Investing in childcare is job-enabling and job-creating, by allowing parents to go to their much needed jobs, and by investing in a career and better wages for care workers.” President Biden’s Build Back Better budget reconciliation bill includes $400bn in funds to develop free universal preschool for children ages three and four, and to reduce childcare costs to 7% of income for families earning up to 250% of their state’s median income, which is estimated to expand access for 20 million children in the US. Currently, the United States government spends just $500 annually per child on early childhood care, significantly lower than the average for wealthy countries, at $14,436 in annual public spending. Childcare costs for parents have increased significantly over the past few decades and vary widely across the US, from about $5,000 annually in Mississippi to about $24,000 annually in Washington DC. Even before Covid-19, a majority of Americans lived in childcare deserts. Reshonna Booker of Seattle, Washington, gave birth to her first child in June 2020, while studying to become a teacher. After her few weeks of paid leave during the pandemic expired, Booker had to leave the workforce to care for her son, as childcare was not only too expensive, but every facility she and her husband could find had waiting lists of at least two years. “Ninety percent of the kids that come in are white, middle class families, and so all those spots get full, and where does that leave all the other people of color to get a quality education?” said Booker. “I think that should be a priority, to change the education gap, to have spots reserved for children of color in better quality schools, especially for young Black children, because we can never get in and they’re too expensive.” Childcare workers in the US typically make about $12 an hour. The low pay is a contributing factor in staffing shortages that the majority of childcare facilities in the US are still experiencing after the pandemic.More than 100,000 jobs in the child daycare industry have been lost since the pandemic began. Across the US, more than one in three childcare providers reported in a recent survey they are considering leaving or closing their childcare program. Lacey Clark started working at Wild Lilac Child Development Community in Portland, Oregon, once the facility reopened after a brief shut-down due to Covid in spring 2020. She had been laid off from a job at another childcare provider due to the pandemic. “It felt like the dark ages,” said Clark. “The policy landscape was changing, it felt like every week, both our school creating its own policies, the government policies, and then the early childhood policies. It felt like we were really out of control and getting a lot of flack for the policies being made around us.” Clark and her co-workers recently voted overwhelmingly to unionize after organizing with coworkers through the internet due to Covid safety protocols. “We need to have more staff and to get paid better,” added Clark. “There’s such a high turnover. Having new people come in with no training for minimum wage and having the highest expectations for them to deliver high quality childcare has caused a massive burnout.”Deja Lewis was walking down a sidewalk in Salem, New Jersey, in the early, frightening days of the Covid-19 pandemic in April 2020, when she was stopped by police. Lewis, 28, was arrested on warrants related to failure to pay traffic tickets, and an incident in which she “escaped” from a police vehicle. She had been a witness to a fight and left the back of the patrol car, her attorney said. While she was in custody, police said she coughed “in close proximity” to officers, and said she had Covid-19, though no dashboard, body or in-station videos exist to prove the assertion either way. The allegation has landed Lewis, who otherwise has no criminal history, with a potentially ruinous terrorism charge – one that could land her in prison for 10 years and leave her with a $150,000 fine. The rare and serious penalty was available to prosecutors only because New Jersey was in a state of emergency, in this case because of the Covid-19 pandemic. Lewis is among nearly four dozen people hit with life-altering terrorism charges – the sort of charges normally brought against people who perpetrate bomb threats – after the former New Jersey attorney general led a campaign to show law enforcement “we have their backs” amid the early days of the pandemic. “It’s a miscarriage of justice,” said Lewis’s attorney, public defender Logan Terry. The most recent plea agreement offered to Lewis would sentence her to five years in state prison with restitution. “This is a poor person, and if this was a rich white lady this would not be happening. This is a poor black lady and they’re going to stick it to her, and I think it’s wrong.” The charges brought by New Jersey prosecutors are formally called “terroristic threats in the second degree”. Each count can result in a possible 10-year prison sentence and a $150,000 fine and prosecutors may bring this heightened charge only during a state of emergency. The first apparent terroristic threat charges in New Jersey came on 14 March 2020, two days before the White House would call on Americans to stay home for 15 days to “slow the spread” of Covid-19. The charges were brought against a Bergen county woman who allegedly coughed on an officer during a domestic violence incident. From there, the former New Jersey attorney general Gurbir Grewal would continue to bring serious charges against people throughout New Jersey, tacking them on to otherwise minor arrests. Grewal has since joined the Biden administration as the director of enforcement for the Securities and Exchange Commission. “By ensuring that prosecutors filed serious charges in each of these cases, we let our officers know that we have their backs and that we appreciate the dedicated and professional way that they have met the challenges of this unprecedented emergency,” Grewal told the Guardian in June, before he joined the administration. However, defense attorneys for people charged with second-degree terroristic threats said the cases are rarely as clearcut as prosecutors make out. Instead, they argued charges often hit the poorest and most vulnerable residents of the state, those living with mental illness and addiction disorders, and are brought against people accused of otherwise minor crimes. “New Jersey was unusually aggressive early on in saying, ‘We’re going to prosecute these to the full extent of the law,’ not just charging assault,” said Chad Flanders, a professor at St Louis University School of Law who wrote a law review article on anti-terrorism statutes deployed during the pandemic. Flanders said it would be more appropriate for prosecutors to bring charges under less severe assault statutes or disorderly persons statutes. “The idea we’re going after knuckleheads with 10 years and $150,000 fine – there’s sort of a disconnect to me.” Anti-terrorism statutes “carry pretty serious penalties”, said Flanders. “And if you look at the history of the laws, they’re originally designed for people who call in bomb threats to buildings and cause a serious disruption.” The charges echo how prosecutors once used anti-terrorism laws to charge people who allegedly threatened to transmit HIV and Aids. These kinds of charges have made the US a world leader in punishing HIV transmission, alongside Russia, eastern Europe and sub-Saharan Africa. In some cases that attorneys described to the Guardian, New Jersey prosecutors specifically cited precedents set by HIV prosecutions in the 1990s to try to compel Covid-19 test results or to further prosecution. One notorious case prosecutors cited is State v Smith, in which a New Jersey appeals court upheld the conviction and 25-year prison sentence of an HIV-positive inmate. The inmate, Gregory D Smith, threatened to kill corrections officers by biting or spitting on them. HIV cannot be spread through saliva, a fact known for more than a decade by the time the conviction was upheld. In all the Covid-19 cases, the charges came as public health authorities called on law enforcement to release people from jail to avoid spreading the virus, and when New Jersey had the highest per-capita Covid-19 death rate of any state in the nation. Despite these warnings, some New Jersey defendants charged under anti-terrorism statutes found themselves detained for far longer periods than they might during a non-emergency situation. That is because New Jersey waived a requirement that defendants be indicted within 90 days of arrest, as backlogged courts struggled to adapt to the pandemic. In one case, a northern New Jersey man spent eight months in jail awaiting indictment. His crime, his attorney said, was telling arresting officers, “I have corona,” when he was asked if he had any health problems. “It’s obviously not a threat in the common definition of the threat nor in the legal definition of the threat, and it was a direct response to their questioning,” said the man’s attorney, who asked not to be named to protect their client from retaliation. After release, he was asked to return to jail indefinitely to get a coronavirus test. “It was just so absurd and offensive to me for him to go in [to jail] to prove he was a Covid-negative, when obviously he could get tested on the street,” the man’s attorney said. They described the case as an example of how “Covid is used to hurt some of the most vulnerable people, and to continue to hurt them.” All told, the New Jersey attorney general’s office publicized charges of terroristic threats in the second degree against at least 45 people, possibly the most concerted campaign to criminalize threats of Covid-19 transmission in the US. It is possible the campaign was influenced by the Trump Department of Justice. In March 2020, the then deputy attorney general, Jeffrey Rosen, issued a memo arguing anyone threatening to spread Covid-19 could be prosecuted under federal anti-terrorism statutes, especially charges of perpetrating a biological weapons hoax. New Jersey prosecutors also distinguished themselves by bringing the only known criminal case against a health worker in the pandemic for alleged Covid-19 transmission. Prosecutors in Camden county charged a home health aide, Josefina Brito-Fernandez, with the equivalent of four felonies for allegedly transmitting Covid-19 to an elderly patient who later died. Her patient’s death and the case brought against her “destroyed” her life, she told the Guardian. Brito-Fernandez earned $11 an hour at the time she was charged, was threatened with deportation as a result of the case and has lost her license to practice. “At the beginning of the pandemic, there’s a lot of uncertain information and the gut reaction in a lot of jurisdictions – not only in New Jersey, not only in US – is criminal law,” said Nina Sun, an assistant clinical professor and deputy director of global health at the Drexel University Dornsife School of Public Health. Sun said many anti-terrorism threat statutes date from the 9/11 era, when anthrax-laced letters were sent to prominent politicians and journalists. “That situation of bioterrorism is arguably quite different from what we’re seeing now with a naturally occurring infectious disease,” said Sun. Prosecutors have apparently stopped bringing new second-degree terroristic threats charges. The last anti-terrorism charge related to the pandemic, according to the attorney general’s office, came in December 2020, when a Secaucus man arrested for drunk driving coughed on police and said he had coronavirus. “We will not tolerate those who endanger the first responders working on the frontlines of this pandemic,” the acting attorney general of New Jersey, Andrew J Bruck, said in a statement to the Guardian. “We are committed to safeguarding our law enforcement officers and other emergency workers, and we will hold accountable individuals who deliberately threatened to expose these heroes to a deadly virus,” he said. Since then, at least some of the people who were charged pleaded guilty to lesser charges, served or are serving time in jail, or have entered prosecution deferment programs. But others said their lives have been “ruined” by the case against them. More said they believed the charges were unjust, but feared speaking out because of potential retaliation from police or prosecutors. “People lives [sic] are being ruined because of these kind of charges with no proof of having Covid at all,” said Lewis, the woman arrested on warrants related to traffic tickets, via an email. “How can u [sic] assault someone who hasn’t gotten Covid?”The Australian government has launched an aggressive campaign to prevent Pacific Islander farm workers from fleeing their jobs as new figures reveal more than 1,000 seasonal pickers absconded in the past year. The campaign warns pickers they may “bring shame to their families” if they run away from their jobs and they risk having their visa cancelled. “You may not be able to work in Australia again (this may include your family and community members)”, one campaign poster reads. “You may damage the relationship between your country and the employer, and you may bring shame to your family’s reputation.” It comes as Australia’s seasonal worker program is hit with claims it has subjected people to “inhumane conditions”, with a class action being built against the government. Each year thousands of migrants from the Pacific Islands are brought to Australia to work on farms picking fruit and vegetables under the program. In the last financial year, 1,181 workers on the program attempted to run away from their employers, which are normally labour hire companies, according to the Department of Education, Skills and Employment (DESE). That is compared to 225 the previous year. A DESE spokesperson said the number of people who absconded was not as large as it appeared, as some may have returned to work. “[There are also] workers who have reconnected with the SWP and have since been redeployed to another placement,” the spokesperson said. The Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, which is responsible for the campaign poster, has been approached for comment. Alison Rahill, executive officer of the Catholic Archdiocese of Sydney’s Anti-Slavery Taskforce, said 80% of the workforce were tied to labour hire contractors, which often meant they were working in poor conditions. She said the focus should be about why an employee would want to leave in the first place. “We’re never concerned about why a worker is leaving an employer,” Rahill said. “Finding out if there were threats, intimidation and abuse. All of the reasons that would contribute to a worker wanting to leave an employer.” She said the poster, which is available to download on the government website in six different Pacific languages, would exacerbate the “fear” that workers would feel. Rahill said workers were often treated poorly and living in isolation without proper food and accommodation. “They’re left with no choice but to run away. They’re given no choice.” Proponents of the program argue it delivers benefits for both Australian farms and the workers. Workers from these countries are often poor and have limited English. For many, it is a way to build a better life. “We really want to go there to work for our family future,” said one worker in Samoa, who is awaiting approval. But others argue the isolation of the workers and the nature of the industry has led to widespread exploitation. Sydney lawyer Stewart Levitt is building a class action against the government over the program. Workers are meant to receive $900 a week for their work, but Levitt said this was rare and some were left with only $300 a week after their employers made excessive deductions. This can include $200 a week to share a shipping container or room with six other people, he said. “They’re paying through the nose to live with six people in one bedroom, with an outdoor toilet,” Levitt said. “We have payslips where people are being charged $14.80 for water.” He said workers were subjected to “substandard and inhumane conditions” but many were too scared to come forward. “Because of the intimidation and terror that’s been struck, it’s hard to get anyone to come forward. They’ve been told there are repercussions,” Levitt said.The family of Cleo Smith have thanked police and locals in their remote Western Australian community for helping to “bring their little girl back” to them. In their first public statement, released on Friday afternoon, Cleo’s mother, Ellie Smith, and stepfather, Jake Gliddon, said the family were “humbled by the love and support” they had received from “not only our local community but the whole of Western Australia and across the country” in relation to their daughter’s alleged abduction. “We would like to take this opportunity to thank all those involved in the rescue of our daughter Cleo Smith,” the statement said. “In particular, we would like to thank WA Police, all those involved in the initial search, the Carnarvon community, local businesses and of course our family and friends. The pair said they “are so thankful that our little girl is back within our arms and our family is whole again”. “As we try to get on with our lives, we ask that you respect our privacy,” they said. Police officers discovered Cleo alone in a house in the town of Carnarvon which they raided in the early hours of Wednesday morning, 18 days after the four-year-old went missing from her family’s tent at a remote campsite on the north-west coast of WA. Terence Darrell Kelly, the 36-year-old man who was arrested shortly after Cleo’s discovery, has been charged with abducting her. Police found Cleo alive and well and playing with toys when they discovered her at about 1am inside the Carnarvon property, which was just minutes from her family’s home in the south of the town and 75km from the Blowholes campsite she went missing from in October. On Friday, Kelly was flown from Carnarvon to a maximum-security prison in Perth. He appeared before a magistrate in Carnarvon on Thursday in relation to various offences including one count of forcibly taking a child under 16, and was remanded in custody ahead of the matter returning to court next month. He was remanded in custody ahead of the matter returning to court next month. The police commissioner, Chris Dawson, said Kelly would be subject to extra security measures “for obvious reasons”, having twice been hospitalised after self-harming while in custody. The lead investigator, Det Supt Rod Wilde, has previously said police “will allege … he acted solely, alone”. Since reuniting Cleo with her family, police have released an audio recording of the moment officers first entered the room in the Carnarvon home where they found her. During the exchange, officers asked her name and she responded “my name is Cleo”. Police also released footage from an officer’s body camera showing the moment Cleo was carried out of the house with one of the officers present later describing the four-year-old as having been like “a little Energizer bunny”. The WA premier, Mark McGowan, visited Cleo and her family in Carnarvon on Thursday. He gave the four-year-old two teddy bears named after the officers who rescued her “We did a few high fives. I, unfortunately, trod on her new Barbie shoes and broke one of them. So I owe her a pair of shoes,” McGowan said. “It was a lovely experience to meet that little girl. She’s just bubbly, playing, friendly, sweet. She was eating an icy pole, she spilled it everywhere. She told me it was very, very sticky, which I believed, and she was just delightful,” the premier said. WA police do not expect anyone to claim the $1m reward for information about Cleo’s whereabouts that had been offered by the government – the equal largest reward ever offered by the state. Cleo’s family live in Carnarvon.Fears are growing that the UK will trigger article 16 of the Northern Ireland protocol, potentially rupturing the already strained relations with the EU. If talks with the EU collapse, it is expected just after Cop26 in seven days’ time. On Wednesday Ireland’s prime minister heightened concerns that this was almost a racing certainty after his bluntest warning yet to the UK that such a move would be “reckless”, “irresponsible” and have “far-reaching consequences”. What is article 16? It is a clause in the Northern Ireland protocol, one of the key elements in the withdrawal agreement, which legally cemented the UK’s departure from the EU in January 2020. It allows either side to take steps, or “safeguards” in treaty-speak, if the protocol leads to “serious economic, societal or environmental difficulties that are liable to persist, or to diversion of trade”. What is the test for triggering article 16? The UK must prove that the protocol has given rise to “serious economic, societal or environmental” difficulties. Lord Frost has repeatedly said the conditions to trigger it are met because of the obstruction to trade flow between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. What are these safeguards? They have not been defined but they must be “appropriate” to the damage caused and are likely to include the semi-permanent suspension of checks on goods flowing from Great Britain to Northern Ireland. But the invoking of article 16 will not have a huge impact on the ground. This is because many of the checks have already been unilaterally suspended by the UK and the article 16 process itself triggers a formal dispute process that requires both sides to go into talks to resolve the dispute. So why all the fuss? The fear is the UK will go much, much further and use the breakdown of talks to drive through domestic legislation to dump the role of the European court of justice in the arbitration process, something that cannot be achieved through article 16. This would be a sequel to September 2020 when the government admitted it was going to “breach international law” in a “specific and limited way” through the internal market bill. That move was eventually abandoned but not before the resignation of the UK’s top legal civil servant, Jonathan Jones, and a mutiny in the House of Lords by a gang of former Tory party leaders. The Brexit minister, Lord Frost, has repeatedly made the ECJ a red line so many expect that triggering article 16 will be involve multiple connected actions. As one Whitehall source said “Frost is looking for a time machine” trying to undo Theresa May’s 2017 deal which embroidered the ECJ into the Brexit deal. Will there be a trade war? The EU could not retaliate immediately under the arbitration process. However, it has gameplanned various scenarios and many believe a move to abandon the ECJ through domestic legislation would be tantamount to the UK walking away from the international withdrawal agreement. So the language used by both sides will indicate whether the UK and the EU are ready to go on a trade war footing. Can a wider trade war really be triggered by a breakdown in talks over Northern Ireland? Yes. Remember when the EU threatened to trigger article 16 during the row over vaccine supplies in January? What came as a shock to many commentators was the fact that measures in the Brexit protocol designed to protect peace in Northern Ireland could be deployed in a completely different theatre of war. Some are already suggesting the EU could announce its plans to suspend the trade agreement altogether. But under the rules the EU’s response has to be proportionate. Cambridge University EU law professor Catherine Barnard says it would be in its powers to slap tariffs on British products such as Scottish salmon and whisky. This is what happened in the row with the US over steel and other products. The EU put a 56% tariff on Harley-Davidson bikes imported from the US with other countries imposing levies on bourbon, peanut butter and jeans, products that mattered in Trump-supporting states. Anything else? David Frost does not have the last word. A decision on article 16 is ultimately Boris Johnson’s. One Whitehall source said the fishing row had “focused minds on the impact on consumers” after France threatened to check every lorry coming into Calais and other ports. If France, Ireland and the Benelux countries decided to stop every lorry for Brexit checks, supply chains before Christmas would be severely disrupted, something that may weigh on the prime minister’s mind.Neil Gaiman’s short, lyrical 2013 novel inhabits a no man’s land between childhood nightmares and the disappointments of adulthood which is so terrifyingly evoked in this National Theatre transfer that it reframes the idea of a good family show. We’re all used to cowering on the sofa as monsters rampage across the screen (Jim Henson’s film The Dark Crystal is specifically referenced in an adaptation which places the childhood of the middle-aged narrator squarely in the early 1980s). But I can’t remember the last time I cowered so low for so long in a theatre seat. The beauty of Katy Rudd’s production is the way that it manipulates theatre space into a simulacrum of a child’s imagination: doors menacingly multiply, windows open on to enchanted forests, and a pool of spotlight becomes a small but impregnable safe space, on the condition (which can never be taken for granted) that the child is brave and smart enough to resist demons he doesn’t yet recognise. The story is simple: a man (Nicolas Tennant) revisits the scene of his first love and the aftermath of his mother’s death, where he finds a family on the edge. His dad (Tennant again, swapping melancholy for exasperation) burns the toast, while his younger self squabbles comically with his sister in the bedroom they are forced to share because their reduced circumstances demand a lodger, who promptly kills himself in the family car. Cue his introduction to a witchy dynasty of farming women. The real witch, however, has infiltrated the family, turning every home comfort into an instrument of torture. To describe the monsters themselves would be a spoiler – they are astonishing and constantly shapeshifting. But for adults, Joel Horwood’s adaptation presses home a deeper terror of the violence unleashed in a bereaved family that is just trying to survive. Laura Rogers is chillingly plausible as the sinister arriviste, whose manipulative charm is countered by the ardent innocence of James Bamford’s stalwart Boy and Nia Towle’s charismatic Lettie, both played straight to the heart. Though the sentimental ending goes on a bit, this is a genuine rarity – a show that enthrals all generations without patronising any. • At the Duke of York’s theatre, London, until 14 May.Labour has confirmed it will put up a candidate in the North Shropshire byelection – the seat about to be vacated by the disgraced former Conservative cabinet minister Owen Paterson. There had been suggestions that opposition parties could band together to support an “anti-sleaze” candidate, after Paterson stepped aside following a botched attempt by Boris Johnson to protect him from punishment for paid lobbying. A Labour spokesperson said a candidate from the party would definitely stand. “We’re not in the business of alliances: we’re in the business of putting forward a Labour candidate, with Labour values,” they said. It is understood no formal talks with other opposition parties had taken place about the idea of uniting behind an independent anti-corruption candidate. In the 1997 general election, the former journalist Martin Bell stood as an independent candidate against the Tory MP Neil Hamilton, who had been accused of taking cash to ask parliamentary questions. He overturned Hamilton’s 22,000 majority to win the seat of Tatton. Opposition sources said electoral legislation passed since 1997 made it impossible to share data and resources between separate parties in a way they were able to in Tatton. Labour came second in the seat in 2019, but the Liberal Democrats have made advances in recent local elections and believe they are more likely to attract Tory switchers than Labour. “We’re in quite a strong position,” said a Lib Dem source. Paterson was found by the independent parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, to have lobbied ministers and officials repeatedly on behalf of two firms that were paying him more than £100,000 a year. Johnson whipped Conservative MPs on Wednesday to support an extraordinary attempt to revisit Paterson’s case and overhaul the entire parliamentary standards regime. The parliamentary motion passed, in effect lifting the 30-day suspension Paterson had expected to face – but the prime minister then withdrew the government’s support less than 24 hours later after the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, accused him of “corruption”. Paterson won his North Shropshire seat by a majority of almost 23,000 at the last general election in 2019. Starmer, who has been in self-isolation after testing positive for Covid, has taken a noticeably more punchy tone against Johnson in recent days, accusing him of “leading his troops through the sewer” after the attempt to protect Paterson. Conservative MPs erupted in fury after Johnson’s U-turn on Thursday, accusing him – and the Tory chief whip, Mark Spencer – of making a catastrophic misjudgment by setting out to protect an individual.A northern California town has declared itself a “constitutional republic” in response to Covid-19 health restrictions imposed by the governor, in the latest sign of strife between the state’s government and its rural and conservative regions. The city council in Oroville, located at the base of the Sierra Nevada foothills about 90 miles from the capital of Sacramento, adopted a resolution this week stating it would oppose state and federal orders it deems to be government overreach. Oroville leaders said the designation was a way of affirming the city’s values and pushing back against state rules it doesn’t agree with, although a legal expert said the designation was merely a gesture and did not grant the city any new authority. Tensions have existed throughout the pandemic between the rural north and California’s leadership, which has been among the first to implement lockdowns, mask mandates and vaccination requirements. In Butte county, fierce opposition to Covid lockdowns and school closures drove support for recalling the state’s governor, Gavin Newsom, with 51% of voters in the county backing the ultimately failed effort. Newsom’s policies, however, appear to have worked and the state had the lowest Covid infection rate in the US last month. Last year, Oroville refused to enforce state requirements prohibiting indoor dining. Butte county, where Oroville is located, declined to recommend a mask mandate earlier this fall, even as cases surged and a a local medical center reported treating more patients than at any other point during the pandemic. Before passing the resolution, council members argued they were taking a stand and advocating for residents to make their own health choices. “I assure you folks that great thought was put into every bit of this,” the city’s mayor, Chuck Reynolds, said. “Nobody willy-nilly threw something to grandstand.” But the city’s declaration does not shield it from following federal and state laws, said Lisa Pruitt, a rural law expert at the University of California, Davis, who said it was not clear what the designation meant. “A municipality cannot unilaterally declare itself not subject to the laws of the state of California,” Pruitt said. “Whatever they mean by constitutional republic you can’t say hocus pocus and make it happen.” Leaders in the city of 20,000 say the resolution is an effort to push back against state government and affirm the city’s values and commitment to the constitution. Oroville drafted its resolution from scratch after not finding any examples of other cities with similar resolutions, said Scott Thomson, the city’s vice-mayor. “I proposed it after 18 months of increasingly intrusive executive mandates and what I felt to be excessive overreach by our government,” said Thomson. “After the failed recall in California, our state governor seems to [be] on a rampage and the mandates are getting more intrusive. Now he’s going after our kids and schools.” The majority of speakers at the Oroville city council meeting expressed their support for their resolution – applauding its introduction and calling council members “heroes” – with several specifically citing the state’s vaccine requirement for schoolchildren. “We’re hoping that becoming a constitutional republic city is the best step in order to regain and maintain our inalienable rights protected by the constitution of the United States. What will be left if we don’t have that? if we don’t have bodily autonomy?” one speaker said in tears. “What else are they gonna want me to let them do to my kids? Where does it stop?” The resolution does not affect local schools, which fall under the purview of the school district, Thomson said, but is a way for the community to declare it will not use city resources to implement state rules it does not agree with. “We’re not ignorant that there are serious issues at hand, we just do not agree with the way it’s being handled.” One council member argued that mandates were “political theater” and that the immune system is the best defense against disease. The best protection against against Covid-19 is vaccination – Butte county has a vaccination rate of 48%, according to New York Times data. The council approved the resolution by a 6-1 vote on Tuesday, even as one member who voted in favor of it warned residents it had “no teeth” and was a “political statement”. The city’s efforts tap in to a common sentiment in rural northern California that the region is ignored, but also over-governed by the state, Pruitt said. Signs for the state of Jefferson, a movement to secede from California, are common here. But, Pruitt says, the city’s gesture does not grant it more power or the ability to ignore state law. “It seems to make the people of Oroville feel better that their city council has made this gesture but as a practical matter it doesn’t make any difference,” Pruitt said.Turn on the TV, watch kids’ cartoons or most films, and you won’t have to look hard for the message that nice guys finish last, while tough guys get the girl, and, more importantly, gain the respect of other men. In the heterosexual safari that is Channel 4’s latest Married at First Sight we saw a woman called Morag spend the whole UK season demeaning and berating her new husband, Luke, for being more of a boy than a man, lacking in muscle and not being aggressive enough. Did she perhaps hanker after more of a “toxic masculinity”, the experts queried, while reassuring her that a calm, attentive and reliable man is the definition of masculinity. Maybe so, but we could well ask why that definition hasn’t become the norm. Meanwhile, toxic masculinity is now a buzzword, and a term most of us will recognise – it describes a set of predatory, bullish and bullying, sexually aggressive, sexist and homophobic behaviours in some heterosexual men. But, arguably, this is a misleading term, as it absolves society of taking responsibility for the everyday gender norms that form the bedrock of the messaging that some men take to extremes. If we want to divert that course, we need to look upriver, and change that messaging. While there is rising public attention to men and masculinity right now, this is not a new phenomenon, nor a new field of study. Men’s search for masculinity is an old, and cruel, mission. The loss, gain, winning of it, or coming of age into it, dominates our culture; and always has, forming the basis of plays, poetry and novels for centuries. While the control of women – particularly sexual ownership and control – are frequent measures of masculinity, women, in a way, are collateral in what is, ultimately, a quest for male approval. This is a kind of male gaze for men; it’s their imagined version of an ideal, more masculine man, who stands in judgment in their mind. Masculinity, to put it simply, is whatever is considered appropriate and expected for men in your circle. It is a set of learned behaviours, easily taught and assumed easily adopted. Acknowledging that these behaviours are learned is not the same as saying they aren’t real, however, or that they don’t have real effects, or that they don’t form important parts of people’s sense of self or identity from a very early age. Indeed, they do. Gender, including masculinity, is something that is worked upon and it is hard work. In fact, if it came so naturally, then men would not increasingly spend so much time, money and effort on fashion, grooming, dieting, training and exercise. There are so many different recognisable types of behaviours, styles and roles considered socially appropriate for men in different groups and communities; which is why the plural term masculinities is now used. For example, there are recognisable gay masculinities, urban masculinities, young masculinities or working-class masculinities. Within this plethora of possibilities there is another type of masculinity that is rarely represented, and that is female masculinity. If masculinity is a set of cultural expectations for men, which varies across history and around the world, and contains roles, styles, mannerisms, attitudes, bodily comportment and appearance, then it does not necessarily follow that these would be the preserve of male bodies only. Any body could do masculinity. Women and female-bodied people have been doing masculinity for ever of course, from the historic female husbands and soldier boys with secrets, to butch lesbians, transmasculine queer people, gender non-conforming tomboys and Black masculine butches, known as studs. Masculinity as style and essence can be worn and embodied by those who had to make it their own, by those for whom it was never meant and so were never taught. Often there are still punishments for this trespass, for what is seen as a colonisation of the realm reserved for one sex only. Masculine women, butch lesbians and transgender people on the masculine spectrum are targeted for double glances at best, and for worse when those scrutinising glances work out who is what, and who is not what was expected. For some, female masculinity is independent of men’s versions, with its own history, often rooted in lesbian identities and communities. It is another way of being a woman, and living that identity, as valid as any other. Others feel less of an affiliation to lesbian legacies, preferring to see their own sense of masculinity as just that, as a version of being masculine, rather than a version of femininity or a more unusual way of being a woman. In that sense, the familiar experience of being read by society as male or as a man, is not a misgendering experience, but one of mis-sexing; where the gender is read correctly, but a sex is incorrectly assumed to follow. Such assumptions come from our strict binary system, where male is supposed to equal masculine heterosexual, and female is supposed to equal feminine heterosexual. Clearly not everyone fits into such binaries; but those lives are obscured in a society that struggles to recognise them. For those creating their own female masculinity, there is more room and fewer rules; not being brutalised into a conventional masculinity from birth brings a freedom to explore masculinity without so much of the suffocating, negative baggage that men are increasingly openly talking about. In this new wave of public focus on men and masculinities, men are rightly identifying the expectations of gender as contributing to poor mental and physical health, social isolation, addiction problems and violence. Let’s hope that this critique can be extended to the dominant representations of masculinity in our media and culture, too, which sets those expectations in the first place. We should all remember that boys will not be boys: they will be adults and will become partners, fathers, carers, friends, lovers and colleagues, with the capacity to be as humane as the next woman. As the king of butch scholarship and female masculinity, Prof Jack Halberstam, has pointed out, transmasculine people, butch lesbians and queer masculine women have more of a chance to think very carefully about what kinds of masculine people we want to become. Maybe men, in this climate of change, could learn from that, too. Finn Mackay is the author of Female Masculinities and the Gender Wars and is a senior lecturer in sociology at the University of the West of England in BristolThere’s a shelf in my dad’s closet, full of old video games and consoles dating back to the 1970s. I was eight when I found his Nintendo Game Boy and discovered Tetris. My older brother Andy and I played it in our home in Texas. Tetris is a simple concept: you rotate and align descending shapes to complete horizontal rows, which then drop down and disappear. If uncompleted, they stay on screen and shapes pile up on top. Once the screen fills with shapes, you lose. The game is so universally popular that over the decades, it has migrated from the Game Boy to PlayStation, Xbox, iPhone and everything in between. But when I came across a YouTube video of the Classic Tetris world championship, in 2018, I was amazed. The competitors use classic 80s Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) consoles, and whoever gets the highest score wins. Their speed and skill at making decisions was genius. There were commentators hyping up the online audience, which added to the excitement. I became hooked. I was 10 and Andy was 13. We re-watched the whole thing over two days on our living room TV. The championship began in 2010, but things stepped up a gear in 2018. The seven-time world champion had been dethroned by a 16-year-old, and lots of younger people were watching for the first time. After that, Andy and I began to play competitively; we’d shout our scores at each other from our bedrooms. We’d always been into electronics. Dad taught us to code when we were five. I’m a straight-A student and maths is my favourite subject, so gaming taps into the way my mind works. We bought clone consoles (cheaper, championship-approved replicas of the NES) and started competing in tournaments. I chose a name, Michael “DogplayingTetris” Artiaga (Andy is “PixelAndy”), and built myself an avatar – a dog with a Nintendo controller. About 200 people signed up for the 2020 world championship qualifiers in December. A casual player might score 50,000 points in a game, but we qualified with six high-scoring, 1m-point games each. We made it to the final eight. Andy and I knocked out all the competition until it was just us, facing off for the title. It took place on a Sunday. I warmed up with some practice games, drank lots of water and got some fresh air. Mom and Dad were watching on their computer downstairs, super excited that we were both finalists. Andy and I played from our bedrooms. I have an old-school TV on a table in the corner of my room and play from an office chair without armrests, because they’d get in the way. My brother sits in an old rocking chair. The Tetris community love teasing us about our chairs. During the final, I was nervous but totally focused. We played five games: Andy won two, and I won two. During the decider match, the commentators were going crazy. Then I won, 3-2. It was intense. Andy walked across the hall into my room and gave me a high five. We’re close, so he was excited for me. I won $3,000 (£2,225) prize money. I bought a used NES for 30 bucks on eBay, a drum kit and a guitar, and invested in cryptocurrency. I’ve set up my own tournament, Classic Tetris Brawl, and sell my own merch, too, so I think I could do this professionally for a while. The championship finals are usually held in Oregon, but they’re online again this year because of Covid. I want to win again. Before I got into Tetris, I wasn’t well known at school – now I’m “the Tetris guy”. I usually play Tetris once a day, when school and homework are done. The key to success is watching how others play and learning what it is that makes them better than you. Tetris is more than 30 years old and it’s still the bestselling video game of all time. I was the second youngest player last year. Afterwards, I had a whole bunch of people reaching out to say congrats, which felt great. Whatever else I do in life, I’ll always go down as a 13-year-old world champion. • As told to Deborah Linton Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comThe hack Using coffee grounds to make a face scrub that gives you baby-soft skin – and eco brownie points. The promise In theory, the grounds lift dead cells from the skin to brighten it, while the caffeine boosts the circulation. But does turning household waste into a skin-blitzing scrub actually work? The test The idea is that coffee grounds act as a “mechanical” exfoliator to slough off dead skin cells. But the downsides are multiple: 1) the grounds have jagged edges that can create micro tears in the skin and cause irritation; 2) coffee grounds can clog water pipes; and 3) it’s beyond messy. One recipe suggests mixing the coffee with honey (for its antibacterial properties) into a thick exfoliating paste. I applied the gloop to my face and worked it in, which was harder than you’d think. My skin was smoother but it also felt super dry. Another recipe called for adding natural yoghurt (which contains a very mild lactic acid), so after a few days’ rest, I applied that to my skin and massaged it in. Again, it felt smoother, but also tight and red/furious. The verdict Face scrubs have a certain teen nostalgia, granted, but save the coffee scrub for the thicker skin on your body – the skin on our faces is way too delicate. And be sure to consider your plumbing first.With the autumn video game release schedule now in full swing, the thoughts of many PC owners are turning to hardware upgrades. Blockbusters such as Halo Infinite, Battlefield 1942 and Forza Horizon 5 will all support demanding visual effects such as ray tracing, so it seems like the perfect time to invest in new kit. There’s just one problem: this is probably the worst, most expensive time in recent memory to boost your processing power. Manufacturing and distribution problems, together with skyrocketing demand, have seen prices soar, especially for high-end graphics cards. “There are GTX 1080Ti cards listed on eBay for over £500 – that’s a four-year-old GPU for half a grand,” says Chris Wilson, design director at Cardboard Sword. “The suggestion for most people would probably be to wait it out. Intel is rumoured to have a serious GPU out early next year and they are likely to price it aggressively to try and gain some market share. Eventually the bottom has to fall out of this current disaster.” However, if you’ve made up your mind to improve your ageing set-up, there are options out there. Here are some tips … Graphics card Let’s say money is no object. You want something that can support 4K monitors and two key features: ray tracing, which creates realistic lighting and reflection effects, and DLSS (Deep Learning Super Sampling) which uses AI to improve visual detail and frame rates. I’m using an Nvidia GeForce RTX 3060, with 12GB of ram, G6 memory and HDMI 2.1 support and it has given me blistering performance on games such as Flight Simulator 20, Metro Exodus and even Cyberpunk 2077, at 1440p. According to Alan Dexter, senior hardware editor at PC Gamer, however, the standout card this winter is the GeForce RTX 3080. “At its intended £649 retail price, there’s nothing out there that can really touch it,” he says. “It’ll handle anything you can throw at it and even let you play at 4K properly, with everything tuned high. It’s expensive, but it’s such a leap in performance it feels like an investment that will last you for years.” Chris Wilson agrees on the RTX 3080 but adds, “For most people running games at 1440p resolution, a 3070/3070ti should be more than enough. The previous generation cards are still decent. They were arguably overpriced at launch, but in the current state of things they aren’t that bad.” The AMD equivalent of the 3080 is the Radeon RX 6800 XT. As Dexter explains, “Its ray tracing isn’t quite as strong as Nvidia’s, but it manages to put up a good fight elsewhere, and overall, it’s a strong offering.” CPU Although the graphics card is the heart of a games machine, you’ll want an up-to-date CPU to get the most out of it. I’m a big fan of the AMD Ryzen models, having built a PC around an AMD Ryzen 5 5600X this year, and PC Gamer currently recommends the Ryzen 9 5900X. If you’re an Intel gamer, the Core i5 10400F or 10600K are excellent workhorses. Whatever you go for, make sure it’s compatible with your motherboard and GPU and remember to apply thermal paste before attaching the cooler! Memory Upgrading your system memory is the most cost-effective way of improving gaming performance, allowing for faster, smoother frame rates. For this year’s releases, 16GB is becoming the recommended requirement, but even 32GB is going to become more common. Check the speed of the ram you buy – usually given in MHz – it’s debatable how much effect this has, but 3200MHz is a good guide if you’re buying new. I recommend Corsair Vengeance or HyperX Predator kits, or at the budget end, I used the Crucial Ballistix RGB in my first home build. Drive If you’re somehow still solely relying on a hard disk, or want to upgrade from an older SSD/HDD combo, now is your chance – prices are quite good, and a fast SSD will greatly improve loading times, both in booting games and loading new levels while you play. The industry is now moving away from the old Serial ATA drives toward PCIe-based SSDs using NVMe communication drivers. If that means nothing to you, a site like PCPartPicker will help you decide which type of SSD your motherboard is compatible with. Also, you’re not just looking for memory capacity, you need to check the data transfer speed too, measured in MB/s – a SATA drive will manage 560MB/s while a new PCIe NVMe SSD will operate at anywhere between 3500 and 7000 MB/s. So which models do we recommend? “1TB NVMe drives, such as the WD Black SN850 are impressive and can have a massive impact on loading times and just using Windows for that matter,” says Dexter. Monitor If you’re still relying on an old office monitor you bought from Currys five years ago, this is definitely an update worth making. When buying a screen for gaming, you need to think about the three Rs: resolution, refresh rate and response times. The first is the amount of detail on screen, the second is how quickly your monitor updates the image, and the third is how long it takes pixels to switch colour. Also, check whether the monitor supports G-Sync or FreeSync to prevent screen tearing. If you’re on a budget, you’ll need to compromise, so think about what you need depending on the games you’ll want to play this winter. “In terms of resolution, do you want 1440p or 4K?,” says Dexter. “Or are you looking at 1080p at a super high-refresh? Curved or flat? Ultra widescreen or a more traditional 16:9 ratio?” Broadly, if you want to play a fast-paced shooter such as Battlefield 1942, then refresh rate and response times are going to be most important (and maybe a curved or ultra wide screen for better peripheral vision). If you’re going to play beautiful narrative adventures such as The Forgotten City or Psychonauts 2 you might prioritise resolution, or if you really want to show off your RTX 3090 GPU with Far Cry 6 running at ultra in all settings, a 4K or even 8K beast will be necessary. Dexter recommends the Gigabyte G27Q – “a great, mostly affordable screen, and it ticks a lot of PC gaming boxes too”. Wilson is a fan of Asus monitors, specifically the ROG Swift PG32UQ, which he acknowledges is pretty pricey. “Something like the ASUS ROG Swift PG278QR is a good choice,” he says. “This hits the 1440p sweet spot while delivering high refresh rates.” Elsewhere, I have an Acer Predator, which is excellent, and the Alienware 25, LG UltraGear and Samsung Odyssey are all good gaming models. The nuclear option If your gaming PC is really creaking, buying a pre-built model might make sense in the current market. “Pretty much the best way of getting your hands on the very latest hardware is to buy a whole new machine,” agrees Dexter. “These are a bit pricier than a simple upgrade, but it does mean you’ll have a complete PC that should operate well for years to come.”Every morning before the dew has dried on Andre Brunson’s 80 acres of land along Alabama’s Uphapee Creek, he swings his pickup truck out on to the gravel road leading from his house in Alabama. When heading for his eight-hour shift, he packs his bulletproof vest, gun, flashlight and now – since coronavirus sent him to the hospital in January – an asthma inhaler and a nebulizer. Brunson lives in Tuskegee, where he’s the county sheriff. “I’m a big strong guy and I just thought it was never going to affect me. Once I got Covid I realized I’m just like everybody else,” he said. While other officials were kicking off 2021 by taking the brand-new Covid vaccine, rolling up their sleeves on television to encourage others, Brunson had chosen not to take the shot. Then Covid struck him like “a bus”, he said. Tuskegee sits at the heart of Macon county, where Brunson has lived for 36 years. It was there that in the past the United States Public Health Service notoriously promised to treat 400 poor Black men for syphilis, but they never received treatment. Instead, from 1932 through 1972, the government watched the men buckle under the effects of the illness, while deceiving them about the medical study they were conducting, and denying them a cure. That tainted history and initial worries among the public about whether the Covid vaccine was egg-based – Brunson has an extreme egg allergy – put him among those reluctant to get vaccinated in Alabama. “People here in Macon county had to deal with the syphilis study … myself and a lot of other people were hesitant [to get the Covid vaccine], not only because of the study, but because it was something new that hadn’t been tested,” Brunson said. By the end of January, about 676,000 Alabamian essential workers and people over 75 were eligible to get the vaccine, just weeks after it was approved for emergency use by US regulators, according to the Alabama department of public health. Of that population, the 57-year-old sheriff was a part of the 55% of eligible people that didn’t get vaccinated. When he caught Covid soon after, he spent the first night battling the virus alone in his basement, but as his condition deteriorated his wife, Courtney Brunson, couldn’t help but risk her own safety to take care of him. He slept no more than 30 minutes each night out of fear that he wouldn’t wake up in the morning. “It felt like I had been hit by a bus,” the father of four said. “Having Covid was one of the worst things in the world.” He suffered for three weeks and made it through. But it took him six months to get his senses of taste and smell back and, 10 months later, Brunson is still dealing with persistent side-effects. He’s been rushed to the hospital more than 10 times because he couldn’t breathe. The 282-pound man who used to work out and run every day is still experiencing a loss of strength, waves of fatigue and a lack of energy. “I think if I had taken the vaccine, I wouldn’t have gone through what I went through. But now I have to live [with it],” Brunson said. Since the start of the global pandemic in 2020, Black communities throughout the US have been disproportionately affected. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that Black Americans are almost three times as likely to be hospitalized due to Covid-19 as the white population and twice as likely to die from it. In Macon county, where about four in five residents are Black, Covid rates followed national trends and the Black population bore the brunt of the virus. At least one in seven Macon residents have caught Covid, according to New York Times data. But the syphilis experiment in Tuskegee, other examples of racism in medical mistreatment and a history of being let down by the government have sown generational mistrust in the healthcare system for many Black Americans, in Alabama and across the US – in turn driving vaccine hesitancy. Twice a week during football season, Brunson pulls on Tuskegee University’s maroon and gold gear – he wears his own 1987 football championship ring from his college days there – and hits the field as the team’s strength coach. Normally he would shuttle between the goals, concerned about the team’s conditioning. Now, he worries about the conditions of his lungs. As of 29 October, about 41% of Macon county residents were fully vaccinated. Alabama ranks third to last in the US in fully vaccinated rates, with about 45% of the population fully vaccinated. Only West Virginia and Wyoming report lower rates of vaccination. Black people account for about 22% of Alabama’s small vaccinated population. Back in July, by which time only about a third of eligible Alabamians had been vaccinated – the lowest rate in the country – the state governor, Kay Ivey, a white Republican, called the vaccine “the greatest weapon we have to fight Covid”. At the same time, without addressing community concerns, she warned bluntly that it was “time to start blaming the unvaccinated folks” for surging cases of Covid-19, and accused those who had not yet taken the shot of “letting us down”. In August, Brunson followed his wife’s example and received the vaccine, after doing some more research and talking to his doctor, he explained to the Guardian last week. Now, every Thursday evening when Brunson hits the radio airwaves in Tuskegee for his regular community broadcast, he lets listeners know that he’s vaccinated, what he’s been through and is still going through. “I tell them that Covid-19 is real. I always tell them that I almost lost my life to Covid and what a difficult time I had … There were many nights I stayed up praying to God … that he wouldn’t take me,” he told the Guardian. It’s proving effective. He noted: “Many people said if it’s happened to the sheriff, it could happen to them.”My earliest reading memory I was in my grandmother’s house in Ankara, Turkey. I must have been six years old. I learned how to read from Grandma’s cookbooks and traditional Middle Eastern love stories – Layla and Majnun, Ferhat and Shirin. My favourite book growing up A Tale of Two Cities by Charles Dickens. Back then a company in Turkey had published the story as a graphic novel, and I adored it. I not only read and reread the novel, but also painted every little drawing in it – the bonnets, the gowns, the guillotine. I loved history and I now realise that perhaps there was something personal going on as well: after my parents separated, my father stayed in France and remarried. He had another family, half-French, half-Turkish. We were completely estranged for a long, long time. So I was especially interested in books that had a connection with the bloody history in France. The book that changed me as a teenager I was very fond of Fairy Tales and Stories by Hans Christian Andersen. When I was about 12, I read The Neverending Story by the German author Michael Ende and it blew me away. A child, Bastian, who was chased by bullies and had to hide in a bookshop where he found a strange book – that boy and that story spoke to me on so many different levels. The writer who changed my mind Virginia Woolf. Reading Orlando for the first time was like plunging into a cold but most beautifully blue sea. Until then I didn’t know you could write fiction like that – that kind of fluidity! Travelling across centuries, geographical limitations, gender boundaries. I am not claiming I understood the book fully the first time I read it, but something inside me shifted radically. I have read and reread Orlando many times throughout my life, always tasting that sense of freedom I felt the first time. The book that made me want to be a writer From an early age I needed to read in order to make sense of the world around me. Books opened up other worlds, other possibilities. The decision to become a writer came to me later. When I was 18 I changed my surname. I chose the pen-name Shafak because I liked the meaning (dawn, inbetweendom), and because it was my mother’s first name, so using my mother’s first name rather than my father’s surname felt like turning a power hierarchy upside down. That said, Gabriel García Márquez and Albert Camus were both very important to me in my early youth. The book I reread And Quiet Flows the Don by Mikhail Aleksandrovich Sholokhov and Ivo Andrić’s The Bridge on the Drina. Both books are so multilayered and the canvas in each is so large that one needs to read them again. The book I could never read again Nikolai Gogol’s Dead Souls. I loved it when I first read it, it is incredibly powerful and visually compelling too, it stays with you for a long time, but I don’t think I would like to read it again. And for completely different reasons I have little desire to reread On the Road by Jack Kerouac. Although I used to like his maverick spirit and critical mind, I find his inflated masculine ego highly troubling. The book I found later in life I started reading HG Wells a bit later than I should have, after I had read Aldous Huxley, Ursula Le Guin and George Orwell. Wells is a fascinating thinker and storyteller with remarkable futuristic prophecies and an extraordinary appreciation of human rights. As I get older I am valuing him more and more. The book I am currently reading Homeland Elegies by Ayad Akhtar. Sharp and riveting. My comfort read This is going to sound odd, but for a long time Emil Cioran’s books were my comfort read. The Trouble With Being Born, On the Heights of Despair, A Short History of Decay. His pessimism is so acute and dark that you feel more optimistic by comparison. • Elif Shafak’s The Island of Missing Trees is published by Viking (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer buy a copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.In 2014, Northwestern and Princeton researchers published a report statistically documenting how lawmakers do not listen or care about what most voters want, and instead mostly care about serving their big donors. Coupled with additional research documenting the discrepancy between donor and voter preferences, they bluntly concluded that the “preferences of the average American appear to have only a minuscule, near-zero, statistically nonsignificant impact upon public policy”. Seven years later, America is witnessing a very public and explicit illustration of this situation in real time – and the country seems pretty ticked off about it, in the lead-up to Tuesday’s off-year elections and in advance of the upcoming midterms next year. Over the last few weeks, Joe Biden and Democratic lawmakers have been making headlines agreeing to whittle down their social spending reconciliation bill at the demand of corporate donors and their congressional puppets. The specific initiatives being cut or watered down in the Biden agenda bill share two traits: 1) They would require the wealthy and powerful to sacrifice a bit of their wealth and power and 2) They are quite literally the most popular proposals among rank-and-file voters. New polling demonstrates the silencing effect that systemic corruption is having on voter preferences: 82% of registered voters support adding dental and vision benefits to Medicare – and this is voters’ “top priority” for Democrats’ social spending bill, according to survey data from Morning Consult. Conservative Democratic senators Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona have pushed to keep these benefits out of the bill, following an aggressive lobbying campaign by health insurers who enjoy massive profits from the privatized Medicare Advantage program. Another top priority for voters is allowing Medicare to negotiate prescription drug prices, with 72% saying they support the idea, according to Morning Consult. Sinema and a few House Democrats backed by the pharmaceutical industry managed to block the party’s original drug pricing measure from being put into the reconciliation bill. On Tuesday, Democrats announced they had reached a deal on a drug pricing plan, which Politico described as “far weaker” than Democrats’ promised legislation. One industry analyst said the deal “seems designed to let legislators claim an achievement while granting pharma protection”. The poll also found that 70% of voters support including paid family and medical leave for new parents in Democrats’ spending bill. Manchin has demanded this item be cut. After railing against the Republicans’ 2017 tax law for years, Democrats have largely refused to raise taxes on corporations and the wealthy, and their final bill may even end up being a net tax cut for the rich. This, even though Biden’s own pollsters found that raising taxing on the wealthy was “the most popular of more than 30 economic proposals” they tested during the 2020 presidential campaign. The flip side of all this also appears to be true – Democrats have protected initiatives to enrich powerful corporations, even though some of those measures aren’t very popular. One example: subsidies for health insurance plans purchased on the Affordable Care Act (ACA) marketplace that shower money on for-profit insurers. Morning Consult reports that extending new ACA premium tax credits passed by Democrats in March “is the lowest-ranking of all the health measures included in the poll”. The results of this latest middle finger to voter preferences? New polling data shows that almost three-quarters of Americans now think the country is headed in the wrong direction. Taken together, this is the democracy crisis thrumming underneath all the media noise – the day-to-day erosion of democracy by corporations that use a system of legalized bribery to buy public policy, which then erodes Americans’ faith in their government. And yet this erosion does not get discussed in a media-directed democracy discourse that focuses almost exclusively on the 6 January insurrection or Republican efforts to deny election results and limit voting. This is what my 2006 book called the “hostile takeover”: the conquest of democratic institutions by moneyed interests, to the point where “the world’s greatest democracy” routinely rejects the commonsense policies that the vast majority of voters want and that every other high-income country has already adopted. The hostile takeover is not just the rejection of the most popular policies – it is also the media discourse itself. The Washington press is constantly portraying industry-sponsored opponents of majoritarian policies as “moderates” or “centrists” and depicting supporters of those policies as fringe lunatics who refuse to be reasonable and compromise. Meanwhile, there is a pervasive omertà that silences most media discussion of the corporate influence and corruption that so obviously defines American politics – and there is scant mention that the “moderate” obstructionists are bankrolled by the industries lobbying to kill the popular policies that Americans want. There is some encouraging proof that more and more Americans innately understand the kleptocratic nature of their government, and want explicit accountability journalism to uncover it. Also mildly encouraging is the impact of that reporting in the reconciliation bill battle: Democrats tried to get rid of all the drug pricing provisions, but were successfully shamed into adding at least a few of the (pathetically weak) provisions back in after independent media aggressively exposed the pharma ties of key lawmakers. It’s not a huge victory and not worthy of some effusive celebration of Democrats because the provisions are watered down and a betrayal of the party’s promise to do something a lot better. But it’s a minimal proof-of-concept win. It may at least get the idea of Medicare negotiating drug prices into law for the first time. And as important, it shows that when there is a robust press willing to challenge power, the government can be forced – kicking and screaming – to respond, or at least pretend to respond. It’s going to take a whole lot more of that kind of reporting and a whole lot more movement pressure to secure real wins and beat back the hostile takeover. The silver lining here is that at least that takeover is now explicit. The polls showing what people want compared to what’s being excised from the reconciliation bill make this part of the democracy crisis impossible to deny – and ending that denial is a prerequisite for achieving something better. David Sirota is a Guardian US columnist and an award-winning investigative journalist. He is an editor-at-large at Jacobin, and the founder of the Daily Poster. He served as Bernie Sanders’ presidential campaign speechwriter Andrew Perez is a senior editor at the Daily Poster and a co-founder of the Democratic Policy Center This article was originally published in the Daily Poster, a grassroots-funded investigative news outletDemocrats this week suffered a stinging rebuke in elections up and down the country. The damage was most notable in Virginia, where Republican Glenn Youngkin won a state that Joe Biden carried by 10 points just a year ago. But there were warning signs elsewhere, too – from the party’s eroding support in the southern suburbs of New Jersey to its still-declining fortunes in Hispanic areas of south Texas, where Republican John Lujan flipped a heavily Hispanic state legislative district which Biden won by 14 points last year. Although depressing, these results are not entirely surprising. Even as Biden triumphed in the 2020 presidential election, there were ample signs that the suburban voters who propelled him to victory were keeping their options open. Democrats won the presidency, but declining suburban support nearly cost them the House of Representatives. In the Senate, they fought Republicans heroically but unsatisfyingly to a standstill, splitting the chamber 50/50. Voters rejected Trump, but they seemed not to want to pass complete control of government to his opponents, either. These latest results confirm that not much has changed since, and Democrats have only themselves to blame. They have enjoyed unified control of the federal government for a year, but have spent their time trapped in negotiations with one another over a pair of legislative packages covering infrastructure, climate and social welfare. Even seasoned pundits find the process confusing and opaque and, for the busy ordinary voter, the problem is multiplied tenfold. At a time when the coronavirus and its associated scourges – inflation, joblessness and parental panic over their children’s education – are still stalking the land, the party is struggling to break through because it’s too busy talking to itself. There’s a risk that Democrats – or, more precisely, one faction of them – react to this week’s results in a way that makes the problem even worse. Already, “moderate” senators Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema have been the main roadblock to Democrats passing large, popular social welfare bills. They are backed, though more quietly, by other senators and House members who fear that the party will be punished if its agenda becomes too bold and too progressive. If moderates decide that this week’s results represent the beginning of just such a backlash, they may force the party to abandon its plans and retreat into a defensive crouch. This would be an enormous mistake. If Democrats are to reverse their fortunes, they have to be bold and rack up big accomplishments. Rather than backing off expansive legislation, they should double down on it. If Democrats pass an ambitious package to fight poverty, expand healthcare, assist families with childcare expenses, and introduce paid family and medical leave, there will be no mistaking what they stand for. Republicans, meanwhile, will be left arguing against programs that are standard throughout the developed world and – more importantly – popular in the United States as well. Nor is there much reason to believe that Democrats’ recent electoral setbacks resulted from being too progressive. Although a socialist candidate for Buffalo mayor lost out to her moderate rival and a police reform measure failed in Minneapolis, these results reveal nothing about the popularity of the party’s mainstream economic agenda. Democrats struggled not because they appear too progressive, but because, after months of infighting, they don’t appear to stand for anything. The need to move quickly and boldly is underlined by looking at the other factors that are draining the party’s support. The first is inflation, where the party’s plans to expand the social safety net in the future don’t do much to help voters struggling with rising prices right now. Although economic policymakers expect this period to pass relatively quickly, there is little the White House can do to address the fastest price increases in a generation. Even worse, the policymakers might be wrong, leaving Americans still struggling as the midterms approach. Their inability to do much about inflation increases the party’s need to act elsewhere if it is to demonstrate that it can deliver concrete improvements in people’s economic situation. Finally, the outsized role played in the Virginia election by concerns about the teaching of so-called critical race theory in schools is another reason Democrats badly need to change the conversation. As the party has retreated into bickering among itself, the political debate has become increasingly dominated by hyped-up culture war issues to which Democrats struggle to respond. It may be true that concerns about critical race theory are mainly a form of manufactured outrage designed to activate white grievance, but describing them as such doesn’t seem to be a winning political strategy. Even as the party crafts a new message about school curricula which disassociates it from the warped image put forward by the right, it also needs a more concrete response – one that emphasizes how the party is investing in the nation’s schools and families, including through improved access to childcare and paid family leave. But to do that, they need to actually pass the legislation that will create these programs. The painful truth Democrats have to face is that, to many voters, even imaginary claims about critical race theory feel more real right now than the social welfare programs being debated in Congress. To flip that calculus and show that Democratic governance can benefit the country while the culture war is designed to hold it back, Democrats have to be big and bold. Otherwise, they – and, given the Republican party’s extremist turn, the country – are in serious trouble. Andrew Gawthorpe is a historian of the United States at Leiden University, and host of the podcast America ExplainedThe football super-agent Kia Joorabchian has built a three-figure string on the Flat in the last couple of seasons and will have hopes of seeing his purple colours record their biggest success to date on Friday, when his runners on day one of the 2021 Breeders’ Cup meeting at Del Mar include Go Bears Go and Hello You in the Juvenile Turf Sprint and Juvenile Fillies’ Turf respectively. Joorabchian’s list of clients includes Philippe Coutinho, whose €142m transfer fee to join Barcelona from Liverpool in January 2018 was the second-highest in history at the time, and his Amo Racing Club operation has been investing heavily in bloodstock ever since. His three-year-old colt Mojo Star finished second behind Adayar in the Derby at Epsom in June when still a maiden, while both Go Bears Go and Hello You have registered Group Two wins this season, in the Railway Stakes and Rockfel Stakes respectively. A $1.54m (£1.14m) spend on eight lots at the recent Keeneland September Yearling Sale, meanwhile, heralded a new front for Amo Racing in the US, where Joorabchian is “spending more and more time” according to his main bloodstock agent, Alex Elliott. A win for one of his runners on Friday’s card would recoup a decent slice of that outlay and the experienced Hello You (23.10 GMT) has a solid chance at around 9-1 in what looks a very open race. David Loughnane’s filly is a strong traveller and John Velasquez should be able to get a decent pitch from stall six, while she stayed on well over seven furlongs at Newmarket last time and the step up to a mile should suit. Del Mar 21.50 (GMT) A strong European challenge for the Juvenile Turf Sprint is headed by Michael O’Callaghan’s Cornwallis Stakes winner, Twilight Jet, while Armor (Richard Hannon) and Go Bears Go (David Loughnane) also have chances on their best form. Wesley Ward has saddled the winning favourite for the last two seasons, however, and Averly Jane will take plenty of stopping in her bid to become a third. She is unbeaten in four starts and has enough early pace to grab the lead even from a slightly wide draw in stall eight. Del Mar 22.30 (GMT) A disappointing turnout of just six runners for the Juvenile Fillies’, though the three principals according to the betting – Echo Zulu, Jujus Map and Hidden Connection – have seven wins from eight starts between them. Echo Zulu is the clear pick on form after storming seven lengths clear of her field in the Grade One Frizette Stakes at Belmont last time. Del Mar 23.50 (GMT) The scratching of morning-line favourite Jack Christopher leaves Bob Baffert with two of the first three in the betting and the unbeaten Pinehurst, the Del Mar Futurity winner, could be the one to back at around 5-1. He was an easy four-and-a-half length winner last time and Friday’s trip could see further improvement. Del Mar 00.30 (GMT) A big target for the Europeans and Charlie Appleby in particular has a strong hand with Modern Games and Albahr. William Buick has opted for Modern Games, a Group Three winners at Newmarket last time, but Frankie Dettori is an eye-catching booking for the experienced Albahr, whose record includes a Grade One win on turf at Woodbine in Toronto.It is not “compulsory for the Bank of England governor to be an unreliable boyfriend”, Andrew Bailey joked during a press conference to explain why the central bank he runs kept interest rates on hold when action of some kind was expected. As quips go, it fell flat in financial markets, where currency traders sold the pound, knocking more than 1% from sterling’s value against the US dollar. It also left many economists gasping for air as the full implications of Bailey’s refusal to turn up to his own party began to sink in. He had stressed last month that monetary policy “will have to act” if there is a risk of inflation. Those words were not followed by action on Thursday, despite the rising wages and prices. Gerard Lyons, a former candidate for governor and a former adviser to Boris Johnson, described the governor’s signalling as “appalling”, adding that by not correcting how the market or the media interpreted his comments he encouraged “hawkish expectations ahead of this meeting that was not merited by the recent data”. Lyons went on to say the bank needed to learn from the US Federal Reserve, “to be on top of the data” and “guide” the market. He is not the only commentator to offer a disparaging comparison of the Bank of England’s public relations to those of the Fed, or the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank, where the path of interest rates is clearly mapped out. The decision itself was not unpopular. A rise in interest rates, said one analyst, could push the UK into a recession next year, such is the weakening outlook. GDP growth is slowing, consumer confidence is falling and trade figures are weak following Brexit. The MPC seemed to follow this line of argument in its latest quarterly health check, despite forecasting a rise in inflation to a fresh peak of 5% in the new year. While monetary policy would have no impact on rising gas prices and a spike in the cost of oil, which were global problems hitting all countries, there were still worries about domestic price pressures, mostly from the cost of labour. The committee had hoped there would be some information indicating how many had joined the dole queue and how many were kept on by their employer; and if they were kept on, was their position still full-time or part-time. Unable to divine how strong the outlook is for jobs and wage rises over the longer term, they sat on their hands in the hope of a clearer picture emerging “in the coming months”. This phrase was widely interpreted as meaning an interest rate rise in December or February next year. The downbeat economic forecast meant maybe one or two more rises may follow in 2022. Martin Beck, chief economic adviser to the EY Item Club, said a base rate of 0.5% in a year was the most the markets can reasonably expect. Paul Dales, at the consultancy Capital Economics, summed up the Bank’s position: “So the MPC is gearing up to raise rates because the economic outlook is stronger than when it cut rates to 0.1% in March 2020 and because it wants to send a signal that it is not going to let inflation stay above the 2% target for very long. “But equally, it is aware that the economy is still fragile and wants to send a signal that it won’t raise rates too far, too soon.” Speculators will feel bruised. However, they should know that the MPC has been here before, talking tough only to concede meekly that the UK economy is essentially weak and in need of ultra-low interest rates to maintain growth. It was how the former governor, Mark Carney, gained his “unreliable boyfriend” nickname. It may stick to Andrew Bailey too.I suppose everyone who has ever got their period has the same nightmare, though for most of us, it’s come true. Mine happened a couple of years ago while reporting at a festival on New York’s Governors Island. It was August, hot and sticky, and I was wearing a white linen dress and thin cotton underwear. I was interviewing people all day. Later, a woman came up to me. I thought she wanted to speak about the festival. It turned out she had something else on her mind. “I brought you a bottle of water because I think you may have sat in something,” she said. Inside a portable toilet, I found a stain the size of a child’s football, the colour of rust and red grapes. I had got my period and hadn’t even noticed it until that dear woman saved me. It was the worst-case scenario, worthy of the “embarrassing story” section in a teen magazine, and yet I had been menstruating for 25 years. Who knows how long I had been walking around like that? I continue to be mortified by this story, and it’s a long way of saying that I should probably be someone who invests in period-wear. By now, you may have heard of period underwear, if not tried it out: knickers made from some combination of anti-microbial linings and moisture-wicking fabrics (these companies tend to keep the exact formula a secret). The idea is that the fabric pulls liquid away from the body and traps it inside, allowing you to bleed freely. Depending on your flow or confidence or both, they are designed to be worn either as a back-up to sanitary wear, or in place of it. Period pants have been around since the mid-1990s, though my first foray was just over a decade ago when I worked at a feminist magazine and we were sent Lunapads (now called Aisle). It didn’t go well. They were cotton pants with a thick gusset, as if a cotton pad was built in. It felt like wearing a wet sanitary pad and, if I’m honest, they had a certain scent about them. I wore them as back-up on planes or while camping, but didn’t exactly feel reassured. When they started to stretch out, I threw them away and never ordered replacements. Times change, though. Period pants have much improved to become a booming market. They’ve branched out, too. There are now colourful period-leotards and period-exercise-wear, period-swimsuits and period-sleep shorts. One company, Thinx, even has a blanket that costs close to $370 using moisture-wicking cotton, presumably to have sex on. “When we launched in 2013, there had been no innovation in period care since the 1930s,” says Shama Amalean of Thinx. “The category was dominated by single-use disposables, including tampons, 88% of which have single-use applicators.” Period-clothing may be a relatively new market, but it’s a growing one. Canadian company Knix, which also sells leggings and bodysuits, amassed C$53m (£31m) in a round of fundraising last spring. The Period Company, co-owned by Hollywood superstylist Karla Welch, who counts Tracee Ellis Ross and Justin Bieber as clients, recently launched a line of affordable (from $12) shorts. Others on the up include Ruby Love, which sells period-swimwear, and Dear Kate, which makes leak-proof athleisure. Wuka, which stands for Wake Up Kick Ass, bills itself as the UK’s first period-underwear company, founded in 2017, and sells period-proof boxers. Period underwear is not just being sold to savvy millennials; it can now be found at Primark (its three-pack is £13), Boots (with Thinx for £17.95) and even at Left Bank Parisian pharmacies. This suggests they’re becoming normalised as consumers seek more sustainable, more comfortable, and cheaper solutions than tampons, pads or cups. Period-clothing could probablyLD make my menstrual life easier, but when it came to testing it I had some concerns. Do they actually work? Can one pair of leggings hold five tampons’ worth of blood? Do you feel like you’re wearing an adult nappy? Do they … smell? I started with pants, a Leakproof High Rise from Knix ($35), worn under jeans. They felt thick and sturdy – a little slip of underwear is my normal choice – but if I’m free-bleeding on the heaviest day of my cycle, I don’t want anything barely there. I felt a bit damp while doing errands in the heat, but never leaked. That night I slept in a pair of sleeping boxers from Karla Welch’s The Period Company. “Looking at my own period, there was so much waste,” says Welch. “I hate tampons. I have a much better period if I let my body flow.” She partnered with Sasha Markova and launched the line in October 2020 with a round of angel investment. They were profitable by December. Because I was mostly horizontal and asleep, I didn’t feel myself bleeding into the sleep shorts and I liked not wearing a tampon to bed. In the morning I searched for traces of blood on my sheets like a suspicious groom in a 19th-century novel, and found nothing. Period pants certainly beat single-use tampons or pads in terms of waste. There are menstrual cups which can be rinsed out and reused for years, but decades of menstruating have taught me that people are either completely devoted to their cups or find them uncomfortable and prone to leaking. Environmental issues aside, there are other reasons for switching. Two friends of mine adopted them after worrying about toxic shock syndrome from tampons left in too long. One gave me her tips: wear super-absorbent pants for the bulk of your cycle and lighter ones on the days leading up to it and after. That weekend, I tried a pair of Thinx sport shorts for a tennis lesson. No, the pants didn’t leak or shift or smell (most of the newer brands have an odour-controlling treatment). But when I got home, I took a shower and reflexively used a tampon after. I realised that I missed feeling like liquid was being absorbed inside of me rather than bleeding out. Maybe that comes from the same internalised shame and misogyny that makes the stigma around periods universal. And if it’s something that I feel, with all the attending privilege of a white woman whose hippy mother gave her a speech about menstrual pride, I can only imagine how difficult it is for trans men who menstruate; people who can’t afford tampons, and people who go through puberty very young. Adults with incontinence are also adopting period underwear, which I imagine is infinitely preferable to buying adult nappies. In many ways, period-clothing is simply an extension of the so-called menstrual revolution, which includes free-bleeding and Mooncups (see also: the period sex scene in Michaela Coel’s drama I May Destroy You and even the tampon that appears, momentarily, in the new Bond film). The aim is to not simply bust taboos around periods, but to normalise them. If there’s still a certain discretion attached to period underwear, what could be more normal than free-bleeding into something everyone can see? (I should add that none of these swimsuits or shorts come in white.) My last and greatest test was meant to be wearing nothing but one of Thinx’s period thongs under a pink silk slip dress to a party. But I couldn’t do it. It wasn’t so much the threat of leaks, but the anxiety that I would be constantly checking to see if one had made itself known while I was dancing to Dua Lipa. So I wore both a tampon and the period thong, and felt protected. The only undergarment I managed to forgo that night with complete confidence? My bra.As the snowsports travel industry shakes off its Covid chains, rail routes to the mountains are having a surprise renaissance, with more than 60 resorts in France, Switzerland, Austria and Italy now easily accessible from London. And carving up to 90% off a journey’s carbon footprint. But despite snowsport fans’ enthusiasm for flight-free travel to ski resorts (and the extra slope day that can be shoehorned into a holiday compared with a standard seven-day package), the range of rail routes available, especially on sleeper services, has been disappointing. So it’s cheering that, as the ski industry gears up for its first “proper” season in two years, more trains than ever before are running to more than 60 European resorts. Bookings opened this week. Much fanfare accompanied the news in September that Eurostar’s overnight Snow Train to the French Alps is back – sort of. Rebranded the Travelski Express, the service leaving London St Pancras on Friday evenings and returning during the day on the following Saturday is in fact a partnership with tour operator Travelski, and exclusively for those on its travel/accommodation/ski pass packages, which start at about £450. This season it serves six resorts, including Val d’Isère, Les Arcs and Les Menuires, with its first departure on Boxing Day. There are also options for those booking independently or through specialists such as Ffestiniog Travel, Trainseurope and Rail Travel. Nightjet is the name of a growing international network of sleeper routes led by Austria’s national carrier, ÖBB, that can be accessed via Eurostar. Travelling through Amsterdam or Brussels, plus a slick German InterCity Express (ICE) to Cologne, they deliver skiers to Salzburg, Zurich and Innsbruck for easy onward hops to numerous resorts. Train travel from London to Wörgl, a short taxi ride from several good resorts in Austria’s Tyrol, for example, takes about 18 hours, including a night in one of several classes of couchette. While France’s rail-to-Alps crown slipped with the slashing of sleeper routes in 2016, the efficient SNCF service to Briançon (for Serre Chevalier and Montgenèvre) remains. And 10 December will see the relaunch after three years of an overnight route from Paris to Lourdes for the Pyrenees, whose resorts, although lower and smaller than their Alpine counterparts, are well-loved by many UK downhillers for their authenticity, affordability and uncrowded slopes. The service takes about 10 hours, with couchette berths from €29 and first-class private compartments available. The choice of TGV routes from Paris and Lille makes easy work of daytime journeys to the Alps. Paris to Chamonix, for example, can be done in five hours, with a scenic change in Saint-Gervais-les-Bains; Morzine is a mere 2½ hours from the French capital (the journey via Eurostar requires a change of station in Paris). And Belgium’s nippy, well-priced Thalys Snow trains runs every Saturday from Christmas Day to 16 April from Brussels to French Alps hubs, including Albertville, Moûtiers, Aime-La-Plagne and Bourg-Saint-Maurice. Six suggested routes (Best prices at time of publication and most convenient routes from London St Pancras – Eurostar’s Kent stations will not reopen until after the ski season. Prices vary according to date and availability). Les Gets, France Station to slopes from 9 hours, from £179 return Enjoy the Portes du Soleil’s 600km of pistes via the most genteel of its 12 resorts, with access to quieter slopes on local peak Mont Chéry. The 09.31 Eurostar reaches Paris Gare du Nord at 12.47, leaving plenty of time to transfer to Gare de Lyon for the 14.18 TGV to Bellegarde-sur-Valserine, arriving 17.00. The next service to Cluses departs 17.15 and arrives 18.52, leaving you a 25-minute cab or bus ride from your destination. Méribel, France Station to slopes from 9 hours, from £161.93 return Two new lifts connecting Val Thorens with the outlying Orelle area are this season’s big story in the 3 Vallées, and Méribel puts guests at the heart of 600km of diverse terrain. Take the 07.52 Eurostar to Paris Gare du Nord, arriving 11.17. Transfer by taxi to Gare de Lyon for the 13.29 TGV to Moûtiers-Salins, arriving at 17.51 (runs from 1 January). Road transfers to Méribel take about 30 minutes. A six-night travel/accommodation/ski pass package from Travelski costs from £544pp, travelling at 19.45 direct to Moûtiers on the Travelski Express, arriving 05.32. Barèges, France Station to slopes from 15 hours 31 minutes, from £109.62 return The traditional Pyrenean village of Barèges and lift-linked neighbour La Mongie form Le Grand Tourmalet, the French Pyrenees’ largest ski area, with more than 100km of pistes. Take the 16.22 Eurostar to Paris Gare du Nord, arriving 19.47. Transfer to Paris Austerlitz for the 21.14 Intercités de Nuit sleeper train to Lourdes, arriving 07.43. From there a shuttle bus to the resort takes 70 minutes. Crans-Montana, Switzerland Station to slopes from 9 hours 37 minutes, from £195.96 return This smart resort high above the Rhone valley has panoramic views, pretty, wooded pistes, excellent nursery slopes and some fine mountain restaurants. Take the 09.31 Eurostar to Paris Gare du Nord, arriving 12.47. Transfer to Paris Gare de Lyon for the 14.18 TGV to Genève Cornavin, arriving 17.29. Transfer to the 18.11 to Sierre, arriving 20.07. From there it’s a 15-minute funicular railway ride to the resort. St Anton, Austria Station to slopes from 10 hours nine minutes, from £160 return Fittingly, this Tyrolean resort’s rise from farming village to world-class ski town status began with a new rail connection in 1884. Today, the state-of-the-art lift system that serves Ski Arlberg area’s 305km of slopes is a short walk from the station. Take the 07.55 Eurostar to Paris Gare du Nord, arriving 11.17. Transfer to Gare de Lyon and take the 12.22 TGV to Zurich HB. The Railjet Xpress from Zurich to St Anton am Arlberg departs at 16.40, arriving at 19.01. Westendorf, Austria Station to slopes from 18 hours, from £244 return Part of the 280km SkiWelt area, and a short bus ride from ritzy Kitzbühel, Westendorf is a tranquil, traditional village with great beginner slopes and night skiing. Take the 15.04 Eurostar to Brussels-Midi, arriving 18.05, then the 18.25 ICE to Cologne, arriving 20.15. The Nightjet sleeper train to Wörgl leaves at 22.16, arriving at 08.37. Bus or taxi transfers to Westendorf take about 20 minutes. How to book The main ticket retailers are Trainline, Rail Europe and OUI.sncf. Rail booking agencies such as Rail Travel, Trainseurope, and International Rail also sell tickets online.Lenny Henry: ‘Culture is our best hope in answering the question why any of our lives really matter’ Black lives matter. Before it is an organisation or capitalised political movement, it is just a simple statement of fact. Black people’s lives are important and have meaning. However, too often when we discuss the meaning of the phrase, we frame our discussions around how our lives are not valued. It is a cry that has resonated across the world against the worst excesses and horrors faced by Black people, whether in response to police killings or to the toppling of statues commemorating slave traders. There is no denying the racism we face in British society is shocking. But the end result is that our lives are often portrayed as a negative, defined by the very bigotry and prejudice that tries to constrain us. That is why we decided to edit the book Black British Lives Matter, a collection of essays and conversations by prominent Black British figures on why Black representation in their respective fields is so important. It is also about the unique contribution we bring to every aspect of British society: from Black British Historians Matter by David Olusoga to Black British Mothers Matter by Doreen Lawrence. We want to acknowledge the racism we face but we also want to frame our lives in a positive way. The tension in this goal is captured in the final chapter, where my fellow editor Marcus Ryder recounts an argument he had with his wife over the breakfast table about our book: “When Stephen Lawrence was knifed to death, Doreen Lawrence did not set up an anti-knife charity. She didn’t even set up an anti-racism charity,” my wife tells me. “Doreen set up a charity for aspiring young architects because that was Stephen’s ambition and that was the life that was cut short – that was the Black British life that mattered. These essays focus on the architects of the future, they do not dwell on the knife.” “But this book is about capturing the unique experience of Black British people,” I reply. “Police brutality is part of our reality.” “There is more to our reality – and it feels that is all I hear about.” We finish our breakfast in silence. The truth is, we cannot be silent. We must constantly find ways to tell our stories but frame them in a manner that reflects both the negative and positive forces in our lives. Our art and culture is the best way to do this, and that is why we jumped at the opportunity when we were approached by the Guardian to take over its Saturday culture section because we fundamentally believe Black British Culture Matters. We believe that the art any community produces, the music it creates, and the narratives it tells about itself, are crucial to how that community views itself and its place in the world. We also believe that something quite unprecedented is currently happening artistically in the Black British community (or should that be communities?). As Kwame Kwei-Armah writes in his chapter of our book: “A society is measured by the quality of its artists, not the quantity of its accountants.” And culture is our best hope in answering the question of why any of our lives really matter. Lenny Henry ‘With confidence comes a willingness to criticise Britain while embracing it’ Marcus Ryder We are in the middle of a British renaissance, one driven by Black Britons. As with the rise of the Young British Artists in the time of Brit art and Britpop of the late 1980s and early 90s, the evidence of a British cultural renaissance has been clear to see in these pages, week after week, in every sphere of culture. From Daniel Kaluuya to Michaela Coel, Black actors and screenwriters are at the cutting edge of their craft. Writers and political commentators such as Afua Hirsch, Akala and Emma Dabiri are reshaping the public discourse. The acclaimed visual artists Lynette Yiadom-Boakye and sculptor Tom Price have had massive successes, and are joined by newer names such as non-binary painter and illustrator Ashton Attzs and figurative painter Somaya Critchlow. A striking feature of this cultural movement is that, with a few notable exceptions, they are all 40 or under – and this is no coincidence. We often talk about the Windrush generation as paving the way for Black Britain as we know it; my mother fell into this category. And while the Windrush primarily refers to the migration of Caribbean people to the UK in the 50s, as independence was gained across Africa in the 60s and 70s, African families also began to make their own ways over. I belong to the first generation of Black Britons born in the UK. My generation were no longer the Caribbean or African doctors, nurses or bus drivers with a “grip [suitcase] on top of the cupboard” because they constantly had one eye on going back home. We were the generation that not only fought racism but demanded equality – because if you cannot be equal in your own home, where can you be equal? Sir David Adjaye, in his essay for Lenny Henry’s and my book Black British Lives Matter, writes that my generation was the one to “extend the debate of expressive culture … they didn’t ‘come from’ the land of their parents, they were born in Empire”. At university I remember being asked whether I thought of myself as Black British. My Blackness was not being questioned, nor was the idea that I had a right to call Britain my home. It was an existential question. Did I see myself as “British”? Was that a label I wanted to be identified with? That debate was still raging in 1992 when Linford Christie draped himself in the union flag after winning gold at the Olympics. The sight of a Black person embracing their Britishness and a symbol that had previously been seen as synonymous with colonial oppression, slavery and racist political movements such as the National Front was something many Black people struggled with. The Black people I knew all wanted Christie to win, but there was no denying the internal struggle of seeing this as a British victory, as opposed to a Black win. The Black British renaissance we are seeing now is born out of the first generation of Black Britons who do not suffer this cognitive dissonance. They are Black British and proud. They see no contradiction in embracing their Black British identity. Hirsch titled her bestselling opus Brit(ish) – not British?, which might be how the generation before her would have framed it. And Akala, in his seminal book Natives: Race and Class in the Ruins of Empire, writes of a short crisis he experienced as a Black British musician: “I felt that a British accent was not authentic enough, perhaps even not ‘Black’ enough to be real hip-hop. Luckily, I got over this crisis within a week and have never rapped as if I were American since.” This generation has both literally and metaphorically found its voice. It is this confidence that is at the heart of this renaissance we’re seeing. And with that confidence comes a willingness to criticise Britain while embracing it. There was no contradiction when Stormzy chose to pose with a union flag stab-proof vest on the artwork for Heavy Is the Head. When I was editing Black British Lives Matter with Lenny, this generational shift was profoundly visible to our writers. “What strikes me when I talk to people in their 20s, people who are students, people who protested, they have aspirations and ambitions that literally never occurred to me to even entertain,” writes the 51-year-old historian David Olusoga. “So, when you talk to these kids, their aim and what they regard as their generational mission is to destroy racism and to weed it out of their society. It never occurred to me.” And just as Oasis and Blur were completely different expressions of Britishness during the heights of Britpop, and as Tracey Emin brought something highly distinct to Brit art from Damien Hirst with his sharks, this new renaissance is a flowering of the multiplicity of Black British identity. It is a confidence to express personal British and other identities while still centring Blackness. We see this capacity for difference in everything from Black British visual arts, where there is a huge variety in mediums, styles and subjects, to the new Black British jazz movement, where there appears to be a clear eschewing of any “right way” to create jazz. For example, the drummer and Mobo award winner Moses Boyd describes his music as “an extension of Black music, the diaspora”, which draws influence from Afrobeats, soca, reggae, drum’n’bass and jungle music, while groups such as Sons of Kemet embrace rock, Caribbean folk and African influences.Artistic movements are often marked out by how they respond to moments of crisis. For my generation, this was no doubt the murder of Stephen Lawrence by racist teenagers, and Doreen Lawrence’s struggle for justice. The event that has marked this new generation is surely the murder of George Floyd. The key image of the Black Lives Matter movement in the UK is that of actor John Boyega, shouting into a megaphone, recognising that he could not separate his art from his politics, and most importantly, his Black British identity. It is a defiant image, steeped in Black Britishness. We could ask: do we see this time as a Black British cultural renaissance, or is the role of Black artists now so central to society that it should simply be viewed as the British cultural renaissance? Fundamentally, it speaks to what Lenny and I are trying to achieve in Black British Lives Matter: a reminder that Black British people’s lives are crucial to every part of society – not just in the UK but across the globe. Our lives matter. Marcus Ryder Marcus Ryder author is a director, media executive and chair of Rada. Black British Lives Matter: A Clarion Call for Equality edited by Lenny Henry and Marcus Ryder, is published by Faber on 16 November.Why will I love it? This easy-to-please houseplant, Pilea peperomioides, is known for its large, coin-shaped leaves. Its common name is Chinese money plant (legend has it that it will reward the owner with financial fortune). These beauties grow and multiply abundantly. Light or shade? Position it in a bright room, but away from direct sunlight, which scorches the leaves. Where should I put it? It is happy in many settings, from bright indirect to slightly low light. Mine is on a windowsill facing south-west and is loving life. How do I keep it alive? This plant prefers a free-draining compost, so allow it to dry out between weekly waterings during the summer and reduce to watering every 10-14 days in the winter. If the leaves start to droop, that’s a sign it needs more water. To prevent your specimen from becoming lopsided, rotate the pot at least once a week. Did you know … It is also known as the pass-it-along plant: if planted in a pot with enough space, it will produce miniature versions of itself, so you can cover your home in clones or share them with friends and family.Xavi Hernández is due to be confirmed as Barcelona’s head coach after agreement was reached to terminate his contract with the Qatari club Al Sadd. The 41-year-old, who made the last of his 767 Barcelona appearances in 2015, will succeed Ronald Koeman, who was sacked as the team struggled in La Liga. Al Sadd said on Friday they had “agreed on Xavi’s move to Barcelona after the payment of the release clause stipulated in the contract”. Barcelona’s president, Joan Laporta, started discussions some weeks ago with Xavi, who made clear he was ready to accept an offer to return to the Camp Nou, but negotiations with Al Sadd took longer than expected. Xavi came through Barcelona’s academy and is one of the club’s most celebrated and decorated players. His career as a manager began at Al Sadd in May 2019 after he ended his playing days there and last month he led the team to victory in Qatar’s Amir Cup final. Barcelona sit ninth in La Liga and dismissed Koeman after defeat at Rayo Vallecano. Sergi Barjuan has been in interim charge, overseeing a draw at home to Alavés and a win at Dynamo Kyiv that took the team up to second in their Champions League group. He is in line to take charge at Celta Vigo on Saturday before handing over to Xavi. Al Sadd’s CEO, Turki al-Ali, said: “Xavi informed us a few days ago of his desire to go to Barcelona at this particular time, because of the critical stage his hometown club is going through, and we understand this and decided not to stand in his way.” • More details to follow …Flu season is upon us again – and this year, we’re still busy protecting ourselves from Covid-19, too. Due to lockdown restrictions and the lack of mixing between households last winter, the number of flu cases dropped significantly – but that also means our immunity to flu might now be lower than before the pandemic. Approximately 11,000 people die from flu in England on average each year, and most cases occur in winter, when the cold weather encourages transmission, and we begin mixing indoors in less well-ventilated spaces. Alongside flu, continuing or rising cases of coronavirus are expected this winter, creating a double risk. The latest data shows that protection provided by Covid-19 vaccines falls after six months, particularly for older adults and at-risk groups. As viruses can spread quickly from person to person when we’re in close proximity indoors over winter, it’s important to book your appointment for the flu jab and Covid-19 vaccine booster, according to your eligibility for one or both. While most people have two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine as part of their “primary” course and many are now eligible for a booster, vaccination experts have recommended three doses in the primary course for people who have a severely weakened immune system, to get a good level of protection against Covid-19. If you have not already received your primary doses of a Covid-19 vaccine, then now is the time to do it. As well as boosting your own immunity, these essential vaccines could help prevent people who might be more vulnerable from becoming seriously ill, and in turn help reduce pressure on the NHS. “Both flu and Covid-19 cost lives, and the increased threat from these two deadly viruses this winter makes it even more important that anyone eligible comes forward for a flu vaccine as soon as possible, and books in their Covid-19 booster when they’re invited,” says NHS deputy vaccination programme lead Dr Nikki Kanani. “The vaccines are safe, effective, and the best thing you can do to protect yourself and your loved ones this winter.” Here, we’ve answered your key questions on both vaccinations, so we can all stay safe this season. Your guide to the Covid-19 booster vaccine Who is eligible for a Covid-19 booster vaccine? The third shot is designed to ensure the most vulnerable people in our communities are protected over winter. More than 8m jabs including boosters and third doses have been administered and currently the following people are eligible: Those aged 50 and over. Those aged 16 and over with a health condition that puts them at high risk of getting seriously ill from Covid-19. Those who live or work in care homes. Frontline health and social care workers. How soon after my second dose will a booster be offered to those who are eligible? The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation advises that you’ll be offered your booster vaccine no earlier than six months (182 days) after your second dose of the Covid-19 vaccine. People with certain health conditions may be offered the Covid-19 booster earlier. Where will booster vaccine appointments be available? Once invited for your vaccine you can book an appointment online or by calling 119. The booster vaccine is being delivered from a range of locations such as walk-in and mobile vaccination sites to make accessing it as convenient as possible. Primary care teams will vaccinate care home staff and residents on-site, while health and social care workers can book their booster vaccinations through their employer. I’ve recently tested positive for Covid-19 – can I still get a booster vaccine? As always, if you’ve tested positive for coronavirus, you need to self-isolate for 10 full days. You should wait 28 days before booking your booster vaccine, starting from the date you took the positive test. Your guide to the flu vaccine Who is eligible for the flu vaccine? If you get flu and Covid-19 viruses at the same time, research shows you’re more likely to get seriously ill. A free flu jab is available to people in the following categories: Children aged from two years* up to secondary school year 11. People aged 50 or over. Those aged six months to under 50 years in clinical risk groups, (see the NHS website for a full list of conditions and clinical risk groups). People who are pregnant. People who live or work in care homes. Close contacts of immunocompromised individuals and their carers. Health and social care staff. All frontline health and social care workers are expected to have the flu vaccine. Why might we be more vulnerable to flu this year? In the 2020/21 season, we didn’t see much flu, partly thanks to the measures put in place to stop Covid-19 and the reduction in international travel. Because there were so few cases last season, more strains of flu might be in circulation this year, plus there’s less immunity against last year’s strains, too. Regardless of your eligibility for a Covid-19 booster vaccine, anyone who is eligible for a flu jab on the NHS should take the opportunity to book theirs ASAP. If you’re eligible, you’ll be able to book your jab at your GP surgery, at a pharmacy if you’re over 18 (which can be found at nhs.uk/flujab), via a hospital appointment, or through your midwife service if you’re pregnant. If your child is school age, they should be offered their flu vaccine through their school. Does my child need the flu vaccination? All children from the age of two to those in year 11 at secondary school, and all children in at-risk groups from the age of six months are eligible to receive a flu vaccine. Children aged from two years to those in school year 11 will be offered the nasal spray vaccine. Where the nasal spray is not suitable for them, those who are between six months and two years will be offered the flu injection. I’m pregnant – is it safe to get the Covid and flu jabs? Yes – both are safe for pregnant women, and it’s important to have both if eligible. There are more risks for you and your pregnancy if you contract Covid-19 without the vaccine, and the flu vaccine will also help protect your unborn baby. If you catch flu when pregnant, you’re at risk from complications such as bronchitis and it could cause your baby to be born prematurely, have a low birthweight and may even lead to stillbirth. If you’re pregnant, you can get a free flu vaccine from your GP, pharmacist or through your maternity service. *Applies only to children who were aged two on 31 August 2021. Any child that has turned two since this date will not yet be eligible. Vaccines are the best protection against life-threatening viruses like flu and Covid-19. For more information and to book your appointment visit nhs.uk/wintervaccinations ‘You should take all the sensible precautions you can’ Helen Baimbridge, 44, runs the TinCup social media marketing agency, and lives in Haddenham, Buckinghamshire “I’ve already had my Covid-19 booster and flu jab, both of which my GP got in touch with me about. I have Crohn’s disease, which means I have a compromised immune system and am in the clinically extremely vulnerable category, so I received my first jab in the first tier of the vaccine rollout, and my second at the end of March. “Because those of us who are immunosuppressed might have a less than adequate response to the vaccine, and its effect diminishes after six months, I was very happy to get the booster – I think the vaccine rollout overall has been excellent. “I always make sure I have my flu jab early in the season, too, because it’s the smallest thing I can do to keep myself safer – but this year, with the risk of flu even higher than usual, it was absolutely something I wanted to prioritise. Why wouldn’t you avoid getting flu if you possibly could? You should take all the sensible precautions that you can.” This advertiser content was paid for by the UK government. All together (“Get vaccinated this winter”) is a government-backed initiative tasked with informing the UK about the Covid-19 pandemic. For more information, visit gov.uk/coronavirusKanye West has condemned the #MeToo movement that has spoken out against sexual assault in the entertainment industry and beyond, describing it as “mob mentality … Nineteen Eighty-Four mind control”. During a wide-ranging almost two-and-a-half-hour interview with podcast Drink Champs, the rapper, producer and fashion mogul alluded to a recent listening party of his album Donda, when he stood on stage with Marilyn Manson, who has been accused of sexual assault and coercion by multiple women. The pair also appeared together at West’s Sunday Service, a prayer meeting, last weekend. “All the #MeToo – like, when I sit next to Marilyn Manson … for five songs, you know, it’s like they can’t cancel a song,” West said. “They’ll hit you with the accusations or somebody who you was with 10 years ago. And also, there’s women who’ve been through very serious things, pulled in alleys against they will – that’s different than a hug, but it’s classified as the same thing. It’s power and politics. You know, power-hungry maniacs and just, control. This is Nineteen Eighty-Four mind control that we in. And mob mentality.” In February, Manson was accused by actor Evan Rachel Wood and four other women of a range of sexual offences, and other women have since made further accusations against him. He has denied any wrongdoing. West has previously criticised #MeToo in his track Yikes, discussing Def Jam co-founder Russell Simmons, who was accused of rape and other sexual assaults by numerous women, which Simmons denied. “Russell Simmons wanna pray for me too / I’ma pray for him ’cause he got MeToo’d”, runs the lyric. Elsewhere in the Drink Champs interview, West uses the antisemitic stereotype of Jewish people being masters of business. Discussing Black social mobility, he said: “I’m a community builder … but the people who have in the past been in a position of power try to separate Jay [Z] and [Damon Dash], separate my mom and my dad, separate me and Virgil [Abloh]. You see a pattern? That makes it impossible for Black Wall Street … I thought of our community growing, when we not forced to make the choice of whether or not we can afford to have a child, when we’re not forced to say, ‘I’ma have to kill this [N-word] cos he said this or this’. You know, you never hear about Jewish on Jewish crime. They kill each other in business in a different kind of way, but not physically taking a life.” West also claimed that he was recently held at gunpoint by a police officer in Belgium while he was wearing a full-face mask, and that he had feared for his life. He called for Black History Month to be cancelled – continuing his earlier criticism of the commemoration – and seemed to make a veiled criticism of Kamala Harris. “I need Black Future Month, Black Positivity Month,” he said. “I’m tired of seeing us get hosed down, I’m tired of talking about slavery and how we should only be so lucky to vote for a woman we haven’t seen since the election. [Black History Month] is here to remind you of who they want us to be and not who we really are.” He discussed his musical peers at length. He said “the worst thing I’ve ever done was sign Big Sean” and criticised him and John Legend for supporting the Democrats during West’s run for US president. He also brushed off his recent war of words with Drake, saying “I love Drake” and comparing them to a pair of sparring boxers, such as Mike Tyson and Evander Holyfield. He said he counts Damien Hirst’s formaldehyde animals among his “top five favourite artworks”, saying he bought a black sheep in embalming fluid from the artist – “that’s me” – and an embalmed dove for Kim Kardashian West. In one of numerous pronouncements about God, he said: “We are God’s ultimate iPhone, God’s favourite creation – if Steve Jobs was God, we would be his iPhone. And we are simply programmed.” In October, West formally changed his name to Ye. He is in divorce proceedings with wife Kim Kardashian West, and told Drink Champs the paperwork was not yet finalised.Dmitry Davydov is the self-taught Russian director from the remote eastern republic of Sakha who has been gaining golden opinions on the festival circuit for his spare and fervent films, often using non-professional actors. Here is Davydov’s first feature, The Bonfire, from 2016, which is intriguing, if sometimes baffling in its stylistic variations. Mostly it has the uncompromising austerity of a stripped-down social realist drama. And yet occasionally it gives you quite a lot of frills. Intermittently, we get a rich orchestral score that feels as if it comes from another type of film altogether; there’s a “montage” sequence of an old man and a young kid getting to know each other that wouldn’t look out of place in a Hollywood feature, and a late-breaking marriage subplot that is certainly startling. An old man, Ignat (Alexey Ustinov) living alone in this remote and freezing territory, is horrified when his grownup son takes his own life in a fit of remorse for accidentally killing someone while drunk. Ignat finds a kind of redemption in looking after a local kid whose mum is an alcoholic, but the ageing father of the boy his son killed is in no way chastened or mollified by the suicide of his son’s killer. He can’t forgive or forget and is consumed with the desire to kill Ignat. The Bonfire has the simplicity of a parable (when it isn’t periodically assuming the style of something with a higher budget) and it is always absorbing, despite or because of the eccentricities: there’s a scene which is shot from Ignat’s point-of-view for no very obvious reason. Ustinov shows us a real anguish and a real dignity and his stoicism governs the tone of the film itself. It’s a movie with a tough and flinty solidity. • The Bonfire is available on 4 November on Klassiki.The usually sympathetic media has rounded on the government for a second day over its handling of sleaze and Owen Paterson, and this time the verdict is even more brutal. It has been reported that the virulence of Thursday’s press criticism was one of the reasons the government so swiftly ditched a proposed new Tory-led standards panel. Following the U-turn and Paterson’s resignation, Friday’s papers make for even more difficult reading for the government, especially for Boris Johnson. The Mail carries a front-page picture of Johnson beside a headline questioning his leadership. The caption reads: “On day of farce, Tories U-turn on disgraced MP Paterson after public fury … he quits … and a nation aghast at Boris’s misjudgment asks … IS ANYBODY IN CHARGE AT No 10?” It is a much more pointed attack than Thursday’s Mail front page, which tried to blame the whole “political class” for the government attempt to set up a new standard’s panel. “Shameless MPs sink back into sleaze” was the confusing headline. But on Friday there is no doubt who the paper is gunning for. Inside, six pages prominently feature senior Tories questioning Johnson’s handling of the debacle. One is quoted as saying: “The problem with Boris is he packs his cabinet with second-rate people, meaning there is no one to tell him he should take a different course. It all just looks like we’re back to the 1990s – MPs getting together to support their friends.” Even the staunchly loyal Daily Telegraph, which on Thursday carried a sympathetic interview with Paterson, appears to turn on the government. Its front page carries a pull quote from its columnist Fraser Nelson, which says: “Arrogance and complacency … it’s becoming easier to see how the Tories end …” The Telegraph’s front-page headline is “Paterson quits after backlash from MPs.” While the paper’s cartoonist Matt shows Guy Fawkes being caught, saying: “I’m setting up my own standards committee to look into this.” It is worth remembering that on Tuesday Johnson flew from Cop26 on a private jet to attend a Telegraph dinner at the Garrick with the paper’s former editor Charles Moore, a friend and vocal supporter of Paterson. The Times also focuses on how much the government’s mishandling of Paterson’s case has backfired on Johnson. Its front-page headline is “PM faces party backlash after suspension U-turn.” It reports that Tory MPs are angry at being whipped into blocking Paterson’s suspension for breaking lobbying rules by backing a new standards watchdog, only for the government to reverse the plan less than 24 hours later. “MPs did what they were told and have been made to look stupid and corrupt,” one backbencher tells the Times. The Financial Times reveals that potential Tory rebels were told they could lose constituency funding if they voted against the now-ditched new standards body. But one is quoted as saying: “Any MP who believed this deserves to have funding removed for being a thick gullible twat.” Johnson escapes front-page criticism in the Mirror and the Sun, but not the Star. It depicts Johnson and the leader of the house, Jacob Rees-Mogg, as clowns called Bozo and Rees-Smugg under a U-turn sign. The headline reads: “Well, we didn’t see that U-turn coming. Said nobody. Ever.” On the inside pages, the Sun reports it was Rees-Mogg who assured Johnson the plan for a new standards body was “watertight”. The chief whip, Mark Spencer, is also under pressure, according to the Guardian’s Aubrey Allegretti. He quotes one MP as saying: “I have never heard ministers go through the lobby, saying out loud, ‘this is absolute madness’. The chief whip needs to go for this.” He writes: One said she had “been flung under a bus for one man” and asked “was it worth it?” Another, reeling minutes after the U-turn, called it “disgraceful” and criticised “huge party mismanagement” by the whips.A West Country harbour town famous for its links to an albatross is to erect a bronze statue in tribute to another bird – Derek the Goose. Residents of Watchet in Somerset are coming to terms with the loss of Derek, actually a female, who had lived in their harbour for more than a decade. She is believed to have suffered a violent and mysterious death but, determined not to forget her, residents have launched a fundraising effort for a permanent memorial. Watchet harbour was the inspiration for Samuel Taylor Coleridge’s poem The Rime of the Ancient Mariner and a striking statue of the sailor and the albatross he shoots is a landmark in the town. A second statue, of locally born John Short – Yankee Jack – who is known as a 19th-century father of sea shanties, is also a feature of the harbour. The Watchet resident Carron Scott, who runs a Facebook page called Derek the Female Goose, has launched a fundraiser, explaining: “As many know Derek sadly died and she was part of our town of Watchet for such a long time. It has been decided we need a memorial – a bronze to fall in line with Jack and The Ancient Mariner.” Derek had lived among the boats in Watchet marina since being blown into the harbour by a storm and had been fed and looked after by the town’s community ever since. Scott said: “It’s devastated the town as I can’t think of anyone who did not know about Derek. When she arrived it was thought she was a boy so she was named Derek but when she had a health check it was discovered he was a she. But we never changed the name. “She was well fed and there was a fund at the marina shop you could give to for food. When I went out in the evening I always had half a Weetabix to tempt her. She got on with everyone, even the boat cat.” Flowers have been laid at a temporary memorial created on the Esplanade by Watchet marine staff, which includes a photograph of “the guardian of the marina”. The goose’s death remains a puzzle. Derek regularly slept on the town’s slipway at low water and an early morning dog-walker reported seeing blood stains and a pile of feathers, though no body has been found. Chris Moiser, the owner of Tropiquaria zoo in Somerset, was brought in to investigate and confirmed that the feathers and remains were those of a goose. Moiser, a former lawyer, suggested a fox could have done for Derek but said residents would have to be content with an open verdict.Eoin Morgan, the England limited-overs captain, has welcomed the investigation into racism at Yorkshire and the publicity it has received, even though it has diverted attention from the spectacular achievements of his team at the T20 World Cup. Morgan backed the England and Wales Cricket Board’s intervention on the basis that his players “can only do so much in role-modelling what we believe is right”. Speaking on Friday in Dubai after after the ECB board had stripped Yorkshire of the right to host international cricket as the fallout from their bungled report into Azeem Rafiq’s allegations of racist abuse during his two spells at the club continued, Morgan said: “In matters of an extreme or serious nature like these are, they need to be met head-on. “For us as a team, that’s exactly what we want to see. The investigation is ongoing so only time will tell what happens, but I think the actions by the board have demonstrated how seriously the ECB are taking how this has been handled. Yes, we want to see the sport in a great light, but equally if there’s an issue as serious as this we want it dealt with.” England’s team at the World Cup includes players from diverse racial and cultural backgrounds and of different religions, reflecting a sport that has changed significantly over recent years – though, as recent revelations have proved, one still with significant work to do. “Our culture has been built around inclusivity and diversity,” Morgan said. “It’s actually been quite a strong part of our game, and we have been active about talking and actioning things that show meaningful change. We are very serious about it. We firmly believe that there is no place in our sport for any type of discrimination, and I think the actions of the ECB board to Yorkshire have indicated how serious they are about dealing with issues like this. “From our point of view as a team, we can only do so much in role-modelling what we believe is right. We’ve been part of significant change that we feel will lead to something that will be bigger than any of our careers or any of the trophies that we win. What we do at the moment to try and achieve that isn’t perfect, but we are making good ground towards the change that we want. “Outside of that, we are actually limited to what we can achieve. We’ll continue to give that strong message, and I suppose ultimately to be ourselves. In terms you have to be yourself. You should be relaxed, and given that freedom to feel comfortable in your own skin.”The perma-tan is under threat this winter after cosmetics producers reported shortages of an ingredient used in a wide range of fake tan ranges, skin creams and beauty products. A UK-based self-tan producer, a chemical distribution company and pharmacists have been unable to source their usual supplies of the widely used solvent ethoxydiglycol, which is used to improve the texture of skincare products and to help them spread on the skin. The ingredient is imported from abroad and used extensively in many high street and high-end skincare products, including face creams, makeup, deodorants and hair dyes. Sunjunkie, which manufactures its own brand of self-tanning products, as well as under the label of high street retailers, has been struggling to source the ingredient because of disruption in the global supply chain. “It’s a total nightmare,” said Diane Higham, the director of Stockport-based Sunjunkie. “It’s a product that goes into a lot of things and you just don’t think that you’re suddenly not going to be able to obtain it anywhere.” Higham first discovered supply difficulties when looking to restock vital ingredients for her products after the peak summer sales season. A string of her suppliers in the UK and EU do not have any ethoxydiglycol in stock, and do not know when they will be able to source it. Some experts have raised the rapid growth of the beauty industry in China as a possible reason for the UK shortage. Other raw materials are also proving difficult to obtain. Higham is concerned about the future availability – and cost – of other essential components including DHA (dihydroxyacetone) and erythrulose, the ingredients that give a tanned colour to skin. “You can just see the product line suddenly coming to a halt if we haven’t got these major ingredients,” Higham said. She has enough raw materials to keep production going until Christmas but is worried about being able to fulfil orders in the new year. The UK online pharmacy Medicine Direct looked into the shortage of the product and found it had rocketed in price from £12 to £103 a kilogram. Nitin Sethi, the managing director of the chemical distribution firm Ascot International, which sources and supplies raw ingredients for the personal care industry, said many items were in short supply. Ascot imports ethoxydiglycol from the US and India, and Sethi said the price had risen by 30%, while he had been able to source it only “in dribs and drabs” and not in the volume required. Sethi found the main ingredients of self-tanning products were in short supply and the prices have gone up by 30-40%. He added: “A month ago I placed an order for 10 metric tonnes of DHA and I only got four tonnes between now and the end of the year. “Our turnover is down because we are not able to sell what we need to sell because of lack of stock, and the price is high and some people are not willing to pay the price.” Even though ethoxydiglycol is not used in large quantities in fake tan and other cosmetics, it will not be possible to make the products that include it without requiring costly and time-consuming reformulation. The high street pharmacy chain Boots said its suppliers had not raised any concerns about the future supply of products containing ethoxydiglycol, while the retailer Superdrug declined to comment on the shortage, and whether it could lead to lack of availability of fake tan and other products.In April, with her film Nomadland, Chloé Zhao claimed a much-coveted double victory: Best Picture and Best Director gongs at the Academy Awards. It’s a dual accolade that puts the film-maker in some pretty lofty company – Wilder, Spielberg, Bigelow, the Coens – and you might assume would bring with it a degree of creative freedom. Might Zhao, head off into the wilds of Montana to film Leonardo DiCaprio nearly getting eaten by a bear like Birdman director Alejandro Gonzalez Iñárritu did with his best picture/best director follow-up, The Revenant? No, not quite. Zhao’s follow up release to Nomadland is a Marvel movie. The Eternals, out now in cinemas, sees a group of immortal superheroes unite to smash the living daylights out of their similarly superpowered enemies, the Deviants. Frances McDormand ambling round South Dakota in an RV it is not. A noisy, CGI-laden superhero movie might feel like a strange fit for Zhao, but she is far from the first rising star to be plucked from the world of indie film by Marvel. Earlier this year we’ve had Cate Shortland (Lore, Berlin Syndrome) directing Black Widow, while Ryan Coogler (Black Panther), directing duo Anna Boden and Ryan Fleck (Captain Marvel), and even Taiki Waititi (Thor: Ragnarok) were all film-makers associated with smaller, more personal fare before entering the Marvel Cinematic Universe. For these film-makers, the lure of the MCU is more than just financial. There’s the chance to work on a far bigger canvas than they’re used to, and a major studio credit to burnish their filmographies. Marvel, meanwhile, get to bask in the warm glow of indie credibility and – crucially – have talented, not-yet-big-name directors on their books. Marvel have adopted a similar approach in the hoovering up of acting talent. Rather than seek out whopping great names to play their biggest characters, they have often aimed for promising stars with the scope to join the A-list: take Chrises Evans (Captain America), Hemsworth (Thor) and Pratt (Star-Lord), or Elizabeth Olsen (Wanda Maximoff). Again for these actors the benefits are clear: big paydays (including, in some cases a share of box office windfalls), huge exposure and ultimately guaranteed megastar status. There is of course a catch, though: once you’re in, you’re in. Marvel’s sprawling, interlocking, serialised cinematic universe requires its superheroes to pop up in each other’s films, meaning that playing a character is often a more time-consuming gig than other film franchises – and of course now there is an entire Marvel TV series roster for the talent to appear in too. The multi-feature deals Marvel has negotiated with its stars are, by now, common knowledge, in some case tying them up for as many as 10 films. MCU kingpin Kevin Feige has said that these deals are now no longer the norm for Marvel but even if that is the case, it’s hard to imagine anyone turning down a subsidiary of the biggest entertainment company in the world when it comes knocking. Directors, not having to don capes and armour as recurring characters, aren’t quite as locked in as the acting talent, but several of them – notably the Russo Brothers and Waititi – have also signed up for a repeat Marvel prescription. Is that necessarily a problem? Some might argue that this is merely an updating of Martin Scorsese’s “One for them, one for me” approach, allowing directors the clout to go and make more personal or daring movies. Yet the effort it takes to put together a Marvel movie means the time available for making other movies has surely dwindled – not to mention the fact that other studios are leaning into blockbusters at the expense of smaller productions. “One for them, one for me” might have just become “all for them”. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.An examination of the Jewish origins of the Man of Steel, Is Superman Circumcised?, is vying with an up-to-date look at camel milk and related camel goods, Handbook of Research on Health and Environmental Benefits of Camel Products, for the dubious honour of the oddest book title of the year. The prize was dreamed up in 1978 by the co-founders of The Diagram Group, to pass the time at the annual Frankfurt book fair. The inaugural award went to Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Nude Mice, with winners in subsequent years ranging from Greek Rural Postmen and Their Cancellation Numbers, to How to Avoid Huge Ships. Six books are in the running for the 43rd prize, nominated by members of the book trade, with Curves for the Mathematically Curious up against Hats: A Very Unnatural History, The Life Cycle of Russian Things: From Fish Guts to Fabergé, and Miss, I Don’t Give a Shit: Engaging with Challenging Behaviour in Schools. Tom Tivnan, the Bookseller’s managing editor and the prize’s co-ordinator, praised the academics who have written all six of the books in the running for the award. “The erotic undertones of Curves for the Mathematically Curious is a good example – emphasised by Princeton University Press’s marketing copy which is quite frankly the horniest maths book blurb ever written: ‘A rigorous and enriching experience for anyone interested in curves … Every curve has a story worth telling.’ Goodness, is it hot in here, or is it just your Euler spiral and parametric equations?” said Tivnan. “However, I was taken aback when Miss, I Don’t Give a Shit was submitted. My first thought was ‘I know children are different these days, but the Roger Hargreaves books have really taken a darker turn.’ Turns out, it’s not the latest Little Miss book, but a teacher’s guide to engaging with difficult students.” But Tivnan predicted that Is Superman Circumcised? was likely to be a frontrunner for this year’s prize. “Diagram voters have long had a sometimes lamentable predilection for titles that refer, even obliquely, to naughty bits. I’m thinking of Charles L Dobbins’s 2019-winning self-published trapping guide, The Dirt Hole and Its Variations, and the Institute of Mechanical Engineers’ Designing High Performance Stiffened Structures which rose to the occasion to win the prize in 2000,” he said. The winner will be chosen by a public vote on the Bookseller’s website, and announced on 3 December. The nominator of the winning entry receives a “passable” bottle of claret, but author and publisher receive nothing but glory.Harry Kane has described the appointment of Antonio Conte by Tottenham as a show of “great ambition” as he threw his support behind the new manager, who succeeded the sacked Nuno Espírito Santo. Kane has been through a well-documented period of questioning whether the club can meet his ambitions, which peaked over the summer when he tried and failed to force a move to Manchester City. The 28-year-old has largely kept his thoughts on the transfer saga to himself and did not speak to the press during Nuno’s 17-game tenure, including his time on England duty, when he might have been expected to do so as captain. He broke cover on Thursday after Conte’s first Spurs game – the helter-skelter 3-2 Europa Conference League home win over Vitesse – to articulate his hope and excitement about the new project. “It shows great ambition, to be honest,” Kane said of Conte’s appointment. “His résumé speaks for itself. Everyone knows how highly thought of he is and what he has done as a manager in the game. You have to respect that. We have a manager and a club that believe in us and this appointment definitely shows that. “He definitely brings a lot of passion, a lot of determination, whether that’s on the training pitch or in meetings, in the dressing room. He has won trophies at the highest level with the biggest clubs so everyone is excited to learn, excited to work under him and that passion he shows every day, every meeting, every training session is what you thrive on. You go into games wanting to put your body on the line for him and you can feel that already. “We haven’t reached the standards we have wanted to over the last couple of years and we hope that this manager can help us turn it around. But it’s about us and how we take it in because he has done it, he has nothing to prove. He will give us everything he has to improve us and now it is down to us as players to have no excuses. We have to make sure every minute of our lives we are trying to improve and win for this team. That is the only way we are going to move forward.” It has been a difficult start to the club season for Kane on an individual level, with only one goal and one assist in nine Premier League games. His overall numbers have been boosted, however, by six goals and one assist across six Conference League and Carabao Cup ties. “I am a player that always believes in myself and always believes in my ability,” Kane said. “I am 28 years old, I have still got a lot to learn, a lot to improve on. It’s not been the start I wanted, the team wanted or the club wanted so we all know that. We all have to take responsibility for that as players. “It is not something I am worried about. I will keep working and I am really excited about working with this manager. I am sure he can improve me and that is an exciting thing. When you have done what I have done in the game so far and still feel like there is more to come, that is definitely exciting so I am looking forward to it.”In a hangar-sized yet semi-deserted Batman-themed restaurant, a letter is placed on my table while I await a £15 serving of citrus-cured salmon with a fingernail-sized portion of caviar. “Dear Guest of Park Row,” it reads, “I do fear the worst has come to pass.” It was a tiny touch of drama in a supposedly Gotham-styled dining experience, but its message was not wrong: the worst had indeed come to pass. It was Saturday lunchtime at Park Row, just off Piccadilly, and despite Warner Bros’ Batman franchise being one of the best-known brands in modern civilisation, Charles and I were one of only four other tables who’d opted to eat there. Why was that, I wondered. OK, I’ll cut to the chase: I know full well, and in such vivid detail that I called my editor during my £26 main course of champagne and black truffle risotto – which smelled of silage and polythene – and demanded 3,000 or 4,000 more words to document my dismay at this bewildering, slapdash nonsense. Warner Bros seems to have sanctioned a Batman restaurant without any actual mention or sighting of Batman, and that instead offers a menu that’s costlier than The Foyer at Claridge’s and serves drab renditions of dover sole à la grenobloise for £44 that even a hedge-fund manager in an advanced state of refreshment would spot as a massive, cynical waste of money. Park Row is neither a jolly themed restaurant for children and the young at heart, nor is it a destination brasserie for tourists with dollars to burn. Rather, it is an absurdly shoddily staged sort-of Batman experience that never, ever mentions Batman. Oh, sure, Gotham’s presence lurks in cocktails called Beyond the Gates and Three Bridges, and in desserts with names like Riddle Me This (I’ll solve that riddle straight away: it’s a caramelised apple with hazelnut sablé). Still, before coming here, I’d envisaged a steroid-fuelled Hard Rock Café mated with a slick, Warner Bros theme park ride, whereas what I found was more comparable to those incredible failing grottoes that open in the UK each Christmas, where the elves smoke Marlboros behind a foam-spitting snow machine next to a donkey with conjunctivitis that makes the kids cry. The entrance to Park Row is mysteriously almost unmarked. You enter through a rather clever fake but quaint British library, then you’re chivvied down a dark, uninteresting spiral staircase, before waiting by the maître d’s desk in a restaurant called Pennyworth’s. “Pennyworth’s restaurant and bar is an undisputed art deco masterpiece and pays homage to the Wayne family’s faithful butler,” the blurb on the website says. By this point, any semblance of intrepidity and wonder had long melted away. A manager in a vaguely Gotham-themed velour outfit that seemed to have been picked off his bedroom floor an hour earlier stood with his back to us taking phone calls, while a large, fake ice sculpture of a penguin farted out dry ice. All the staff were Dignitas-level unhappy; hell, even the gang at the London Dungeon look more chipper, and they have to wear stick-on boils and tempt people in to watch reconstructed executions. Once we were finally seated, the floor staff delivered that mysterious, aforementioned letter about Oswald Cobblepot’s new restaurant. And … well, that’s it: the Batman “experience” is practically over before it’s even started, and you’re essentially left eating the worst type of cruise ship food in a cavernous room where the other diners catch your eye to share a silent scream at the £36 plates of lukewarm, undelicious fallow deer. While we ate, the staff busied themselves by noisily moving an epos terminal, until I eventually asked if now really felt like the best time for a spot of DIY, what with us having already run up a £146 bill without even ordering alcohol. “We need new space for the till,” I was informed blankly. Dessert was a take on chocolate orange cake styled in peaks and points in shades of black and called The Ruins of Gotham City. It was pre-made, dry and loveless, but it made quite a nice photograph. If I had to find one pleasant thing to say about our lunch, the £8 side of truffle mac and cheese was definitely warm and edible, which is more than can be said for the mushy, stone-cold £6 steamed broccoli that went back to the kitchen untouched. I’m not an ardent Batman fan, but I still can’t work out if I’d be more or less upset by Park Row if I were one. I did, however, spend my childhood engrossed by another superhero by the name of Scooby-Doo, who in numerous episodes turns up at a run-down theme park ready to face monsters and adventure, only to conclude, every single time, that the gang had just met some begrudging employee in a silly costume. Yikes, Scooby: same thing. • Park Row 77 Brewer Street, London W1, 020-3745 3431. Open Tues-Sat noon-1am (last orders 10.30am), Sun noon-4.30pm. About £65 a head for three courses, plus drinks and service. • Episode three of the second series of Grace’s Comfort Eating podcast is released on 9 November. Listen here or wherever you get your podcasts.Amazement, elation, worry, disappointment, derision – the announcement by India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, that the country would reach net zero carbon emissions by 2070 has provoked all kinds of reaction across the spectrum. India is the world’s fourth largest greenhouse gas polluter after China, the US and the EU. It has far lower emissions per head than the other three and already has a highly ambitious solar programme. At the same time, it depends on coal for two-thirds of its energy generation, and is projected to increase its emissions in the next couple of decades as millions move out of poverty and increase their electricity use. The contradictions make for a complicated relationship with emissions, but what is clear is that Indians are experiencing the climate crisis here and now, through more frequent and more intense storms, floods and droughts; from a rising sea that is already decimating farms along the coast and forcing people in the region to drink saltwater; from monsoon anomalies that lead to cloudbursts and therefore flash floods and landslides in the Himalayas and other mountains. As scientists from the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change have repeatedly pointed out, the world’s emissions must reach net zero by 2050 to control these crises. As part of that, India needs to curb emissions for its own sake, while it reminds rich nations of the importance of climate justice during negotiations. The announcement of its own net zero year has brought relief to the American, British and European climate diplomats who have been pushing India on this; it has elated solar and e-vehicle entrepreneurs; and it has drawn criticism from those who misread the global goal (2050) as the net zero year for every country, ignoring that rich nations – that have placed most of the extra carbon in the atmosphere – have to get there first. The net zero goal has serious critics in India, who see it as an attempt by rich nations to shift the goalposts into the future rather than act now. Sunita Narain of the Centre for Science and Environment reacted to Modi’s speech by arguing that: “OECD countries should get [to net zero] by 2030 and China by 2040.” Her argument is based on climate justice and the fundamental principle of “common but differentiated responsibilities” in the UN framework. India has been repeatedly asking developed countries to spell out their plans for this decade, and Modi outlined India’s short-term goals before he got to the net zero target in his speech at the Cop26 world leaders’ summit. The point is that India – and all countries – can demonstrate their seriousness by how they act now. Modi’s big pledge for this decade is to increase installed generation capacity using renewables to 500 gigawatts by 2030. If this is achieved, it will mean renewable energy will account for 50% of installed capacity and carbon emissions will go down by a billion tonnes. Modi’s other announcement was that India would reduce the carbon intensity of its emissions per unit of production by more than 45% by 2030, compared with 2005, something that Indian industry is on track to achieve anyway as it increases efficiency. The big question right now is where these 500GW of renewable energy will come from? India’s installed renewables capacity – excluding large hydro – crossed the 100GW mark this August, according to power minister R K Singh. India’s Central Electricity Authority earlier projected that the country’s installed generation capacity by the end of the decade would be 817GW, of which 525GW would be through non-fossil fuels. The bulk of this would be from solar (280GW), followed by wind power (140GW) and hydro (71GW). Srinivas Krishnaswamy, of the New Delhi based thinktank Vasudha Foundation, said in a statement that this target is more ambitious “than what would be achieved solely through market factors and the falling prices of renewable energy. Massive support and [a policy push] is required for carbon-free electricity standards, investments in ramping up storage capacity, improving the health of power distribution companies, grid stability, net metering etc.” As usual, when it comes to implementation, there will be many devils in the details. There is support for renewable energy across India’s political spectrum, but solar installations cannot be ramped up to the required level without installing panels on thousands and thousands of rooftops. This is lagging woefully behind schedule, firstly due to passive resistance from utility companies scared that their revenues will be affected, and secondly due to a plethora of antiquated local rules on who owns the rooftops of apartment buildings. A lot of this will come down to the actions of state governments. The other big problem will be to take along the myriad micro, small and medium factories that comprise more than 80% of India’s industrial sector. They rarely have the money or the will to invest even in efficiency measures, though they know very well they will make a saving in the long run by doing so. This sector will need many carrots, and perhaps some sticks, before it comes along. Vaibhav Chaturvedi of the Council for Energy, Environment and Water, another thinktank based in New Delhi, observed that India’s emissions will rise for at least the next two decades despite the 500 GW renewables goal, though nonetheless thinks this will be compatible with the 2070 net zero target. India’s coal use will have to peak by 2040 to meet the goal. Though, whatever happens in India, most attention will be on the EU and US. As Chaturvedi said: “The burden of action now lies on the developed world to [advance] their net zero pledges to ensure a 1.5C-compatible world.” In general, the analysts’ conclusions are that it will be tough but possible to do what India has promised – but bigger polluters need to do better. Modi also used his speech in Glasgow to reiterate that the rich world needs to keep its promises on climate finance. He not only wanted a trillion dollars a year for poor nations, but also an international monitoring system to keep track of how these promises are being kept – or how they aren’t. Joydeep Gupta is south Asia director at the Third Pole, an environmental news website focusing on the Himalayan region and South AsiaThe street space occupied by parked cars may not seem like much, but it adds up. The US has an estimated 3.4 spaces for every car. In New York City, the amount of road space reserved for parking is roughly the size of 12 Central Parks, according to one estimate, and most of the city’s 4m street parking spots are free. “The curb lane is some of the most valuable land on Earth,” said Donald Shoup, a transportation professor at the University of California, Los Angeles. “I think that’s our biggest mistake, to take some of the most valuable land on Earth and give it away, free, to cars.” Street parking doesn’t just take away space. It can inform how people get around. “Parking is one of the things that has a really powerful impact on people’s decisions whether to drive or not,” said Daniel Firth, transportation director at C40 Cities, a network of more than 100 cities around the world with ambitious climate goals. Shoup and others have found that underpriced street parking keeps people driving in cities, even in those that have good alternative transport options. More people driving means more city traffic – increasing congestion and pumping out pollution. But cities that want to price, or even convert, free street parking face obstacles – and not just from drivers. Most cities don’t have enough information about how their curbs are used, making it difficult to decide how to manage this valuable space. Companies offering curb management technology have sprung up to try to fill this gap, with promises to help cities reclaim their curbs. Their digital platforms map parking spaces and curb use around cities. Having the information in one place and being able to visualize curb spaces on a map is vital, said Peter Richards, who leads the development of software product CurbIQ at Canadian consulting company IBI Group. CurbIQ was born out of years of working on parking strategy projects for cities and realizing cities don’t have easily-accessible, digitized information about their curbs, Richards said. The endgame is to help cities reduce car numbers – along with congestion, noise, and pollution – while making better use of spaces and still meeting people’s mobility needs. The prospect of snagging a free or cheap street parking spot compared with an expensive off-street spot keeps drivers cruising, said Shoup, who has led surveys of drivers stopped at city traffic lights to ask them why they are driving. In one instance, 68% of the drivers surveyed in a Los Angeles neighborhood were cruising for a parking spot. The availability of free street parking can also inflate car ownership. A study of the four biggest cities in the Netherlands, found that higher parking costs in city centres accounted for about 30% of the lower car ownership rates compared with the outskirts. “You can reduce car ownership quite significantly by making parking more expensive or by reducing the amount of parking you build,” said Jacob Baskin, the co-founder of Coord, an NYC-based curb management company. And there is data to show city residents may prefer less parking. A survey of London residents found that their top choice for using curb space was to plant trees, Shoup said. Parking ranked fifth. One of the first steps that CurbIQ and Coord do for cities is to lay out digitized information about the existing permitted uses of curbs on a map – usually by driving around and using machine vision software to capture the street signs – forming the foundation of a city’s curb management platform. “It’s a lot easier to make decisions and plan when you have all this information together,” said Richards. During Covid, the political barriers to reclaiming curb spaces from free street parking were removed, said Maya Ben Dror, who leads transportation at the World Economic Forum. Commuters started working from home, freeing up parking spaces. Meanwhile, restaurants and other businesses needed outdoor space in cities. That allowed curb management companies to really grow during the pandemic, she said. Cities used Coord’s platform, said Baskin, to figure out “here’s where we have space where we think we can repurpose, to either be restaurant seating or pickup and drop-off space, in ways that will benefit the city”. During the summer of 2021, IBI staff used CurbIQ’s software to help the City of Toronto launch its CafeTO program that allowed restaurants to set up patios on appropriate curb space – identifying those far enough away from fire hydrants, traffic intersections or transit stops. Having a map of curb spaces and their regulations helped the city move quickly, said Richards. Coord is working with cities such as Aspen, Colorado, to designate smart zones – curb spaces reserved for gig and delivery drivers to book through an app when they are approaching their destinations. Home deliveries and ride-shares continue to rise in popularity and drivers need temporary curb space to complete pick ups and drop offs safely. When free street parking dominates, drivers either have to circle around the neighborhood looking for parking or simply double park, holding up traffic, increasing pollution, and endangering pedestrians and bicyclists. “Double parking can really snag up traffic,” said Baskin. “People hate it.” Smart zones could help cities manage the competition for curb space among these drivers and ease congestion from their cruising, said Ben Dror. Both Coord and CurbIQ are working to quantify the tangible benefits, such as reduced emissions. Many businesses will reflexively object to the conversion of free parking spaces in front of their shops, fearing a loss of customers. But often, business owners overestimate how much their customers are arriving by car, said Firth. A study in Seattle found that sales revenue increased 5.4% among downtown restaurants after paid parking hours were extended, Richards said, because more customers were coming and going. “Instinctively, everyone’s like if you got rid of free parking, our business will die. That is wrong,” he said. Street parking is so ubiquitous that converting it feels like a loss. It is a powerful psychology that makes many resistant to the idea, said Firth. “We value the loss of something much greater than the gain of something else.” The patios, parklets, and bike lanes that took over street parking spaces during the pandemic has shown the possible uses of a city curb other than to store empty cars. “There’s been this little space where we can demonstrate, first of all, the loss of the parking was maybe not as bad as people thought, and the gain of the patio was way better than people thought it would be,” Firth said. Converting space could also help cities move more efficiently and more sustainably, said Ben Dror. Cars travelling on a single 10-ft-wide lane move about 1,600 people an hour in cities, whereas converting the same lane to a protected, two-way bike lane, for instance, would allow 7,500 people to get around. A lane delineated for transit, whether for buses or trains, could move 8,000 people an hour, she said. “If we were to use a lane, which is a public space, more efficiently, we would seek to use it for something that is healthier for people and for the air.” Any efforts that help us shift away from driving and towards shared and active modes of transport such as walking, biking, scooting, or public transit are key to tackling the climate crisis, said Ben Dror. Making systemic changes in the way we get around could help prevent an additional million tons of carbon emissions a year by 2050, on top of those saved by electrifying vehicles, she said. And as the time that we have left to limit climate change effectively dwindles, every ton of greenhouse gas that we don’t emit counts.The second audio instalment of Neil Gaiman’s Sandman, the mind-bending DC series deemed “a comic strip for intellectuals” by Norman Mailer, is as close to an audiobook blockbuster as they come, and wisely arrives ahead of next year’s Netflix series. Listeners are once again plunged into the Dreaming to get reacquainted with the goth-tastic Morpheus, AKA the Lord of Dreams (James McAvoy), who is rebuilding his nocturnal kingdom after a period of incarceration. He is joined by a stellar cast including Andy Serkis as Matthew the Raven; Brian Cox as Augustus; Kat Dennings as Death; Emma Corrin as Thessaly; and Regé-Jean Page as Orpheus. Gaiman, who has adapted the comics with the help of audio supremo Dirk Maggs, takes on the role of Narrator, his voice drifting between menace and glee. The first chapter opens with a vision of the Garden of Destiny, a place “distinct from time and space where the potential becomes the actual”. With great solemnity, Morpheus announces he must abandon his motley subjects in order to return to hell to rescue a queen, Nada, who he cruelly consigned to thousands of years of imprisonment. In doing so he will come face to face with his arch enemy, Lucifer, voiced with suitable relish by Michael Sheen. As the story unfolds, new realms are revealed and scores of new characters arrive played variously by Aidan Turner, Adrian Lester, Paterson Joseph and Siân Phillips. This is a spectacular ensemble piece that, aided by smart sound design and an atmospheric soundtrack, will truly occupy your dreams. • The Sandman: Act II is available on Audible, 13hr 47min. Further Listening A Carnival of Snackery David Sedaris, Hachette Audio, 17hr 8min The American essayist deploys his customary dark humour and comic timing in the audio version of his second book of diaries. Apples Never Fall Liane Moriarty, Penguin Audio, 18hr 4min The Australian actor Caroline Lee reads the latest mystery from the Big Little Lies author in which a woman goes missing, prompting her family to unravel.Howdie-Skelp by Paul Muldoon (Faber, £14.99) Very few poets, living or otherwise, can combine high-speed wit, tongue-twisting alliteration and dizzying rhyme with the kind of insight that makes us pause, laugh, remember; feel envious, out of breath, punch-drunk. In Howdie-Skelp, Paul Muldoon summons the ghosts of TS Eliot and Dante to tell stories about our splintered realities, where the wasteland is everywhere and nowhere and Virgil is an immigrant waiter offering overpriced steak tartare. With cheeky poignancy and almost biblical satirical force, Muldoon captures the arrhythmia of our times, touching on voter suppression in the US, the killers of Jamal Khashoggi, the hopelessness of the two-party political system, and arguments about a united Ireland. With their elongated lines and expansive forms, often cast in sequences or variations, the poems feed on memories triggered by the news, TV binge-watching, ruins, damsons, or Robert Frost’s apples. They also flirt outrageously with paintings, translating the perverse and macabre into luminous commentaries on our desires and taboos. The book ends with 15 mutating sonnets about the rich absurdity of our pandemic lives and a new state of existential confusion. Oak by Katharine Towers (Picador, £10.99) Andrew Marvell, the Renaissance poet of green thoughts and green shades, would have liked Katharine Towers’ third collection. Perhaps John Keats and John Clare would too, though Keats might have been wary of the book’s structural predictability and Clare of its narrative ambition. Nevertheless, Many of us will find delight in Towers’ playful concoction, paying homage to love songs, ballads, hymns, gossip, nonsense and children’s verse, among other lyric forms. Questions of poetic legacy and arboreal heritage run deep in Oak. Echoing Shakespeare’s seven ages of man, the book’s sections tell the life story of an oak – the infant, schoolboy, lover, soldier, justice, pantaloon, old man – and are narrated like fables with a lyrical friskiness that is eye-catching, though occasionally hackneyed. Mostly unpunctuated, the poems are heavily invested in metaphor and simile (“like” being a populous word). Towers has a natural gift for playing out the tension between personifying and de-personifying nature. Her unabashedly descriptive poems evoke the private and public life of the oak, speaking with “a quirk of the tongue / which can’t help curling”. Amnion by Stephanie Sy-Quia (Granta, £10.99) If memory provides the architecture of stories, how do we build a house from ruins? Stephanie Sy-Quia’s debut, Amnion, is a bold reconstruction. A kaleidoscopic memoir and familial elegy, it is also an interracial, intercultural love letter to the past, built around individual people, architecture and museum objects. “Hacked of your origins to be enshrined in this museum I have made / a cathedral for all my colonialisms”, the speaker announces. In a sense Amnion is a familiar detective story about migration, multiple origins, and the traumas and possibilities of dislocation; part of the current diasporic literature haunted by hosts of trans-generational ghosts. Nonetheless, the book has a structural intransigence that makes it memorable. Juxtaposing the lyrical with the prosaic, Sy-Quia excavates private life and public arenas with the dexterity and precision of a genealogical investigator. Hers is a voice of a meandering seeker, tracing scraps of memory and elusive objects in Paris, Manila, Munich, Sheffield, Rome, Tripoli, Myanmar, Barcelona ... If some moments seem laboured, forcing lines and paragraphs to coalesce against the grain, there is no doubt Sy-Quia has written a powerful, hybrid song charged with ferocity and fragility. New and Selected Poems by Ian Duhig (Picador, £14.99) Duhig is one of our most engagingly maverick poets, with a magical gift for storytelling. Always historically, socially and humanly grounded, and generously eclectic in his embrace, he harnesses the transformative power of oral history to throw light on an unpredictable spectrum of different peoples, religions, anecdotes, jokes and social and racial injustices. He is never showy, maintaining the fine balance between truth and disguise central to art. There is tenderness in his serious humour, whether he is writing about string vests, hemophobia, goths or plagues. Like Tennyson or Browning, Duhig is a master of the dramatic monologue, stretching the first person to contain multitudes. He has a seance-like ability to enter a speaker’s mind and translate their voice across centuries, cultures and languages, whether it is a Japanese geisha or a curse tablet in a Roman bath. The book showcases his virtuosic mastery of sonnets, couplets, folk songs, rosaries, charms, satires, elegies and more, and confirms Duhig as a dazzling etymological conjurer who helps us reconnect with our words and worlds: “With such ink, a pen feathers; / a quill puns itself into a swan.” • Kit Fan’s latest poetry collection is As Slow As Possible (Arc) and his debut novel is Diamond Hill (Dialogue).The British Transport Police has apologised to the British black community for the trauma caused by the actions of a former officer involved in at least two serious miscarriages of justice involving young black people. In a letter sent to black civil rights activists, Lucy D’Orsi, the force’s chief constable, insisted the actions of DS Derek Ridgewell, who played a key role in the convictions of the Stockwell Six and the Oval Four, did “not define the BTP of today”. D’Orsi said she was also keen to explore a proposal, suggested by activists, that the BTP establish a bursary for black students to study criminology or law at university, and promised to “actively aim” recruitment efforts towards British black communities in an effort to build a force that better reflects the public. The Oval Four were a group of young black men who were framed by Ridgewell and accused of carrying out muggings on the underground in London. It took nearly 50 years for all four men to have their convictions squashed. Ridgewell was also behind the conviction of the Stockwell Six, who were accused of attempting to rob on the underground. Two men involved could have convictions overturned. “On behalf of the British Transport Police (BTP), I am sincerely sorry for the trauma suffered by the British African community through the criminal actions of former police officer DS Derek Ridgewell, who worked in BTP during the 1960s and 70s,” D’Orsi wrote. “In particular, it is of regret that we did not act sooner to end his criminalisation of British Africans, which led to the conviction of innocent people. This is simply inexcusable and is something that my colleagues and I are appalled by.” The apology was welcomed by Winston Trew, one of the Oval Four who was wrongfully convicted in 1972 for attempted theft and assaulting police. “I welcome the apology from the BTP to the British black community who were targeted with false convictions,” he said. “It’s a public acknowledgement that something dreadful went wrong in the 1970s.” Trew also welcomed the proposal to create a bursary, but disagreed with the suggestion that increasing diversity was the solution going forward. “You cannot recruit new people into a broken system, the system needs to change, so the public can have confidence in the police and want to become police officers and have a conducive environment to work in. Inclusion is not the solution.” The apology was solicited by Kwaku, a history consultant and historical musicologist, as part of a seminar series he has been running on police and the criminalisation of black British youths. He stipulated the apology should be addressed to the “British African community”, a term he said was a more appropriate description of the group than “black British”. Kwaku’s approach caused the BTP to further reflect on the criminal actions Ridgewell had taken 45 years ago and the organisation believed it to be a opportunity to set out the chief constable’s position. “We knew that the BTP has issued an apology in each case,” he said. “But we thought it’s not enough to issue an apology to the individual victims, they have to recognise that the British African community was terrorised and have suffered from the trauma caused by these racist cops, from the terror in the 1970s and 80s.” The apology will be read out in a discussion led by Kwaku and Cecil Gutzmore, a black community activist, at the Police and the Criminalising of British African Youths by Numbers Zoom meeting on 8 November. A spokesperson for Black Lives Matter UK said: “This is simply not enough. While the BTP’s proposed bursary will benefit a small number of people, it ultimately doesn’t change the daily discriminatory practices of the force.” According to a study of official data, young black males in London were 19 times more likely to be stopped and searched than the general population. The spokesperson added: “What we need is not more black officers carrying out the same racist harassment and violence against black communities. We need an end to stop and search and we need to create conditions in which black communities can thrive, free from poverty and violence.”You might think, given the events of the last year and a half, that the dystopian disaster genre really ought to be dead in a ditch – don’t we all, as Black Mirror’s Charlie Brooker has suggested, need something a bit more cheery to get us through the long, cold winter? If so, Roland Emmerich clearly didn’t get the memo. For the German film-maker is back with yet another story of the Earth’s imminent collapse, Moonfall, centred on mysterious catastrophic events that appear to be linked to our sleeping satellite. A strange sense of deja vu accompanies the movie’s new trailer, released earlier this week. Stop me if you think that you’ve heard this one before, but didn’t humanity’s home also suffer from catastrophic events (caused by an alien invasion) in 1996’s Independence Day? And didn’t something similar happen in 2004’s The Day After Tomorrow (caused this time by extreme weather?) Then there was Emmerich’s film 2012, in which that year’s catastrophic events were just to do with the fact that it was ... well ... 2012. Might Emmerich have somehow found himself transported to an old episode of the Twilight Zone, in which he is somehow trapped in the creative equivalent of a Möbius strip? To be fair, he has, in the past decade, embarked on a mission to make movies that do not follow exactly the same basic plot each time, trotting out the terrorist thriller White House Down, the gay rights drama Stonewall and the wartime tale Midway among others. But nobody buys tickets to see an Emmerich film unless they can be confident it is going to feature at least a few scenes of overturning cars, world-famous American buildings collapsing and giant tsunamis. So it’s no surprise that he has returned to his first love – epic CGI mega-destruction. The only question is whether there is anything original left for him to posit as the source of humankind’s imminent annihilation. The Moonfall trailer picks up on the kind of sci-fi conspiracy theory silliness that inspired Independence Day, in which it turns out that Area 51 really is home to the remains of dead extraterrestrials (presumably from an earlier scout mission preceding the later mass attack). Donald Sutherland seems to think something very funny was going on with the moon landings, so perhaps it will be aliens again. Either way, it would be fair to say that Emmerich is doubling down when it comes to far-out space nonsense: it appears that the moon has been hollowed out and filled with spectacular tech by unknown forces. (Then again, this is the guy who taught us that the ancient Egyptians trained woolly mammoths to help them build the pyramids in 10,000 BC.) Has Jeff Bezos upset the Earth’s gravitational pull by secretly moving all his Amazon warehouses into space to avoid the pesky taxman? Or is this some 2001: A Space Odyssey-style discovery of impossibly advanced extraterrestrial technology on our doorstep? We won’t find out until February, when Moonfall hits cinemas – but let’s face it, we can probably predict the main details of the film based on previous experience of Emmerich disaster movies: the White House will almost certainly get blown up again (he has also destroyed the Statue of Liberty at least twice), there will be not-so subtle criticism of US political and military supremacy, and the whole thing will feature more scientific inaccuracies than the average issue of Anti-Vaxxer Weekly. It just wouldn’t be an Emmerich flick if the script wasn’t sillier than a moon rocket made from cheese. Yet this is a film-maker whose movies have made a staggering $3bn worldwide, and is listed as the 15th highest-grossing director of all time. All of which rather suggests that it’s us, the great popcorn-munching, film-going public, who might just be the dumb ones.The carbon dioxide emissions of the richest 1% of humanity are on track to be 30 times greater than what is compatible with keeping global heating below 1.5C, new research warns, as scientists urge governments to “constrain luxury carbon consumption” of private jets, megayachts and space travel. In keeping with the Paris climate goals, every person on Earth needs to reduce their CO2 emissions to an average of 2.3 tonnes by 2030, about half the average of today. The richest 1% – which is a population smaller than Germany – are on track to be releasing 70 tonnes of CO2 per person a year if current consumption continues, according to the study. In total they will account for 16% of total emissions by 2030, up from 13% of emissions in 1990. Meanwhile, the poorest 50% will be releasing an average of one tonne of CO2 annually. “A tiny elite appear to have a free pass to pollute,” said Nafkote Dabi, climate policy lead at Oxfam, which commissioned the study by the Institute for European Environmental Policy (IEEP) and the Stockholm Environment Institute (SEI). “Their oversized emissions are fuelling extreme weather around the world and jeopardising the international goal of limiting global heating,” she said. The research comes as global leaders gather in Cop26 to discuss ways to curb emissions and keep the 1.5C target on the table, with a number of delegates arriving at the climate conference by private jet, including Boris Johnson, Prince Charles and Jeff Bezos. The charity is urging the richest citizens to speed up action on global heating by cutting their own CO2 emissions in line with Paris targets, and using their influence and financial backing to drive a green economy. Jamie Livingstone, the head of Oxfam Scotland, said Cop26 was a “moment of truth in the fight against climate change”. He said: “Global leaders must agree ways to curb excessive emissions and limit global heating and they must do it here and now in Glasgow. Delay costs lives.” Earlier this year Sir Richard Branson went to the edge of space in his Virgin Galactic Rocket, and Elon Musk’s company promises to take humans to Mars. The emissions from a single 11-minute space flight amount to at least 75 tonnes, which would exceed the lifetime emissions of one of the poorest billion people on Earth. The paper shows that the fight to keep 1.5C within reach is not being hampered by the consumption of most people on the planet, but by the excessive emissions of the world’s richest citizens, said Tim Gore, author of the briefing and head of the low-CO2 and circular economy programme at the IEEP. Even the total emissions produced by the richest 10% could be sufficient to exceed the amount allocated for keeping within the 1.5C targets by 2030 – regardless of what the other 90% of the population does. Gore said: “To close the emissions gap by 2030, it is necessary for governments to target measures at their richest, highest emitters – the climate and inequality crises should be tackled together. That includes both measures to constrain luxury carbon consumption like megayachts, private jets and space travel, and to curb climate-intensive investments like stock-holdings in fossil fuel industries.” • This article was amended on 12 November 2021. An earlier version mentioned and pictured the Blue Origin rocket New Shephard. However, this is fuelled by liquid oxygen and liquid hydrogen rather than carbon-based fuel. The main image has been changed, and the reference in the text removed.The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, has accepted the government committed errors in its attempt to save the former minister Owen Paterson from suspension, but denied the debacle called into question the prime minister’s judgment. In a broadcast round, Zahawi accepted it was a “mistake” to try to link overhauling the standards system that had found Paterson guilty of paid advocacy with a parliamentary attempt to preventing him facing the punishment of suspension. He admitted to not reading the standards committee’s report into Paterson’s conduct before voting in favour of overhauling the system. Speaking to Sky News, he said: “The prime minister has always been very clear that paid lobbying is not allowed. The mistake is the conflation of creating a fairer system with the right of appeal for parliamentarians to be able to put forward an appeal process. “Conflating that with the particular case of Owen Paterson was a mistake and I think the leader of the house, Jacob Rees-Mogg, came to the house yesterday … upon reflection, yes it was a mistake, and I think it was right to come back very quickly to the house and say we need to separate these things out.” Paterson resigned as MP for North Shropshire after the government ditched its plan to set up a new standards panel. On BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Friday, Zahawi denied Johnson was trying to head off a potential investigation by the standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, into the financing of the decoration of his Downing Street flat. Zahawi said it was “absolutely not true” that the new system that the government was forced to ditch was a “pre-emptive strike” against Stone. He said: “That is absolutely not true, and Kathryn Stone and her duties are the responsibility of the House of Commons, and the Speaker of the House.” Zahawi also defended his cabinet colleague Kwasi Kwarteng over his suggestion on Thursday that Stone should consider her position. Before the U-turn over the new committee to examine Paterson’s case, Kwarteng said Stone should “decide [on] her position”. Zahawi told Sky: “I don’t think Kwasi was saying anything different that Kathryn Stone has a responsibility to the legislature.” He added: “I think it’s important to remind all parliamentarians and the country as a whole that Kathryn Stone works for the house, for the legislature, and I think it’s only right that I echo the words of the Speaker by saying that it is up to the house how the commissioner and the procedures are delivered.” He admitted on BBC Breakfast to not reading Stone’s report into Paterson, and appeared to take on trust his colleague’s claims of innocence. “Owen says that much of it is contested, right?” he said. Referring to supportive witness statements published in the report, Zahawi added: “I think something like 14 people have sent statements [saying] that it is contested.” Zahawi reiterated the government’s determination to change the system, but with cross-party support. He said: “The important thing to remember is that parliament as the legislative chamber of our country has absolutely the right to look at and improve the system.” Zahawi said the issue of the Downing Street flat had been looked at by Johnson’s own ministerial standards adviser, Lord Geidt, “and the prime minister was found not to have broken any ministerial code”. He added: “I think it was looked at by Lord Geidt, it’s a ministerial declaration and I think that’s the correct way of doing this. We have very good robust processes. We always want to improve them, but I think that’s the correct way of doing it.” He also denied that the government’s handling of Paterson’s case called into question Johnson’s judgment. “I think actually it says that the prime minister, when wanting to be following a process that makes the system fairer … wanted to do that. “And very quickly realising that that’s one thing that we should pursue on a cross-party basis and we’ll come forward with proposals, and I hope, we can sort of set our politics aside and create a fairer system, because right of appeal, I think, is important, and your listeners will see that as important.” Zahawi avoided questions about whether Paterson had breached the parliamentary code. Asked on Sky News whether he believed his colleague did anything wrong, Zahawi said: “The commissioner had investigated and had come back on the investigation around what Owen Paterson was doing in terms of his work for two companies.” On the government’s U-turn, he said: “We have to take collective responsibility as parliamentarians. It’s a process that parliamentarians voted for.”George Harrison’s childhood home, where the Beatles played early rehearsals, is to go up for auction this month with an estimated price of between £160,000 and £200,000. The three-bedroom terraced house at 25 Upton Green in the Liverpool suburb of Speke has been renovated but still has some of the features when Harrison lived there, including the original bath, sink, and outbuildings. The Harrison family moved there in 1949 when George was six, and stayed for 12 years. It was Harrison’s base as he made his first forays into music. Having met Paul McCartney on the bus to their school, Liverpool Institute High School for Boys, he later successfully auditioned for Lennon and McCartney’s skiffle group, the Quarrymen. Various photos depict the band, who would soon become the Beatles, at the Upton Green house. Paul Fairweather of Merseyside firm Omega Auctions said it was “truly an honour” to be hosting the sale. “George will have learned to play the guitar in this house and the photos of the group gathering there in the early 1960s are amazing,” he said. Viewings are by appointment in the two weeks before the 30 November auction. Alongside various Beatles autographs, photographs and other ephemera, a more portable item of memorabilia is on offer in the same sale: a letter from manager Brian Epstein rejecting an offer from Decca Records in February 1962. The band auditioned for the label the previous month but were rejected, with label executives reasoning that “guitar groups are on the way out” and “the Beatles have no future in showbusiness”. This letter confirms that Decca did make a subsequent offer to the band, but that it was rejected by Epstein, who claims in the letter that the band have had an offer from another label. However, it was days later that Parlophone’s George Martin would offer the group a contract, “so Epstein’s claim of another offer of a recording contract was untrue and likely the result of a wounded pride following the initial Decca rejection”, according to the auction listing. The letter is expected to sell for between £2,000 and £4,000.Good morning. The main Russian source behind Christopher Steele’s dossier on Donald Trump and Moscow has been arrested, the justice department has said. Igor Danchenko, the analyst who was the chief source behind the explosive allegation that Trump was compromised on a trip to Moscow in November 2013, has been accused of repeatedly lying to the FBI in 2017. The charges come amid an investigation by John Durham, who was appointed by the former president to investigate the origins of the FBI’s investigation into links between the Trump campaign and Russia. What were the allegations? Danchenko claimed that Trump may have been covertly filmed with sex workers during his Moscow trip, putting him at risk of blackmail. Is Danchenko the first arrest? No. The analyst is the third person, and second within two months, to face indictment. What are the charges? The FBI accuses Danchenko of fabricating the conversation understood to be behind the claim that Trump watched sex workers urinate on each other at the Moscow hotel. He is also accused of including information from a Democrat-linked PR executive in the dossier and concealing its source. A lawyer for Danchenko had no immediate comment. Two killed in shootout on Cancún beach by luxury hotel Tourists near the Mexican resort city of Cancún fled into a luxury hotel after a gang shooting on the beach erupted on Thursday, killing two men. State officials described the shooting as a confrontation between drug dealers at the Hyatt Ziva in Puerto Morelos, just south of Cancún. No tourists were seriously hurt or taken hostage, officials said. Fifteen armed men stormed the beach on Thursday, killing “presumed” drug dealers, local media reported, while the tourists, who had been playing volleyball and swimming, ran into the hotel. The incident comes just two weeks after a Californian blogger and a German tourist were killed in the nearby beach resort of Tulum during a shootout between suspected gang members. Telling a New Jersey cop you have Covid could get you 10 years in prison A woman arrested in New Jersey has been hit with a potentially disastrous terrorism charge after she was accused of coughing “in close proximity” to officers and telling them she had Covid. Deja Lewis, 28, is one of at least 45 people landed with the charge, which could result in a 10-year prison sentence and leave her with a $150,000 fine – a penalty made available under state of emergency laws. Are people still being charged? The last pandemic-related terrorism charge was last December, according to the attorney general’s office. Is New Jersey unique? No – but with nearly four dozen people hit with terrorism charges, it could be the state with the most intense campaign to criminalize threats of Covid transmission. In other news … McDonald’s chief executive, Chris Kempczinski, has triggered anger after appearing to blame the parents of two children who were shot dead. In a text exchange with the Chicago mayor, Lori Lightfoot, obtained via a freedom of information request, Kempczinski said: “The parents failed those kids which I know is something you can’t say.” Natalie Wood was sexually assaulted as a teen by Kirk Douglas, her younger sister has written in a memoir. Lana Wood remembers that her sister and their mother agreed that publicly accusing him would ruin Natalie’s career. Greece has been accused of the biggest illegal pushback in years after a cargo ship carrying 382 migrants was towed across the seas for four days before the coastguard was forced into a rescue. Stat of the day: Zillow lost over $300m in recent months Property website Zillow has been utilizing an algorithm to help it buy and flip properties – only the selling hasn’t gone so well. The site’s home-buying division, Offers, has lost more than $300m in the last few months. After moving the company into the nascent field of “iBuying” in 2018, CEO Richard Barton at one stage aimed to buy 5,000 homes a month by 2024. Instead, Offers will be closed, leaving 2,000 out of work, while 7,000 houses still need to be sold – many at a loss. Don’t miss this: Andrew Garfield on playing heroic characters, mushroom trips and self-awareness From a Jesuit priest in Silence to a Seventh-day Adventist in Hacksaw Ridge, Andrew Garfield has almost always found himself playing “heroic, altruistic, champion-of-the-light kinds of characters”. Does any malevolence lurk behind the actor and his string of angelic performances? He’s unsure. “I think we are vastly unknowable unless we meditate 18 hours a day and/or go on mushroom trips to discover all the nooks and crannies of ourselves,” Garfield tells Ryan Gilbey. Climate check: richest 1% will account for 16% of total emissions by 2030 The CO2 emissions of the world’s richest 1% are set to be 30 times higher than what is compatible with keeping global heating below 1.5C, new research has warned. A group of people smaller in number than the population of Germany are on track to release 70 tonnes of CO2 each per a year – despite personal emissions needing to fall to an average of 2.3 tonnes by 2030. Last Thing: meet the world’s best Tetris player It all started when Michael Artiaga, then eight, and his older brother Andy, found their dad’s Nintendo Game Boy on a shelf in his closet full of 1970s video games. After the brothers, who learned to code at the age of five, watched the Classic Tetris world championship on YouTube, they were hooked – and went on to compete against each other for the top prize. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe backstage heroes of the West End of London have been documented by the photographer Rankin in an exhibition of portraits celebrating the resilience and creative range of the theatre industry. Stage managers, technicians, front of house, wardrobe, wigs, sound design, puppeteers and stage door keepers are among those featuring in Performance, alongside stars, directors and producers. “Everyone working in theatre has a story to tell of their experience over the past 18 months, inspiring tales of hardship, perseverance, patience, innovation, despair and joy,” Rankin said. The project, supported by the Society of London Theatre, aimed to “celebrate the jewel in the crown of our unparalleled culture sector – epitomised by these countless faces and voices who make up the backbone of London’s theatre community and will spearhead its post-Covid recovery”. Proceeds from Performance will go to the Theatre Artists Fund and London youth homelessness charities. Dario Cacioppo – dresser, Les Misérables We prepare the costumes and help the actors in and out of them at ridiculous speeds, often in the dark with a head torch. Some productions use a lot of Velcro and poppers, but in Les Mis, there’s a lot of buttons and corsets, and jiggers – like a male corset – in the back of trousers and waistcoats. You’re a cog in a giant wheel. It takes every single person to make sure everything runs smoothly. And it gives you adrenaline and excitement – every night is a brand new experience and the audience will only ever see that one performance. I wish the audience could see what goes on backstage, it’s like a whole show with its own plots in itself. Ben Hart – magic consultant, Magic Goes Wrong I began as a performing magician, but started inventing my own tricks. And in the world of magic, it doesn’t take long before word gets out. I develop material, design props, organise the building of the props, coach actors who are not magicians, and deal with the technical requirements of integrating the magic into the set and lighting design. The average member of the public would be shocked if they saw what a complicated machine backstage is, and what extreme precision it takes to run a show. I’m sad the audience can’t see this beautiful ballet unfolding backstage as well as on stage. Alice Afflick-Mensah – deputy head of sound, Hamilton I studied music technology at uni, but I had no idea what to do. A friend working in it said go and look at the theatre business and do some work experience, and I haven’t looked back since. We come in a few hours before the cast to do a full soundcheck. We make sure all the microphones, speakers and other equipment are working. During the show, we control how much of the music and how much of the cast you hear. No one really notices until something goes wrong. And then they realise there’s an actual person taking care of the sound. Backstage we are a huge team. We all work to make the show happen. Tinuke Craig – director, the Old Vic I’m the oldest of lots of children and I used to make them put on shows, so I guess I started early. Now there’s no typical day. I might be reading plays or working with designers or mentoring young people. Other times, you’re in rehearsals – that’s the best bit, the most creative. I always forget how hard a show was the second it finishes. Lockdown was really tough and we all panicked about how we were going to survive: 70% of our industry are freelancers. But the mad treadmill disappeared – which would have been liberating if we weren’t so worried about actually eating. Sylvia Addison – orchestral manager, Phantom of the Opera (also works on Mary Poppins and Les Mis) My job is to book musicians for West End pit orchestras and then manage them day to day. Now we have all the Covid-related administration to contend with which makes a lot of extra work. The musicians do a lateral flow test daily and if someone tests positive, we have to get someone else in. A live orchestra is essential for a show. It’s there to support the stage. Pit orchestras are made up of very good musicians, but they’re different animals to actors. It’s about the music, not the glory. Liz Flint – voice coach, Matilda the Musical Mainly, I look after the voices of the children and adults in the cast, teaching them vocal techniques and how to keep up their vocal stamina. Audibility, articulation, clarity, projection, singing techniques. I teach them everything about their voices because they lead our show. Children are sponges, they take on information remarkably quickly, it’s so rewarding. People think children are magically able to speak on stage, and be heard and understood. But there’s an awful lot that’s happening underneath those ducks swimming on that lake. Pat Mitchell – stage door keeper, The Mousetrap I look after the backstage area, seeing to the needs of the actors and some of the staff, handling mail, looking after keys, making sure there’s good harmony. I try not to come into work in a bad mood. Don’t get me wrong, I don’t put on a clown face and perform. But once they step through the stage door, whatever stress they’ve been having, they can be in the right frame of mind to get on with their job and enjoy it. I’ve worked in theatre for a very long time – as a stagehand, and I’ve done box office; I’ve worked in wardrobe. I love working in theatre, and I feel appreciated. Performance is at the Fujifilm House of Photography, London, until 31 January.Eddie Howe could well have been appointed but may not be the man in charge against Brighton as Graeme Jones is expected to continue as caretaker. The former Bournemouth manager would get a boost if his new side can overcome an abysmal record of no wins in eight top-flight meetings against Albion. Graham Potter was delighted with Brighton’s comeback draw at Anfield last week and will feel this is the perfect opportunity for his burgeoning side to get back to winning ways after five without tasting victory. Graham Searles Saturday 5.30pm BT Sport 1 Venue American Express Community Stadium Last season Brighton 3 Newcastle 0 Referee David Coote This season G5 Y25 R1 5.2 cards/game Odds H 4-7 A 9-2 D 3-1 BRIGHTON Subs from Steele, Connolly, Sarmiento, Lamptey, Mac Allister, Scherpen, Richards, Maupay, Webster, Burn Doubtful Burn (knee), Richards (back), Connolly (heel) Injured Alzate (ankle, Jan), Welbeck (hamstring, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y26 R0 Form WDDDLD Leading scorer Maupay 4 NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Gillespie, Schär, Lewis, Joelinton, Murphy, Hendrick, Gayle, Anderson, White, Fernández, Willock Doubtful None Injured None Suspended None Discipline Y26 R1 Form DDLLDL Leading scorer Wilson 4Richard Ratcliffe no longer feels hunger pangs, as long as nobody mentions food. Even so, his inanition has left him feeling increasingly weak, dulling his mind and senses as he begins to retreat into himself to focus on the task of survival. It is the 13th day of his hunger strike on Friday, sleeping in near-freezing temperatures in a pop-up tent pitched opposite the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO), fortified by his clear sense of purpose. He needs the government to understand that “this is not a stunt”, but rather “a warning shot”. He will continue until there is acknowledgment that ministers need to act fast to spare his wife, the British-Iranian aid worker Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, from another year in a Tehran prison after completing a five-year sentence on the spying charges she has always denied. The pair’s daughter Gabriella, seven, is being cared for at the family home by Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s brother. The question of when to stop is difficult. He knows that after 25 days he will cause his body permanent damage. He is sleeping 10 hours a night, struggling to recuperate from a lack of sustenance. The last time he went on hunger strike, outside the Iranian embassy in 2019, he managed 15 days, which is the estimated threshold for making a subsequent full recovery. That was in June, and he was joined by 100 sympathisers, creating what he describes as “almost a carnival feel”. This time it is November, he is flanked each night by only two family members or friends – and yet he is determined to go on for longer. “It’s more visceral this time around. It’s smaller, darker, more pointed. I’m saying things I wouldn’t have said two years ago,” he told the Guardian. His extreme action is prompted by his disillusionment with the government’s handling of his wife’s case, and the “real drift” he has observed since Boris Johnson became prime minister. “The policy is one of managed waiting, waiting for Iran to do the right thing, for a diplomatic solution. There is no strategy to get Naz home, which I said very bluntly to [the foreign secretary] Liz Truss last week. That’s why I’m camping on the street, because after five and a half years that’s really clear.” He is especially frustrated that Iran’s vice-president is being “wined and dined” by ministers at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow. “I promised the Foreign Office […] I would find a way to rain on that parade. It’s the complicity, pretending the world can just go on as normal.” Ratcliffe’s greatest frustration is the government’s reluctance to acknowledge an obvious solution to Nazanin’s plight: paying the £400m debt owed from a tank order made by the Iranian government, which the UK admits it never delivered after the revolution in 1979 ushered in a new theocratic regime. “It’s perfectly clear that Nazanin isn’t coming home until they pay that debt. That’s a matter of conscience at a certain point, not politics or law,” he said. Ratcliffe has sensed in recent months that his case is no longer prioritised by the FCDO. Where once it was “considered a prime-ministerial matter”, he is now fobbed off with meetings with junior ministers. He was given a slot with Truss thanks to the hunger strike, but left feeling “deflated and dumbfounded” by the lack of direction. He believes Zaghari-Ratcliffe’s case has been folded in with a number of other geopolitical issues, including a nuclear deal with Iran brokered by the US, and is being used as “leverage to curry favour” ahead of a US-UK trade deal. Placards propped around the campsite outline key demands for the government. One reads: “Choose to keep your promise, choose to pay your debts, choose to free your citizens or continue choosing to avoid responsibility.” Another urges the UK government to “punish the perpetrators” and to “commit to end state hostage-taking” in the Iran nuclear deal negotiations. Yet the atmosphere around the small encampment is cheering. The tents are festooned with fairy lights and surrounded by lit pumpkins carved by schoolchildren, along with the remnants of daytime crafting sessions. These include painted stones (intended to echo Boris Johnson’s erstwhile pledge to “leave no stone unturned”), pennants scrawled with messages of support and a patchwork quilt woven by Amnesty International supporters. Ratcliffe, an accountant by trade, is praised for his dedication and resolve throughout the day by a steady stream of well-wishers, including MPs, FCDO employees visiting in a personal capacity, and celebrities including Bill Bailey, Claudia Winkleman, Shappi Khorsandi and Victoria Coren Mitchell. He spends most of his time talking to people and doing media work to raise the profile of the case. He is supported by a small army of dedicated volunteers, marshalled by his sister, Rebecca, a GP who gives him health advice. There is a sense of community around the cause – one volunteer who hands out homemade badges describes herself as a “groupie”. Others bring deliveries of tea (no milk or sugar), electrolytes and hot-water bottles. He is working closely with the families of other British-Iranian detainees in Iran, notably the children of Anoosheh Ashoori, who join him some nights. “There’s strength in numbers,” said daughter Elika Ashoori. “For those of us who can speak up it’s very important we put pressure on the government otherwise Iran will continue to hold hostages and more families will be affected.” Ratcliffe said that, while his wife is broadly supportive, she is “worried about her husband’s hare-brained scheme”, and is all too aware of the dangers of hunger striking after turning yellow when her liver began to fail. She also worries about how Gabriella will fare. Ratcliffe said their daughter “remembers we did one before and it ended up happily” – though he is apprehensive about how she will feel in future visits when she finds her father weaker still. An FCDO spokesperson said: “Iran’s decision to proceed with these baseless charges against Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe is an appalling continuation of the cruel ordeal she is going through. Instead of threatening to return Nazanin to prison Iran must release her permanently so she can return home. We are doing all we can to help Nazanin get home to her young daughter and family and we will continue to press Iran on this point.”There is only one cast-iron, baked-in certainty about England’s group at the T20 World Cup as it goes into its final fixtures, and it is that at least one semi-final place will be decided on net run rate. The tiebreaker has been significant throughout the Super 12s – England had it in mind as they bunted Dawid Malan down the order in their haste to conclude their opening fixture against West Indies – but the closer they come to a conclusion the more dominant it becomes. England’s opponents in Saturday’s final fixture, South Africa, are currently third in the group, behind Australia on NRR, so their approach to the game will be dictated by what happens earlier in the day when the Australians face West Indies in Abu Dhabi. Should West Indies win the Proteas know that victory of any sort will be enough, but if Australia triumph then South Africa will be forced to take the field not just trying to win, but trying to win fast. “It’s been labelled as a quarter-final for us, it’s a must-win game. I think that’s the main point,” said Temba Bavuma, the South Africa captain. “I guess what helps us is that Australia’s game happens before our game, so we’ll get a better understanding of how we need to approach it. We’ll have an opportunity, somewhere along our game, to control our net run rate or alter our approach.” England sit two points above Australia and South Africa and could be caught by either or both of their rivals, though their NRR advantage means they are unlikely to be overtaken by either. Eoin Morgan, however, insists his side will be as motivated for this as for any other game, although probably not so motivated that they would choose to risk the fitness of Mark Wood when there will be more important matches to come – a late decision will be taken on who will replace the departed Tymal Mills in the side. “We’re coming into the game wanting to win, and given some of the situations we’ve been through in the past we know how difficult it is to win a World Cup game without adding different permutations like that,” Morgan said. “We’ve watched teams throughout this World Cup not even being in the contest at certain stages, so we know how difficult it is to get into that contest and then try and do what your team needs to win the game.” Unlike the other two stadiums in use for this World Cup, Sharjah is old, a bit crumbly, and crowbarred into a busy neighbourhood. The only thing that has silenced the in-house DJs during a tournament they seem to believe exists entirely for their own remorseless amplification has been the call to prayer ringing out from nearby mosques, during which their plug is pulled out of deference. It is a small ground that promises unpredictable bounce and unpredictable outcomes, with different strips behaving in very different ways. Last September Kings XI Punjab made 223 there and still lost; this September, since renamed Punjab Kings, they made 125 there and still won. In the latest Indian Premier League 10 matches were played at Sharjah, and six were won by the team that won the toss and chose to field (plus another by a team that lost the toss and were told to field). In this World Cup Afghanistan have been bowled out there for 90, Scotland for 60 and Netherlands for 44, but Afghanistan have also made 190, and Bangladesh failed to defend 171. England and South Africa have played there only once, both beating Sri Lanka in close games. England admit they celebrated their own victory over Sri Lanka with unusual enthusiasm, given that it essentially qualified them for the semi-finals. “In the group stage it’s so easy to get things wrong because every team has to fight tooth and nail to get through, and then when and if you do get through there’s a release of any pressure that’s been applied from yourself or anybody outside of the group,” Morgan said. “I think our win in Sharjah was as tough a win as we’ve ever had as a T20 group, and the satisfaction was significant.” The satisfaction of coming through their group with a 100% record would be no less significant, and in the end a bit of NRR-based desperation on the part of their opponents might just help. Meanwhile England have named their coaching group for the forthcoming Ashes tour, though with one notable name missing. The return of Troy Cooley, the Australian bowling coach who worked so successfully with the team that won the urn in 2005, has been widely trailed but will not be confirmed until contracts are signed. The assistant coach Graham Thorpe will lead the group of Test specialists who arrive in Australia on Saturday, with the head coach, Chris Silverwood, among four coaches who will follow after completing their commitments at the T20 World Cup.Richard Desmond, the billionaire former owner of adult television channels and top-shelf magazines, has spent years having his Wikipedia edited in a failed attempt to remove any suggestion he is a “pornographer”. The former owner of the Daily Express and Channel 5, and one of Britain’s richest men, appears to have become fixated with his biography on the open-source encyclopedia. To this end, an account operating on behalf of Desmond has repeatedly edited the article to replace the description of him as a “pornographer” with the term “philanthropist”. According to legal documents seen by the Guardian, Desmond says he cannot factually be described as a pornographer because that term applies only to individuals who publish illegal and obscene material. Desmond says the top-shelf magazines and television channels he owned for decades were instead in the legitimate “adult material” category distributed in high-street shops and on Sky. The former owner of the magazines Asian Babes and Readers’ Wives, who owned adult outlets from the 1980s until 2016, has now hired lawyers to demand Wikipedia permanently deletes any mentions of the word “pornographer” from his biography. Lawyers acting for the businessman this week asked Wikipedia administrators to investigate edits to the page, actively monitor it in case the word is reinstated, and keep “genuine, factually correct, edits by Mr Desmond” on the page. “The use of the term ‘pornographer’ when applied to our client is at least factually wrong, gratuitous and insulting, and at most commercially damaging,” they wrote. His lawyers claim that Wikipedia editors who describe Desmond as a pornographer may be commercial motivated as part of a “strategy by business competitors to harm his public image”. “Attempts have been made to rectify the factual errors by Mr Desmond numerous times. Despite this, each time, editors have reinstated the term ‘pornographer’,” the lawyers wrote. As part of Desmond’s legal threat, the lawyers confirmed he has spent three years having his own Wikipedia page edited through an account with the username NewsEditor1959. Although it is unclear who is operating the account, it has been used to remove references to Desmond’s work in the adult industry and add substantial sections about his donations to charities such as Moorfields eye hospital. NewsEditor1959 also cut references to how Desmond’s company allegedly hid copies of Penthouse magazine when Princess Anne arrived to open the company’s new office. A representative for Desmond declined to comment. Desmond, 69, has largely exited the media industry in recent years after offloading Channel 5 to Viacom for a substantial profit and selling his newspapers to Reach, the publisher of the Mirror. According to the Sunday Times Rich List, he is the UK’s 107th-richest man. However, he hit the headlines again last year amid claims he had inappropriately lobbied the communities secretary, Robert Jenrick, at a Tory party fundraiser to approve a major redevelopment in Canary Wharf, London. Jenrick later said he regretted the episode.Natalia Osipova is an out-of-this-world Giselle. When she debuted the role with the Royal Ballet in 2014 it was a revelation, especially her second act where the dead girl rises as a wili (the spirit of a betrayed woman). She inhabited the ghostly being as if truly possessed, tossed into the air, breaking out of the music’s frame and ballet’s politeness to create something extraordinary. Opening a new season of the 19th-century ballet (Peter Wright’s production, after Petipa), Osipova has lost none of her supernatural glow. Giselle begins, however, a completely different being: the naive country girl. Bursting on to the stage, she couldn’t be happier to greet the day with pure light and sweetness. She’s a girl whose natural expression is dance – in fact, this whole act is infused with great joy in dancing, from Osipova carried away with buoyant grace; to the corps de ballet villagers, delighting in detailed petit allegro of the dancing-on-hot-coals variety, feet quickly escaping the floor; to the radiant pas de six, including a polished Joseph Sissens. Giselle’s downfall is noble Albrecht (Reece Clarke), the pair’s dancing very much in sync. He woos her pretending to be an ordinary villager, although Clarke’s tall, poised composure and capable strides could give the game away. Meanwhile, so natural is Osipova, you can entirely accept her descent into delusion having fallen irrationally in love and had her heart brutally broken in the space of an hour. The painterly forest setting of Act II is home to the ice-hearted wilis (a stone-faced, precisely drilled corps). Osipova is transformed, the Romantic droop of her shoulders like an expression of defeat. When she moves, you could absolutely believe mystic powers are puppeteering her, rather than the dancer’s own muscle and sinew – the awesomely high-springing jumps, the unfathomably smooth passage of head, neck and arms. Clarke executes a few mighty jumps of his own, as the wilis try to dance him to exhaustion. Among the rest of the cast, a nod for Lukas Brændsrød, whose Hilarion is pleasingly unlikable, and Christina Arestis’s Bathilde, Albrecht’s aristocratic fiancee with a visible distaste for peasant life. They are small roles that matter, although there’s no doubt this evening belongs to Osipova. At the Royal Opera House, London, until 3 December. Live-streamed on 3 December.Britney and Bennifer. Cristiano Ronaldo at Manchester United. A new series of Sex and the City. Trucker caps and dresses with peekaboo cutouts. Wait, is it 2021, or 2003? The noughties are back. Don’t blame me: this isn’t just a fashion thing – it is celebrity culture, TV and even football. Also, do not confuse “the noughties are back” with “the noughties are cool again”, because the two are quite different. When something is ripe for pop culture nostalgia, that means it is ancient history. Being old enough to remember the actual noughties does not make you any kind of oracle on the noughties revival, because our memories are not the point here. The generation leading this particular revival are reliving memories of their own – childhood ones of their mums picking them up from school in Juicy Couture tracksuits, or of the formative night they came downstairs in their jimjams and saw Christina Aguilera in chaps on late night MTV. “I was there” doesn’t make you hip, it just makes you old. Were the noughties actually any good, though? Do they warrant a revival? The gold-script name necklaces were solid, to be fair. But if there is glory in cargo pants and Ugg boots, it is as holy relics of the last days of a life that wasn’t ruled by phones and social media. The noughties are the bridge between the pre-internet era, and the life we live now. I remember the day the Guardian gave me a BlackBerry – Google it, kids! – and I walked down the street clicking out emails on my little keypad and, wow, I mean as far as I was concerned I was literally Hillary Clinton. Look at me! I’m so busy. I’m so important! Funny to think that after all the panic about the millennium bug, when New Year’s Day dawned in 2000 and the clocks were still ticking and the aeroplanes hadn’t fallen out of the sky, we thought that Y2K had been a false alarm and embedding technology into the frontal cortex of our brains hadn’t destroyed civilisation after all. Two decades later, it feels more and more as if the Y2K doomsayers had a point. Technology did kind of crash our culture; it just didn’t happen on the stroke of midnight. Noughties fashion is not an easy look to wear as an adult. I don’t plan my outfits around my bedazzled belly button ring, and I’m guessing that you don’t either. Oh, and the colours! All bubblegum pinks and mermaid aquas, like a six-year-old girl’s bedroom. But there are some nice bits we can cherry-pick. Gucci designer Alessandro Michele told me recently that he thought Tom Ford’s era at the house, which ended in 2004, was “magical”. All slouchy trousers and corset tops, pencil skirts and silk trenchcoats, those clothes look like the 90s, but hotter. (Don’t take my word for it: TikTok superstar Addison Rae wore 2003 Tom Ford for Gucci to the Met Gala this year.) And I’m willing to overlook the decade’s hideous frameless sunglasses if it means a green light to spaghetti-strap vest tops, which I still prefer to T-shirts, if I’m honest, despite camisoles having been unfashionable for two decades. What’s more, the noughties gave good handbag. The Dior Saddle bag, introduced in 2000, was lightweight enough to slot neatly between your arm and your ribcage. In a cashless age of travelling light, maybe we can swap the super-practical cross-body for an old-school shoulder bag. You know, next time.The dark new drama The Shrink Next Door tells an almost unbelievable story. Almost, of course, because it actually happened. In 1980s New York, wealthy businessman Martin “Marty” Markowitz fell under the spell of his psychiatrist Isaac “Ike” Herschkopf, who manipulated Marty into giving him his house, handing over his business and cutting off his family for almost 30 years. In an adaptation penned by one of Succession’s writers, Georgia Pritchett, Will Ferrell plays the patient whom many assumed was the handyman in his own home, while Paul Rudd is the smarmy shrink turned cuckoo in the nest. If the story sounds familiar, that’s because the show is based on the hit podcast of the same name. The Shrink Next Door is the latest in the podcast to TV trend, which includes Julia Roberts’s Homecoming, Dirty John, with Connie Britton as the gaslit victim of “Dirty” John Meehan (Eric Bana), and Dr Death – based on the terrifying tale of sociopathic surgeon Christopher Duntsch – starring Joshua Jackson, Christian Slater and Alec Baldwin. We’re arguably at peak podcast, and it’s clear that TV studios are now scouring audio for inspiration. “The thing is, TV and film companies don’t like to take big risks – if something has proved itself to be compelling and popular, that’s very reassuring to them,” says Pritchett. “And the great thing about podcasts is that you hear all kinds of unusual, incredible stories that you would never have had access to [before], and that wouldn’t necessarily have been funded otherwise.” The podcast to TV pipeline shows no sign of stopping, either: Renée Zellweger will soon play killer Pam Hupp, the subject of the Dateline podcast The Thing About Pam – and Pritchett is already adapting the Radio 4 podcast Tunnel 29, about students who escaped Stasi-occupied east Berlin in 1962 by digging a tunnel under the so-called “death strip”. As for The Shrink Next Door, journalist Joe Nocera – Herschkopf’s former neighbour, who wrote and narrated the Shrink Next Door podcast – insists he didn’t “expect” the show to be snapped up and turned into TV, but “with Wondery [who produced The Shrink Next Door], part of its business model is finding podcasts that could be turned into TV shows. Dirty John quickly got bought, then Dr Death, so in my mind there was a possibility something could happen.” The podcast came out in May 2019, topped the charts for three weeks and got bought up for television almost immediately. “I was actually walking through Soho in London when my American agent called to ask me if I had heard it. I was like: ‘Yes, get off the phone, I’m trying to listen to it right now!’” says Pritchett. “He said it was being made into a TV series and did I want to pitch for it. I didn’t think I had any chance of getting the job. Interestingly, both Paul Rudd and Will Ferrell had heard the podcast, separately, and wanted to be in the TV version.” The show was given the go-ahead in April 2020, and filmed during the pandemic. Other podcasts haven’t had such a smooth journey to the screen, not least because – as the pod-to-TV boom has continued – more shows have focused on real-life events. The podcast Teacher’s Pet – based on the sudden 1982 disappearance of housewife Lyn Dawson and made by the Australian newspaper – was the subject of talks with studios after hitting 17m downloads. But when Lyn’s husband Chris was arrested on suspicion of her murder, the show stalled. After getting 16m downloads in the week of its release in 2017, the rights to S-Town were swiftly sold off, with Spotlight’s Tom McCarthy lined up to direct. But then the creators got mired in a long legal battle with the estate of the show’s subject, the master clock-maker John B McLemore, and the project is now “back into early stages of development”, according to executive producer Julie Snyder. Even when projects do go ahead, they don’t always leave everyone happy. Terra Newell is one of the victims of “Dirty” John Meehan and took part in the podcast made by the LA Times, recounting how he tricked her mum Debra into marrying him, and attacked Newell in an attempt to abduct her. He died after Terra fought back in self-defence. Newell says the producers of the TV show and its star Connie Britton met her and her family and screened episodes for them ahead of broadcast. “Connie is the nicest, most heartfelt person,” says Newell. “And at first it’s so exciting. But then I was like: this is my trauma being acted out on television. It was really hard, to be honest. I watched part of [the final episode, where she is attacked] with my therapist, actually. Every time my story is retold, I have to relive it.” When the show was in development, Newell was surprised to find that she had no control over her own story. “It was just like – we’re going to do this with or without you guys, the LA Times owns everything now. So from a victim’s standpoint it was shocking. We were told as a courtesy.” Sometimes, a podcast’s real-life subjects are unavailable, leaving creators with difficult decisions over how to fill in the gaps. Dr Death’s Christopher Dunsch, for example, is currently serving life in prison after being convicted of maiming one of his patients. “You can’t begin to fathom the responsibility that you feel when you take a deep dive into people’s back stories,” says Dr Death showrunner and writer Patrick Macmanus. “You begin to see the lives that [Dunsch’s patients] had when they were struggling with pain, and how they were upended and ruined. We didn’t want any of them to feel like we were sensationalising their pain or their journey.” Macmanus did attempt to meet Dunsch, but says: “I don’t think there was a world in which he was going to tell us any semblance of the truth. All we would have ended up getting was lies, and I can’t imagine that would be beneficial.” For his part, The Shrink Next Door’s Marty Markowitz seems over the moon at having his life turned into a TV show. “Paul Rudd, Will Ferrell and [director] Michael Showalter flew out from California to spend a day with myself, my sister and Joe Nocera,” he says. “Then they flew right back to California! There was no joking around, they just peppered me with a million questions. I had a wonderful five-hour lunch with Georgia Pritchett. I gave her a timeline which I had prepared – a very detailed one with all the main facts.” Markowitz also received a message from Ferrell. “He sent me an email that said: ‘I’m not 100% sure you’ll be happy with the way I’m playing you, but I think you’ll be happy with the arc of the story.’ He’s a very, very nice man.” Gladly, The Shrink Next Door is darkly funny, but never at Marty’s expense, and Ferrell’s performance is nuanced and heartbreaking. “With my background in comedy writing and Will, Paul and Kathryn [Hahn, who plays Marty’s estranged sister Phyllis], I think everyone at Apple was expecting a comedy,” says Pritchett. “But my mantra was: I’m going to squash all the joy out of this show, I’m going to stop being funny, I’ll suck all the pleasure from this – my point was that this story is a tragedy. “The Shrink Next Door comes under the title of a true-crime podcast, but for me it wasn’t a whodunnit, but how did he do it? If you look at what I’ve written – from The Thick of It to Veep to Succession – I love finding compassion for unlovable people. It took two of them to create that situation. How did they both end up where they ended up? It was tragic for both of them, because Marty kind of opted out of his own life, and Ike lived someone else’s life for 27 years.” The Shrink Next Door seems to be a prime example of a pod-to-TV transfer done the right way. However, while Marty insists he isn’t bothered about reliving the lowest moments of his life once again, one thing did really bother him. “Nothing can remind me of the bad times,” he says. “The only thing that disappointed me is the house they used. My place had a basketball court and two koi ponds. The one in the show is nowhere near as nice!” The Shrink Next Door is available to stream on Apple TV+ from 12 November; all episodes of Dr Death are available on Starzplay in the UKThe rescue of Cleo Smith made global headlines. The four-year-old vanished from a tent in the middle of the night on a family holiday, sparking an 18-day search involving more than 100 police officers and thousands of volunteers. She was recovered alive and well in the locked room of a house in the small coastal town of Carnarvon, just minutes from her home, on Wednesday. The Australian prime minister called it a miracle. Police officers, from the Western Australia police commissioner down, admitted to openly weeping. The Western Australian premier, Mark McGowan, travelled 900km from Perth to see the four-year-old and her family, presenting her with two teddy bears in police uniform that he had named after two senior detectives who worked on the case. On the morning she was found, talkback radio in Perth lit up with callers who admitted crying at the news, their relief and joy overwhelming. It was a very good news story. Most missing person cases do not run like this. And if the person who goes missing is Indigenous, sometimes there is no report at all. It is not surprising that Cleo Smith’s disappearance and rescue captured worldwide attention, says Dr Sarah Wayland. Waking up to discover your child gone is every parent’s worst nightmare. To recover that child again after thousands of hours of dedicated police work, finding her safe and well in her home town, allegedly taken by a man who has no connection to her family, sounds like the final act of a movie. It’s the least common type of missing person case – just 0.6% of the almost 40,000 missing person reports in Australia each year relate to an abduction – and an even more rare happy ending. Of course the world was hooked. “There’s a cute little girl, we can imagine what it would be like to have lost her and we can also imagine how vulnerable she is because of her age so we can connect with it,” says Wayland, who has almost 20 years experience working with the families of missing persons. “The case of her being found proves that the world can offer us a problem, that we throw resources at it and that it gets fixed. That it neatly ties itself up.” That Cleo disappeared from a campground 75km north of Carnarvon on the Western Australian coast created, for international audiences, a layer of outback mystique — what Wayland calls the Picnic at Hanging Rock effect. “It buys into the mysticism and intrigue and romanticism of Australia and its wildness and how people can vanish without a trace from these locations,” she says. “These narratives already exist in people’s heads. The real facts of the case can connect with the story that’s already there.” In the UK, some media outlets dubbed Cleo “Australia’s Madeleine McCann”, in reference to the three-year-old British child who was taken from her bed on a family holiday in Portugal in 2007. These narratives help grow public attention, which is a crucial part of a missing person investigation. But the story can overtake the facts, and those following closely, who have become invested in the characters, may have difficulty stepping back and respecting the missing person’s privacy once they have been found. “You invite people in because the family’s ultimate goal when someone is missing is to do anything they can to bring that person home,” Wayland says. “But once you’ve been able to reach a resolution, whether it be a positive resolution or not, you can’t just say, ‘thanks very much we’re going to pack up our things and go home now’.” In the case of Cleo Smith, it is the police that have kept feeding the story post-rescue, releasing audio of the moment of the little girl’s rescue and video of her a few minutes later. On Friday night, police distributed a statement from the family who thanked everyone involved in the rescue and asked for their privacy to be respected. Her successful recovery appeared to bolster morale inside the police force and its public reputation, both of which were at a low ebb. Linda Cao, a former senior lawyer with the Aboriginal Family Legal Service, watched events unfold with a sense of relief for Cleo’s family and disbelief that the same police force that had at times refused to help her clients were being hailed as heroes. “Thank goodness you did the job well and there was a good outcome, but you should be doing this with every case all the time,” Cao said. “Regardless of what the outcome is, the effort should be the same.” Cao says she has at times been unable to get police to investigate reports of a missing child, because the parent who reported them missing had been declared unfit by child protection authorities. In some parts of regional WA, she says, the disappearance of children and young people is so pervasive that “to police it’s just their normal”. One case involved a 13-year-old girl who ran away after being removed by police from her mother into her father’s care, despite her mother being awarded custody by the family court. Her mother’s attempts to report her missing failed. The girl was later found living with a middle-aged man and had become addicted to illicit substances which she was provided in exchange for sex. A local police officer told Cao they would not intervene as the child was there by choice. “The police say that’s just what happens out here,” she says. “If the police will not get involved, who else is there? There is nobody else.” Sometimes First Nations communities undertake the search themselves. Watching reports of Cleo’s rescue, Bundjalung woman and advocate Vanessa Turnbull-Roberts, who was forcibly removed from her family at the age of 11 and placed into state care, said she felt relieved for her family and community and sorry for those families whose loved ones remain missing, and who are still fighting for police and public attention. “We have had so many of our kids just recently go missing and it’s up to community to start those GoFundMe pages, it’s up to us to demand to the coroner, to the courts, please give us some more time, can you please help us,” Turnbull-Roberts says. “But when it’s a non-Indigenous child there’s all these resources, families and communities don’t have to think twice about whether the courts are going to respond, about whether police are going to stop their investigation.” Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples are disproportionately represented in missing person reports, many of which concern children who have been removed from their families by child protection orders. A review by the Victorian commissioner for children and young people found that children in care were reported missing at 75 times the rate of other children in the same age cohort. Another review prepared for the Australian federal police in 2021 found that at least 25.6% of children under 12 and 18% of those aged between 13 and 17 who go missing while in care are Indigenous, despite First Nations children making up just 5.9% of the total population under 18. “You don’t see that same response for First Nations children,” Turnbull-Roberts says. “So many people say it’s not an issue of race but it becomes an issue of race when the level of response isn’t equal.” Those stories are not frequently told in the media because of legal restrictions around reporting on child protection cases, and also because they are complicated, often contain conflicting accounts, and are overshadowed by opaque and unhelpful government departments. “When you have stories of children that go missing because of another individual, there is a sense that the state (through police) is the saviour,” says Prof Thalia Anthony, an expert on the policing and criminalisation of Indigenous peoples with the University of Technology Sydney. “But with Aboriginal kids in care it is the state that has failed in its role as protector.” In Cleo’s disappearance, “the police are the good guys. They don’t have that same role when Aboriginal kids go missing”. There is often an assumption that the family is to blame, or that a child has left by choice, Anthony says. Families are evaluated, by police, by the media, by the public, to see if they “deserve” the help. The day before Cleo was found, the family of Aboriginal man Andrick Ross, who has been missing since 28 September, made a public plea for assistance to help find him. The 35-year-old artist’s car has been found in outback Queensland, near the Northern Territory border. On Thursday the family of an Aboriginal man from the East Kimberley, Jeremiah Rivers, issued a similar plea. He was last seen on 18 October. The family of another young Aboriginal boy, who went missing in the Kimberley in December last year, have requested his name and image no longer be used. He is still officially listed as missing by WA police but there are no active search efforts. Earlier this year 250 people marched through the NSW town of Moree to demand answers over the disappearance of a 22-year-old Gomeroi man, Gordon Copeland, last seen running from police on 10 July. His remains were found last month. The families of the Bowraville children fought for three decades for a proper investigation into their disappearance, which finally resulted in murder charges. “We see it as a community,” Turnbull-Roberts says. “I don’t think white Australia sees it. But we see it.”Monday It has been a feature of Covid that, along with all the other bad things ushered in by the pandemic, it has opened up whole new categories of people to hate. Thought the mum you exchanged casual greetings with every morning at school drop-off was more or less sane? Turns out she believes the health authorities are lying to us and the vaccine programme is tantamount to murder. Or the friend who, before vaccines were available, was still throwing indoor parties? Or the cabinet minister and the testing contract? The world is full of lunatics, benign in good times, dangerous in bad, available, almost two years into this rolling disaster, for unprecedented levels of resentment. If there is one group in New York that, prior to Covid, would appear to have been exempt from this dynamic, it was the FDNY, the fire department still rightly lionised after 9/11. On Monday, a vaccine mandate came into effect for New York’s 378,000 public sector workers. Of 35,000 uniformed police officers, the NYPD put a mere 34 on unpaid leave for failing to show proof of vaccination. Of the city’s 17,000 civilian employees, only 40 were benched for being unvaccinated. And then there were the firefighters. The FDNY has a 77% vaccination rate, which is still higher than the average population, but lower than other city workers. On Monday morning, Daniel A Nigro, the FDNY commissioner, announced that 2,300 firefighters had called in sick. (That daily number is usually between 800 and 1,000.) Andrew Ansbro, head of one of the biggest firefighters’ unions, said the Uniformed Firefighters Association was “not anti-vaccine, we are anti-mandate”. There was, the mayor’s office insisted, no disruption to service; of 350 fire units, only 18 were compromised and no firehouses closed. Still, it was an odd mental reversal, getting halfway through slamming the firefighters in the rudest terms possible, before pulling up short. Do you want to call the person who lugs 20 kilos of gear halfway up a burning skyscraper to save you an arsehole? I don’t. (The highest FDNY ladder stretches to the eighth floor of most apartment buildings; the majority of New Yorkers, including us, live higher than that). Great bunch of guys. Hope they come to their senses soon. But you know, whatever works. Tuesday It’s election day and the schools are shut. Pre-Covid, the kids would have had a free day. Now, thanks to protocols established during lockdown, they are subject to a day of “asynchronous learning”, which means lots of homework for them and zero work at our actual jobs for us. The first task is to navigate the massive resurfacing of trauma triggered by overseeing their schooling at home. As we unpack the pages and pages of assignments from their folders, I shudder at the memory of March 2020. They were in kindergarten then, and at least the work made sense. This is second grade and what an earth is going on here? I pick up one of my second-grader’s work sheets, in which she is instructed to read a series of sentences and “scoop the phrases”. “What’s scooping a phrase?” I ask, peering at the paper like an elderly judge. “Oh, it’s underlining. When did underlining become scooping?” My daughter glares. “And why is that a phrase?” I point to the given example. “Why do those two sections represent constituent parts?” My children never sound more American than when they’re telling me off. “Mom!” she says sharply. “You don’t understand.” And that’s just the English. Oh my god, the maths. Did you know this? That they’re not called sums, or “addition”, any more, they’re called – in America at least – “number models”? These are distinct from “number sentences”, which are themselves, of course, different from “number stories”. It’s horrifying. “This is nuts. How do you keep track of all this?” I say before putting my head on the table, closing my eyes and groaning loudly. My children quietly get on with their work. Wednesday Eric Adams has been elected mayor of New York, which we knew would happen. The surprise is that, after the primary, when any eccentric detail was seized upon to liven up duller parts of the race, Adams continues to seem deeply odd. God knows De Blasio was weird, dropping down to Brooklyn flanked by security to use his old gym. But Adams seems, possibly, weirder. One of the scandals of his campaign was the long-running, and increasingly hilarious, speculation that he didn’t actually live in New York. To counter the rumours, he invited reporters into his Brooklyn residence, where it was noted that famously vegan Adams had salmon in the fridge. It was speculated his adult son really lived there. This week, the website Curbed staked out Adams, using seven reporters in round-the-clock shifts to occupy a grey Nissan Sentra parked across the street from Adams’s Brooklyn address. After a day of no activity, Adams pulled up at 4am, ditched his car in the street so that it blocked the entrance to a busy plumbing supply company, disappeared inside, and didn’t re-emerge for many hours, even when his car caused a huge traffic problem. Eventually, the plumbing company attached a forklift truck to the car and dragged it out of the way. When Adams emerged the following morning, the Curbed reporter watched him blithely get into his car and, to avoid the traffic chaos he had himself caused, drive up on to the sidewalk and away. Weird guy. Although to his credit, as a former cop he did bust the stakeout, yelling “I caught you!” before driving off. Thursday I would, obviously, take Adams over Boris Johnson. The never-ending embarrassment of the British prime minister filters across the Atlantic via photos of him slumped over at the Cop26 climate summit, less head of government, more man who falls asleep on the last Piccadilly line train and wakes up at terminal 4. President Biden appeared to fall asleep too, but he was at least masked while doing it. To reach the transgressive heights of Johnson breathing on Sir David Attenborough, Biden would have to cough on Betty White, stick out a leg to trip Barbara Walters or do something to callously destabilise 95-year-old Dick Van Dyke. Friday Suddenly, it’s freezing in New York. Time to unpack last year’s puffers. These things could cushion a fall from the highest FDNY ladder and fully take up half the hall closet. In previous years, I’ve had one compliant child and one who is aggressively anti-puffer and insists on wearing the skinniest jacket on the most brutal days, like those boys who wear shorts all year round. Now, she puts it on quite cheerfully and compliments the fluffiness of the lining. I’m relieved and a little sad. All things pass.Who is fighting in Ethiopia? Ethiopian government forces and their allies have been fighting against the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF), the ruling party of the country’s northern region, for just over a year. But the conflict has developed rapidly after the Ethiopians suffered a series of reverses since June, and the TPLF has recruited more allies to its cause. On Friday, eight other rebel groups, including the Oromo Liberation Army (OLA), announced they and the TPLF were joining forces amid growing speculation they will attempt to march on the capital following a series of military gains. They are pitted against the Ethiopian National Defence Force and irregular combatants from Amhara, which lies to the south of Tigray. Also fighting on the government side are troops from Eritrea, which borders Tigray to the north. Eritrea’s leader, Isaias Afwerki, is close to Ethiopia’s prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, and is a sworn enemy of the TPLF, which ruled Ethiopia when the two countries fought a border war. The TPLF was the dominant force in Ethiopia’s coalition government until 2018, when discontent among the largest ethnic groups, the Oromo and Amhara, led to the elevation of Abiy Ahmed, who is of mixed Oromo-Amharic parentage, as prime minister. But Abiy has gradually lost support as the war has gone on, leading to the formation of the alliance between the TPLF and the OLA, who represent formerly historic foes. How bad is the fighting and what has been the toll on civilians? Accurate information about the conflict is hard to obtain. Journalists are banned from combat zones, Tigray has been subject to an internet blackout and very few humanitarian agencies are operating on the ground. Rough estimates suggest that more than 100,000 people have been killed. There have been multiple reports of massacres, sexual violence and other atrocities committed by all sides to the conflict – and accusations that a blockade of Tigray has led to famine conditions, affecting hundreds of thousands of people. Tigray accuses Addis of having tried to wage a campaign of genocide – which is sharply rejected by the government. On 3 November, a joint UN-Ethiopian report on the conflict – the most comprehensive yet – detailed first-hand accounts of a string of human rights violations, some of which “may amount to war crimes and crimes against humanity,” according to Michele Bachelet, the UN high commissioner for human rights. The commissioner said “the majority of the violations” documented between November 2020 and June 2021 appeared to have been committed by Ethiopian forces and their Eritrean allies. But since the Tigrayan counter-offensive had started, Bachelet added that there were “an increasing number of allegations of human rights abuses by Tigray forces”. How did the conflict begin? Abiy launched military operations in Tigray in November 2020 after he accused local authorities of attacking a military camp and attempting to loot military assets. The TPLF denied the charge and accused Abiy of concocting the story to justify the offensive. Who are the Tigrayans? The region is in the mountainous north-west corner of Ethiopia, and borders Eritrea and Sudan. There are about 7 million inhabitants, out of a total Ethiopian population of 110 million, but the region has played an outsized role in the country’s recent history. Tigrayans have a formidable history of military success. They spearheaded the rebel march to Addis Ababa that ousted a brutal Marxist dictatorship in 1991 and bore the brunt of a 1998-2000 war with Eritrea, during which hundreds of thousands of people were killed. Their region’s rough terrain is ideal for guerilla-type warfare with local knowledge and support. What has been the course of the war? Government forces initially routed the rebels, but the situation changed in June this year when Tigrayan fighters retook much of the region. Since then they have made significant territorial gains and now control parts of Amhara and Afar regions, displacing hundreds of thousands and widening the crisis. In late October, Tigrayan forces said they had seized control of the strategic cities of Dessie and Kombolcha, positioning them to move down a major road towards Addis Ababa. Abiy has called on all citizens to combat the approaching forces, and a nationwide state of emergency was declared on 2 November. What is the international community saying? Diplomatic efforts to try to avert an attack on Addis Ababa gathered pace this week with a visit to the city by the US special envoy for the Horn of Africa, Jeffrey Feltman. There have been calls for an immediate ceasefire from the UN, which has said “the stability of Ethiopia and the wider region is at stake”, and from the Intergovernmental Authority on Development, a bloc of east African countries. The blockade of Tigray has been described by the US Agency for International Development as “perhaps the most egregious humanitarian obstruction in the world”.Although his star status was rooted in talent and solid achievement, on the musical stage, in revue and in television light entertainment, Lionel Blair, who has died aged 92, was one of the first media celebrities famous for being sort of famous. He played up roguishly to his image of a bouffant-haired, perma-tanned dancer, impossible to send up in any meaningful way because he was sending himself up, on gameshows in the 1980s (Give Us a Clue, Blankety Blank) and reality shows in the new century (Celebrity Big Brother). Blair was a genuine hoofer and a superb choreographer, who performed a scintillating dance routine with his friend and idol Sammy Davis Jr at the 1961 Royal Variety show and directed one of Danny La Rue’s most lavish spectaculars at the Palace theatre in 1970. He was quick on his feet and witty in speech, and audiences loved his unique brand of extravagant ingratiation, even if the critics sometimes squirmed. Endearingly, he owned up to having lied about his age in his autobiography (he shaved off four years), on the daytime chatshow Loose Women in 2016. But in 2010, as one of six oldie celebs on the BBC reality show The Young Ones – along with Sylvia Syms (with whom he had appeared as a dancing sailor in the 1960 movie The World of Suzie Wong), the newsreader Kenneth Kendall, cricket umpire Dickie Bird, actor Liz Smith and Fleet Street editor Derek Jameson – he was easily the most agile and youthful. He was born Henry Lionel Blair Ogus, in Montreal, Canada, where his parents – of Russian and Polish extraction – had emigrated from the East End of London in 1926. In 1930, the family returned to Hackney before settling in Stamford Hill, north London. Lionel’s father, Myer Ogus, was a barber; his mother, Deborah (“Della”, nee Greenbaum), was a tailor. Lionel very much cared about his hair and his clothes all his life (and his legs were once insured for half a million pounds, a sum then comparable to the $1m quoted – admittedly two decades earlier – to cover Betty Grable’s pins). He was educated at Craven Park school – where he first met his lifelong friends Mike and Bernie Winters, the comedians – and Egerton Road school, connected to a synagogue. During the war years, he and his younger sister, Joyce – a budding Fred and Adele Astaire sibling song-and-dance act who were soon billed as “England’s youngest swingsters” – entertained Londoners in the air raid shelters at Manor House station on the Piccadilly line. Lionel made a professional debut as a munchkin in The Wizard of Oz at the Grand, Croydon, in 1942, shortly after that theatre reopened following the heavy bombing of Croydon earlier in the war. In 1943, he was one of the children in the post-West End tour of Lillian Hellman’s Watch on the Rhine, a powerful anti-Nazi play, and made a West End debut in 1944 in Flying Colours, a revue starring Binnie Hale and Douglas Byng. In the same year, he joined the Memorial theatre at Stratford-upon-Avon to play five roles in the summer season directed by Robert Atkins, including Macduff’s son in Macbeth; Gregory in The Taming of the Shrew; and third player in Hamlet. After a season in rep in Belfast there was a short run in RF Delderfield’s cosy comedy Peace Comes to Peckham. When his father died in 1947, Lionel became the family breadwinner – Joyce was just starting at a dance school – and decided to change his surname and concentrate on dancing as a more likely way of maintaining a regular income of sorts. This he did, as a waiter, in Bob’s Your Uncle (1948) at the Saville, a musical comedy vehicle for Leslie Henson with a score by Noel Gay, then on the touring production of Annie Get Your Gun and in Kiss Me, Kate at the Coliseum in 1951. By the mid-1950s he was choreographing the celebrated Five Past Eight shows, swishly staged by Dick Hurran at the Alhambra, Glasgow, with headline stars such as Jimmy Logan, Eve Boswell and Stanley Baxter, and this led to his pre-eminence on BBC television in the 1960s, choreographing and dancing with his own group of show girls. In that same period, he choreographed several movies and appeared in Michael Winner’s The Cool Mikado (1963) with Frankie Howerd and Stubby Kaye, and in Richard Lester’s A Hard Day’s Night (1964) with the Beatles. He was a regular in the biggest London pantomimes, commanding a fee of £15,000 a week as Buttons, Dick Whittington, Jack on his beanstalk and Aladdin. But he was really now subsumed in his television work, and his last “legit” West End stage appearances included a cheerful 1968 revival of the Gershwins’ Lady Be Good at the Saville, partnering the self-parodying squeaky “blond bombshell” Aimi MacDonald (who had won television prominence in At Last the 1948 Show with John Cleese and Marty Feldman); and critically acclaimed “turns” as the Player King in a touring production of Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead at the Piccadilly in 1987 and as the oleaginous compere of Pageant (like Liberace on speed, said Sheridan Morley) at the Vaudeville in 2000. He also toured with Jimmy Edwards in Doctor in the House in 1978. On Give Us a Clue (1979-92), he and Una Stubbs captained teams competing in charades. On Name That Tune, which had been running in some shape or form since being imported from the US in 1956, he took over as presenter from Tom O’Connor from 1983 until 1988. And he filled in missing words on Blankety Blank during the best years of that show, with Les Dawson chaotically and uninterestedly in charge. This extensive warmup as a self-mocking celeb made Blair a prime candidate for reality shows, and he started mucking out down on The Farm on Channel 5 in 2005. On a Christmas special of Extras by and with Ricky Gervais in 2007, Blair paid the ultimate humiliating price for self-preservation with a needy plea to extend his career on Celebrity Big Brother; and this eventually came to pass in 2014 (he was the third house guest to be evicted). In the same year, on the BBC drama Doctors, he played an old actor stricken with Alzheimer’s disease; this, he said, was a move to escape being Lionel Blair. He made another bid for freedom on Emmerdale in 2014. Blair was involved in a variety of charity work, including for the organisations Stage for Age and Age UK. Latterly, he occasionally dusted down a one-man show, Tap and Chat, for the delectation of his loyal fans. For many years he lived in Surrey with his wife, Susan Davis, whom he married in 1967. He is survived by Susan, their daughter, Lucy, two sons, David and Matthew, and three grandchildren. His sister, Joyce, a well-known performer in her own right, died in 2006. • Lionel Blair (Henry Lionel Blair Ogus), actor, dancer and choreographer, born 12 December 1928; died 4 November 2021New Conservative MPs, especially in “red wall” seats, have shed sweat and tears this week after being strong-armed into trying to save a veteran colleague from suspension by ripping up anti-sleaze rules before the government was forced into a screeching U-turn. Some from the 2019 intake privately confessed their fury at being told by Downing Street and Tory whips to put their necks on the line for Owen Paterson, who they believed had broken Commons rules and would not recognise them in the corridor. The move has left a small but potentially permanent scar on their relationship with the top of the party, new MPs said, with trust in No 10’s ability to avoid more errors further diminished. One Tory elected in a red wall seat in 2019 said he thought the government “wouldn’t have gone to this trouble for others and it’s more a case of having friends in high places”. He called the saga a “complete waste of political capital” and said that while many colleagues backed reform of how MPs are scrutinised – by the standards commissioner and the expenses watchdog, the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority – this should have been separated out and not conflated with Paterson’s wrongdoing. “The fallout is also worse than if he’d just taken it on the chin,” the MP added, saying Paterson’s insistence he would do the same thing again was not a view shared by many colleagues. “A lot of people walking through the lobby wouldn’t,” he cautioned. A new Tory MP from the party’s traditional heartlands said they and others from the 2019 intake were “not holding back about how angry we are”. She said: “Those of us who swallowed hard for the government over this recent issue have put their integrity on the line. Was it worth it? I do not want to see this happen again. There are some really decent people in the new intake and they shouldn’t be taken for granted.” Another confessed they were “so tired of crying” and had been racked with frustration at having to protect Paterson. Others complained about “taking shit for another man I’ve never met, after Dominic Cummings”, and being “hung out to dry to protect someone who wouldn’t even recognise me in the corridor”. Few new Tories have spoken out publicly. But one, Aaron Bell, the MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme, said in the Commons debate on the issue this week that he would vote against the government-backed amendment, claiming it “makes it looks like we’re moving the goalposts” by changing the rules specially for Paterson. A minister noted that many of the latest intake were “quite bolshie” already, and it would not have helped the party by pushing them away even further. “They’ve been put through a process where they had to take one for the team and the whole thing exploded less than 24 hours later,” they said. “There are so many quick U-turns, it would almost be better if there was some material damage. “If we actually dropped significantly and for a sustained period in the polls, it might make the powers that be deal with this issue. The approach now seems to be ‘we dodged another bullet there lads, let’s wait and see what the next one is’.” Eyebrows have also been raised at Angela Richardson, who became the MP for Guildford in 2019, losing her job as a parliamentary private secretary (PPS) in Michael Gove’s levelling up department for abstaining on the amendment to spare Paterson’s suspension, only to be reinstated the following day when the government reversed course. A Tory aide said the move could encourage other PPSs to rebel against three-line whips, given their excuse would be “well, we thought there would be a U-turn”.Police have launched a wave of investigations against young people, mainly women, in recent weeks for taking partially nude or sexually suggestive photographs next to Russian landmarks. At least four cases have been reported over the past week of police detaining, investigating or jailing Russians for photographs that have been posted online in front of the Kremlin walls, St Basil’s Cathedral, St Isaac’s Cathedral in St Petersburg and an “eternal flame” dedicated to the history of the second world war. One couple has been sentenced to jail for 10 months for taking a photograph suggestive of oral sex in front of the distinctive onion domes of St Basil’s Cathedral in Moscow. Ruslan Bobiev and Anastasia Chistova, who wore a police jacket in the picture, were found guilty last week of “insulting believers’ feelings” – marking the first time that those charges had led to prison time. Bobiev, a blogger from Tajikistan, was also ordered to be deported from Russia. Other women have been detained for flashing their buttocks or breasts in front of public landmarks or police stations in various cities including St Petersburg and Yekaterinburg in cases that stretch back to August. Several of those investigated said they were not responsible for the material being put online. The cases, which have often been pursued by conservative activists who have complained to the police, mark another step forward in the policing of social networks and the willingness of the authorities to use severe punishments against apolitical Instagram stars and influencers. While a judge chose to jail two members of the punk protest group Pussy Riot in 2012 for two years after a performance in a Moscow cathedral, many of the recent cases are far less politicised, and appear to be driven by greater attention to Instagram accounts used by ordinary Russians. One woman, an adult actress and model on OnlyFans, said she was a “patriot” after she was sentenced to 14 days behind bars for a picture showing her buttocks near the Kremlin walls. Another, who was briefly jailed for a similar photograph in front of St Isaac’s Cathedral in St Petersburg, was only released because she had a school-aged son. On Friday, a model publicly apologised after reports that an investigation was opened over a three-year-old photograph with her kissing another woman in front of the “eternal flame” near the Kremlin walls. The flame is a monument dedicated to Soviet dead in the second world war. “Please accept my honest apologies for the video that was created three years ago,” she wrote. “It was made without the goal to offend or defile.”Boris Johnson will not declare a free luxury holiday he received at the Spanish villa belonging to the Goldsmith family in the register of MPs’ interests, Downing Street has said, meaning he does not have to detail the value of the gift. Johnson listed the near week-long stay in the Marbella property in October in the register of ministerial interests. It confirmed the holiday was provided free of charge by the family of Zac Goldsmith, the former Conservative MP who is now a peer and an environment minister. However, this register does not detail monetary values. The separate register of MPs’ interests does but on Friday Johnson’s spokesman said the prime minister had no plans to list it there. “Earlier this year the prime minister received hospitality from a long-standing family friend who provided their holiday home,” the spokesman said. “In line with transparency requirements, he has declared the arrangement in his ministerial capacity, given the hospitality was provided by another minister.” Asked if this was an attempt to avoid revealing the cost, they added: “The declarations in terms of the transparency requirements have been met by the prime minister. Ministerial code declarations fall outside the remit of the Commons register.” The unusual decision to not make a full declaration will heap pressure on Johnson. He has previously had to apologise to the parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, for making incomplete or late declarations. Stone, who is also expected to adjudicate on whether Johnson broke rules in the way he financed a refurbishment of his Downing Street flat, faced calls from ministers this week to resign after the government briefly and disastrously tried to reverse her decision over the suspension of the Tory MP Owen Paterson for breaking paid lobbying rules. No 10 said the decision to avoid the MPs’ register was based on a section of the MPs’ code of conduct detailing the rules for registering overseas visits. Part of this states they do not need to be declared if they are “wholly unconnected with membership of the house or with the member’s parliamentary or political activities (eg family holidays),” which appears to be the No 10 argument. While Goldsmith is a friend of Johnson’s, and particularly of the prime minister’s wife, Carrie, he was also made a peer by Johnson after he lost his Commons seat in 2019, and given a government job. The Goldsmith family property is marketed online for rentals for as much as £25,000 a week. After the holiday, the Guardian revealed that documents indicated the villa had been held by an opaque offshore structure based in multiple tax havens. The papers suggested the minister and his family may have owned the property through a Maltese company held by companies in the Turks and Caicos Islands and administered by a wealth-planning firm based in Switzerland.It was one of the defining images from Cop26. Seated next to Boris Johnson on Monday and wearing a mask was 95-year-old David Attenborough. The prime minister, however, was maskless. At one point, Johnson seemed to have nodded off. On stage and in front of 120 world leaders, the contrast between the two men was striking. The naturalist was sombre and serious. There was a “desperate hope” we might still avoid disaster, Attenborough said in Glasgow, in the most memorable phrase of the week. Joe Biden was among those to give him a standing ovation. Johnson sought to strike a similarly elevated tone. There were serious moments in his speech: he mentioned a responsibility to future generations, for example, and to “children not yet born”. But overall the prime minister appeared to rely on the jokes and verbal antics that have served him well in the past. With the world watching on the most urgent issue of the age, he sought to mix it up – part statesman, part standup. Labour said his speech seemed thrown together at the last moment. To many others, his quips seemed strangely unsuited to the grave occasion and to his non-British audience. He began by likening the climate crisis to James Bond wrestling with a ticking bomb. “It’s one minute to midnight on that Doomsday Clock and we need to act now,” he declared. (Days before, at the G20 summit in Rome, he had used football for his analogies – describing humanity as “5-1 down at half time”.) Johnson’s Cop26 address was met with stony silence. The prime minister left pauses for laughs. They never came. Outside the hall, what did other countries make of a British leader who had once written sceptically about the climate emergency? Was his new evangelism for real, many wondered, or merely an act by someone adept at persuading people he holds certain beliefs? Abroad, few were convinced. In Spain, El País noted Johnson appeared to have undergone something of a Damascene conversion to environmentalism since the days when “as a provocative political columnist for the Daily Telegraph, he flirted with a rather loutish kind of climate change denialism”. His attempts to stress the importance of the meeting were undercut by a familiar idiosyncrasy, it said. “He wanted to appear ‘cautiously optimistic’, and yet he couldn’t avoid slipping into his usual over-the-top rhetoric,” the paper reported. Others felt his puns got lost in translation. Bas Eickhout, a long-serving Dutch Green MEP, observed: “He is regarded a bit like a clown. It’s clear that this is his style and that is certainly now what people are used to. Some of the jokes are quite domestic orientated for a domestic audience.” Asked about Johnson’s leadership, one EU official laughed, but offered a diplomatic take. “It’s not completely my taste to be honest,” the person said, sidestepping to praise the UK diplomatic machine. “One thing that we profit from is that the UK still has one of the best foreign services in the world. It’s pretty difficult to break that up and they [Downing Street] haven’t got round to it yet.” The French media was also unimpressed, at a time when Paris and London are involving in a bitter spat over fishing. Le Point said Johnson had indulged in his “usual humorous banter”. “Wide-eyed, we observe Johnson’s smirk; his face recalls that of a dad cracking one of his favourite jokes,” it said. Libération saw “chaotic organisation” on show at the summit; Le Monde “apparent nonchalance” from the British side. “He seems a lot more interested in re-litigating Brexit with Brussels than with convincing global leaders to raise their CO2 reduction targets,” the paper wrote. Germany’s Der Spiegel recalled the prime minister’s climate speech in September to the UN general assembly when – bizarrely – he referenced Kermit the frog. “When it comes to using zany metaphors to underline his message, Johnson has form,” Spiegel said. For his part, Johnson insists his conviction that global heating poses an existential threat is real. Asked by the Guardian why he had become a believer, Johnson said he received a briefing from government scientists soon after becoming prime minister. It featured terrifying data and graphs, he recalled. Johnson’s wife, Carrie, probably also played a role in changing his mind, or so everyone around him thinks. Yet doubts over Johnson’s sincerity remain. He flew to Rome and then on to Glasgow in a luxurious chartered plane painted with “United Kingdom” and a union flag. The jet is used by Johnson and some royals for shorter trips. But why not travel back to London from Cop26 by train, a comfortable journey of four and a half hours? This was not possible, No 10 said, because of “time restraints”. On Thursday, the reason for Johnson’s haste became clear. The Mirror reported Johnson had flown back to London to attend a reunion of Daily Telegraph journalists at the men-only Garrick Club. He was pictured emerging from a dinner with Charles Moore, his old boss, whom Johnson recently made a Tory peer. Lord Moore has said there is no proof the planet faces a “climate emergency” and accuses activists of “project fear”. Anneliese Dodds, the Labour party chair, said Johnson was guilty of “staggering hypocrisy”. The charge sheet also includes reducing taxes on domestic passenger flights in last week’s budget and equivocating on whether a controversial new coalmine should be built in Cumbria, at the same time as calling on China, the US, Australia and others to phase out coal production. It has left many environmentalists with a fear that Johnson has so far failed to heed his own apocalyptic rhetoric, even if he now grasps the problem. “We hope world leaders listen to Johnson’s warnings. But maybe he needs to listen to them himself,” Greenpeace’s Rebecca Newsom said. Additional reporting: Jennifer Rankin, Jon Henley, Sam Jones, Philip Oltermann, Tom PhillipsTwo libel claims by an aggrieved Italian prosecutor against a Guardian journalist have been flagged as potential acts of state “harassment and intimidation” on an alert system run by Europe’s leading government-backed human rights organisation, the Council of Europe. Calogero Ferrara, a prosecutor in Palermo, filed the defamation suits in 2019 against the journalist Lorenzo Tondo over a Facebook post and a series of allegedly inaccurate articles published by the Guardian. A first hearing of one of the libel cases has now been set for February 2022. It is claimed in an alert posted on the Council of Europe “safety platform” by the European federation of Journalists and the International Federation of Journalists that the lawsuits will in effect prevent Tondo from carrying out his reporting duties. The Italian government is yet to respond to the alert. According to the Council of Europe, a postwar organisation of which 47 member state governments are signatories, the “safety of journalists” platform reports on “serious threats to the safety of journalists and media freedom in Europe in order to reinforce the Council of Europe’s response to the threats and member states’ accountability”. In the past year, there have been 212 such alerts in 33 countries, to which 78 have received a response from the government involved. None of the alerts have been “resolved”, according to the Council of Europe. Ferrara’s defamation claims against Tondo relate to his reporting on the case of an Eritrean man, Medhanie Tesfamariam Berhe, who a court found was mistakenly identified by prosecutors in Palermo in 2016, as one of the world’s most-wanted human traffickers, Medhanie Yehdego Mered, nicknamed “the General”. In July 2019, Judge Alfredo Montalto rejected the prosecutors’ case against Berhe and ordered his immediate release. He had been arrested in Khartoum, Sudan, with help of the UK’s National Crime Agency and the Sudanese police. “It was a case of mistaken identity,” the judge said. “The man in prison was wrongly arrested.” Berhe was found guilty of aiding illegal immigration for having helped his cousin to reach Libya. Because he had already served three years in prison, the judge ordered his immediate release. The initial case against Berhe, led by Ferrara, was found in a 400-page judicial report by the court of assizes to be guilty of “serious neglect” by withholding evidence. According to judges, the prosecutors’ accusations in some instances “appeared patently inconsistent and inadequate”. The prosecutors are appealing against the judgments on what is known in Italy as the “Mered” trial. According to the alert on the Council of Europe platform, “as a result” of the lawsuits against Tondo, the Guardian’s southern Italy correspondent, he will not be able to report on the appeal hearings, which started on 27 October. The Council of Europe alert says: “In 2016, public prosecutors in Sicily had announced the arrest in Khartoum (Sudan) of a 35-year-old Eritrean who they alleged was Medhanie Yehdego Mered, also known as ‘The General’, one of the world’s most-wanted international people traffickers. “During the subsequent trial in Palermo, doubts were raised – first of all by Tondo on the basis of evidence-based investigative work – that the arrested man was not Mered but an innocent refugee whose name was Medhanie Tesfamariam Berhe, whereas Mered was free and active in Uganda. “Between December 2019 and January 2020, Tondo was notified of two civil lawsuits for defamation filed by prosecutor Ferrara: one over his Facebook post and one over his articles posted on the Guardian. “Although the mandatory mediation attempt was concluded on 5 November 2020, prosecutor Ferrara waited almost one year before confirming the lawsuits, which were notified shortly before the start of the second ‘Mered’ trial. Critics say this might indicate a strategic move to intimidate and prevent Tondo from covering the second ‘Mered’ trial.” Romina Marceca, a journalist with the Italian newspaper la Repubblica, is also been sued by Ferrara for her reporting on the original trial. Alberto Spampinato, the director of Ossigeno per l’informazione, an organisation established to defend the rights of journalists, said: “Criticising a prosecutor in Italy is risky. If a journalist dares to do so, it is likely that the prosecutor will sue him for defamation and force him to defend himself in court and to bear the related costs. “Events of this type are not rare and put journalists in serious difficulty. Ossigeno per l’informazione will continue to support Lorenzo Tondo during this legal battle and will continue to do so, alongside the Guardian and the community of European journalists.” When contacted, Ferrara said he had asked his lawyer to respond.Lionel Blair, who has died aged 92, was that modern phenomenon: the all-round entertainer. That meant he might turn up as a stage or film actor, choreographer or star performer on a TV show such as Give Us a Clue. But all-rounders, as any cricket-lover will tell you, have to shine in one particular discipline and, in Blair’s case, it was as a dancer. If you want proof, you have only to look at a clip of him doing a competitive tap routine with Sammy Davis Jr in a 1961 Royal Variety Show. The joke is that they are both playing bowler-hatted English gents vying for supremacy. Davis performs with his usual elan and departs saying “Toodle-pip”. He leaves the stage clear for Blair who, with his slim frame and galvanised elegance, if anything outdoes the master. Dancing was clearly Blair’s forte, which is why he formed his own troupe – who regularly adorned stage and TV variety shows. I first saw Blair on stage in a 1968 revival of a George and Ira Gershwin’s 20s musical, Lady, Be Good! The original London production had starred Fred and Adele Astaire as a brother-sister act that had fallen on hard times and, although the revival failed to draw the town, it showed that Blair could evoke memories of the nimble feet of his legendary predecessor. The big surprise came in 1987 when Blair turned up as the Player in a West End revival of Tom Stoppard’s Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead. I’d classified Blair as a talented hoofer and amiable TV host but here he showed he could wrap his tongue around such quintessential Stoppardian ideas as the subjectivity of truth. As I wrote at the time, he also invested the role with “the right touch of seediness as if he were the Elizabethan equivalent of a purveyor of filthy postcards”. Stoppard certainly demanded more of him than his last role on the London stage. It came in 2000 in a show called Pageant in which he acted as compere to an all-male beauty contest. In a sense the show was a forerunner to RuPaul’s Drag Race, in that the men were all in skirts: it lacked, however, the slickness of the RuPaul show and Blair, with his spangled hair and salmon-pink dinner jacket, seemed all too complicit with the evening’s air of fake glitter. Blair was nothing if not versatile and scored a popular triumph as a team captain, alongside Una Stubbs, in Give Us a Clue. The show depended on the two stars’ ability to encapsulate the title of a play, film or book through energetic mime. It also turned into a running gag on a BBC radio show, I’m Sorry I Haven’t a Clue, where I can still recall Humphrey Lyttelton paying tribute to Blair’s ability to pull off Twelve Angry Men in 30 seconds. It says a lot for Blair – a happily married man with three children – that he never complained about the programme’s portrayal of him as a camp icon. But, while Blair had something of Bruce Forsyth’s capacity to be a showbiz chameleon, it is as a dancer that he was at his considerable best.Cop26 may not be the first place that springs to mind when thinking about fashion, but stripes were all the rage in Glasgow this week, where striking white, blue and red shirts were the latest must-have piece for fashion-forward scientists. These statement shirts may look like some 70s throwback but they have been designed using the latest polar data. Climate data is not a natural conversation starter but the shirts, made by Cambridge-based company DressCode Shirts, are designed to get people’s attention. They tell the story of two datasets, which show how rapidly polar regions are warming, using soft blues to represent colder temperatures and reds to show hotter ones. The stripes on the body of the shirt represent 70 years of warming in the Arctic, from 1950 to 2020. On the cuff is a graph depicting 800,000 years of Antarctic temperatures and CO2 data, which shows how closely the two are linked. The single black button represents the ozone layer. “We’ve had some jaws drop today,” says Pilvi Muschitiello from the British Antarctic Survey (BAS), who helped design the shirts and has been modelling them in the green zone. “A lot of people are very enthused when they see the shirt. People are surprised just looking at the CO2 levels and the historical record, as well as where we are today,” she says. Scientists from BAS are researching polar regions, looking at a range of issues, from what iceberg carving does to ecosystems to how melting is making them less habitable for polar wildlife. The aim of the clothing line is to help people engage with complex scientific data. “We want to show the different timescales of these changes so people can understand the urgency of this situation. We also want to engage with the data in more creative ways because that’s part of how we will find better solutions for the future,” says Muschitiello. The barcode of vertical stripes is also trending on face masks, ties, scarves and even dresses at the conference. They were made using an algorithm created by Ed Hawkins, professor of climate science at the University of Reading. His original design shows temperature increases from 1850 to 2020, with each stripe representing one year. Even Ed Miliband is a fan and was spotted sporting a scarf, designed by London-based Atelier Tammam, bearing the stripes. “Starting conversations about climate change is key to engaging everyone with the urgent need to cut greenhouse gas emissions,” says Hawkins. “Using fashion is another example of how the warming stripes have been used as inspiration for enabling these conversations with different audiences.” As part of the promotional display at Cop, scientists from BAS froze one of the shirts and ran a competition to see who could guess when it could thaw. The shirt was put out at 8.30am and defrosted at around 7pm, by which time all the ice had disappeared. “This is an analogy for what is happening to our planet. It shows the effects that climate change is having in the polar regions,” says Muschitiello. The shirts were designed by Andy Boothman, founder of DressCode Shirts. They are made from sustainable wood pulp and are printed digitally to save water. The shirt costs £125, or £160 for one with a chip in the cuff, which means the wearer can use it to make contactless payments. “Clothing has an amazing role in our lives,” says Boothman. “We’re passionate about making clothing with real stories backed up by science. The reaction has been phenomenal. “It’s been great to work with the scientists and get a deep understanding of what they’re doing and how things are being measured. When you start talking about an 800,000-year dataset, it just blows your mind. The challenge is to make that into something simple enough to be engaging.” The shirt was released two weeks before Cop26 at the Cambridge Clean Tech 10th anniversary conference. They can be bought online and come in three sizes for men and women. Researchers now want to look at other big datasets that could be displayed on a shirt, such as sonic data showing the amount of krill in the ocean. The fashion writer’s verdict Colour is always appreciated by style watchers - and if that colour has a “if you know, you know” kind of meaning, so much the better. Repurposing Ed Hawkins’ infographic on shirts, ties, scarves and, inevitably, face masks gains approval for these factors alone. Judged solely as sartorial statements, however, the interpretations are a mixed bag. A pattern as busy as this is a brave choice to wear as a clothing item rather than accessory. At first glance, and without the reference, a shirt with the global heating infographic looks more like something found in the gift shop for a Bridget Riley exhibition. Masks get a pass because we’re now used to all sorts of patterns on people’s faces, but a tie with the infographic width-ways is a bit distracting. It’s certainly not one for a video call. Ed Miliband - typically a bit overshadowed by his brother David and his sharp suits, when it comes to style - is the surprise style success story here. Hawkins’ pattern transposed to a scarf adds a jazzy detail to Miliband’s otherwise-plain outfit but its success comes from an impact beyond aesthetics. With the infographic covering the length of a scarf, the visual effect showing how the planet’s temperature has warmed from blue to red over time is made more explicit - you can see it better, basically. And, arguably, that’s the most important thing. Lauren Cochrane Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and features • This article was amended on 19 November 2021 to include the name of the designer of Ed Miliband’s scarf.Britain and the EU appear on the brink of a trade war after Brussels accused Boris Johnson of lacking sincerity in negotiations over Northern Ireland’s future and warned of “serious consequences” if Downing Street suspended the post-Brexit deal. As he emerged from his latest tense meeting with the UK’s Brexit minister, the EU commissioner Maroš Šefčovič said that despite Brussels’ attempts to find a compromise, “we have seen no move at all from the UK side”. The two sides have been locked in talks for three weeks over changes to how the Brexit deal works to ensure the free flow of trade between Britain and Northern Ireland. The EU has offered to cut customs controls in half and health checks on animal and plant products heading to supermarkets by 80%, but Šefčovič suggested there had been scant effort by David Frost, the Brexit minister, to engage with the proposals. “I found this disappointing and once again I urge the UK government to engage with us sincerely,” Šefčovič said. “From this perspective, I see next week as an important one. We should focus all efforts on reaching a solution as soon as possible. “Our aim should be to establish stability and predictability for Northern Ireland. We hear a lot about article 16 at the moment, but there’ll be no doubt that triggering article 16 to seek the negotiation of the protocol would have serious consequences. “Serious for Northern Ireland, as it would lead to instability and unpredictability, and serious also for the EU-UK relations in general, as it would mean a rejection of EU efforts to find a consensual solution to the implementation of the protocol.” Under the protocol, Northern Ireland in effect remains in the single market for goods while the EU’s customs rulebook is enforced on goods entering from Britain. Brussels has conceded that the implementation of these arrangements has created political disruption in Northern Ireland. Lord Frost reiterated on Friday, however, that the remedies proposed did not go far enough. The UK government wants to maintain a free flow of trade between Northern Ireland and the wider single market including the Republic but without a role for the European court of justice as arbiter of whether EU law is being followed. “Lord Frost set out the UK’s assessment of the negotiations on the protocol,” a UK government spokesperson said of the meeting with Šefčovič. “He underlined that progress had been limited and that the EU’s proposals did not currently deal effectively with the fundamental difficulties in the way the protocol was operating.” Article 16 of the protocol allows either side to take unilateral “safeguard measures” that would suspend parts of the deal agreed by Johnson with Brussels if it causes “serious economic, societal or environmental difficulties”. Such a move would be seen as incendiary in EU capitals, which have been infuriated by Downing Street’s refusal to implement a deal agreed in October 2019. Before his meeting in Brussels, Frost nevertheless warned triggering article 16 was “very much on the table”, adding that time was running out. “We hope to make some progress, but honestly, the gap between us is still quite significant, but let’s see where we can get to,” he said. “We’re not going to trigger article 16 today, but article 16 is very much on the table and has been since July. “Time is running out on these talks if we are to make progress.” Frost had set the EU a three-week deadline after the 12 October publication in Brussels of a plan to drastically reduce the level of checks on trade going from Great Britain into Northern Ireland. It is widely expected that any decision on article 16 will be made after the Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow, which are due to end on 12 November. Frost said: “I’m not going to give any timescales or any hypotheticals. There’s a significant gap between us. If that gap narrows and the commission listens to what we have said in the command paper and looks at the situation in Northern Ireland, then maybe that will help us move things forward.” There has been speculation the UK could use article 16 to implement its vision for Northern Ireland, as outlined in a July command paper. However, the treaty only allows for “strictly necessary” actions “to remedy the situation”. There is ongoing debate in government at what this legally permits. Should the UK trigger article 16, there will be a range of options available to the EU, including giving notice of terminating the trade and cooperation agreement that ensures tariff-free trade. EU sources said it was unlikely Brussels would jump to such a decision given the range of other options within the treaty to respond to the UK, including targeted tariffs on British exports.At a toy factory in south-east China, boxes of plastic dart guns are stacked across the floor. Sometimes, so many packages pile up that they stretch into the production area, slowing the work of making more toys. What to do with all the blaster guns, which have been sold to retailers in the UK but cannot find room on ships to get them there, is a problem for Nick Mowbray, the co-founder of Zuru Toys. The company expects to generate about $1.1bn (£815m) in revenue this year thanks to surging demand for products such as 5 Surprise Mini Brands, Rainbocorns and X-Shot blasters. But Mowbray says there will be toy shortages this Christmas. Shipping constraints, power outages and a lack of workers to stitch soft toys are all hurting production. Mowbray says stress points throughout the “delicate” manufacturing ecosystem mean some toys will cost consumers more, and some will not make it under the tree at all. Too many factories The problems begin in China. Zuru Toys makes about 600,000 toys each day at 20 factories across China. Manufacturers have flooded into the country from places such as India and Vietnam over the past year, as Covid-19 outbreaks have left factories struggling and China has kept outbreaks under control. Mowbray says a “whole heap of manufacturers moved back to China” because it has managed the virus well. But the world’s second largest economy and manufacturing powerhouse has a big challenge: not enough power. The electricity crisis The influx of production has drained power supplies and China continues to grapple with severe energy shortages. It is driven in part by an enormous hunger for goods as the world reopens from the pandemic. Tight coal supplies and stricter emissions standards have also led to power outages, halting production at some factories. Mowbray says on top of those pressures, cryptocurrency miners – though technically banned in China – continue to operate and “use a tonne of electricity”. “So now we have the electricity crisis in China,” he says. “It’s a huge constraint.” In response Beijing has rationed power and imposed energy limits. Mowbray says the restrictions at factories in the Guangdong province – where some of Zuru’s most popular toys are made – would have cut capacity in half. Zuru has created a workaround – building “mini-power stations”, laying concrete, constructing new buildings and equipping sites with generators – to keep output at those factories ticking at 100%. Worker shortages Mowbray says for now, generators have solved the power issues but the company faces other production headaches. Certain factory workers are scarce in China and the swelling appetite for consumer goods has made labour shortages worse. Finding workers who can sew is “a nightmare right now” and that has dealt a heavy blow to the soft toy market, he says. “We’re having massive constraints in our plush products … all of China is facing that.” That means any toy with a soft component – from a cuddly teddy bear to a plastic doll house fitted with fabric bedspreads – will be harder to get. Container crisis By far the biggest issue, Mowbray says, is shipping. The world is in the grip of a supply chain crisis that stretches from Asia to the US and Europe. It has been caused by a series of connected issues that include the surge in demand for goods, and not enough workers to distribute them. Maritime trade crashed at the start of the pandemic, then as the world began to reopen, demand for energy, labour and transport leapt. That has led to backlogs at the world’s busiest container ports, including the UK’s largest in Felixstowe. Worker shortages on the ground tightened bottlenecks even further. “Every week is a battle for us trying to get product on to vessels,” says Mowbray, and container prices have skyrocketed. He says a container from China to the UK would have previously cost about $2,000-$3,000 (£1,480-£2,200) – now it is more than $20,000. It means Zuru struggles to get toys it has already sold to UK customers like The Entertainer, Tesco and Argos out of the factory door. Competition for space on vessels is so tight that some retailers have waited up to four months to get Zuru toys on a container ship. In that amount of time, its factories fill with already-sold stock. “In some cases we have to stop production because there’s no more room to store products,” Mowbray says. With its warehouse already full, stocks of X-Shot blasters at one point flowed into the production area. “It’s an enormous factory, 70,000 sq metres of space … we had to take space outside, down the road.” He says Zuru held up to $70m in inventory that retailers had bought. That is now down to about $18m, still sitting in the factory warehouse. Driver shortage Once the toys finally make it to the UK, the challenge becomes finding a truck to deliver them to the retailer. At major ports in the UK and the US, heavy backlogs have left ships unable to dock and unload. There is also a problem with a lack of workers – namely HGV drivers in Britain – to deal with all those goods. In the haulage and warehousing industries, Brexit and Covid-19 are blamed for chronic labour shortages. The government pointed the finger at coronavirus – at least in part – for the driver shortage, saying the pandemic delayed 40,000 HGV driving tests. At the same time, some industry bosses argue Brexit cut off supplies of long relied upon European workforces. Gary Grant, the chair of The Entertainer, says there are issues with deliveries from UK ports to its chain of 172 toy stores owing to the delivery driver shortage. He warns there may be difficulties in restocking popular items once the festive buying season takes off in November. Price hikes and Christmas jitters Mowbray says the pressure points along the toy supply chain – in particular the surge in shipping costs – will leave retailers with “no choice” but to raise prices. For the X-Shot blaster range, he says, prices in the UK have risen anywhere from 10-15% on toys that sell for £10 to £30. “Inflation is coming in a big way,” he says. “There won’t be one of our brands that won’t have shortages for Christmas.” The Entertainer, meanwhile, believes that the challenges in China will not affect Christmas but could hit toy supplies moving into the school holiday period. “We are never going to be out of toys but there might not be certain toys in the market as early as there would have been,” Grant says. Additional reporting by Sarah Butler“It’s been like a whirlwind,” says Tyrick Mitchell. The Crystal Palace defender is reflecting on life under Patrick Vieira a few days after he was part of the side that defeated the champions, Manchester City, on their home patch, although the 22-year-old could easily be talking about his own career. As a youngster Mitchell had trials with Watford but struggled with attendance because his absent father was in and out of prison, leaving his mother to survive on benefits. His dream of becoming a professional looked doomed when Brentford closed their academy in May 2016 – two months after he had signed his first contract. Now firmly established as Palace’s first-choice left-back, he has started every Premier League match since Vieira succeeded Roy Hodgson in the summer and insists he never lost faith in his ability. “I always had a plan that somehow I’ve got to … I had tunnel vision,” he says. “There was nothing going to stop me. Sometimes you detour and don’t focus as much but I always make sure that no one is going to influence me or put me on the wrong track to not succeed. It hasn’t been the easiest of routes but that’s what makes everything more special and humbling to me. It came from nothing and it wasn’t easy – I think that is a big part of the person I am today. I try to stay humble and cherish every moment.” Mitchell grew up with his mother and sister in Harrow, north-west London, and has had only sporadic contact with his father. “It was difficult and for a lot of people around me in the area it was probably the same,” he says. “The single-parent aspect was massive for me. I feel like it made me a better person. I didn’t take anything for granted. It gave me that pride where now I am in a position where I can help the people around me, and no one has to worry about anything. “That whole scenario built me into a man so much quicker. Sometimes when you have two parents, or when you are given everything you want, you are kind of shielded from the real world. Now when I enter the real world, and you don’t get everything you want or you have to work even harder, I am able to do that with ease.” Mitchell was first spotted playing for local club Pinner Albion and failed a trial with Watford’s Under-10s before joining AFC Wembley. The coach Abdi Farah, his mentor and now agent, took Mitchell under his wing after growing concerned because the young defender kept missing training sessions. Mitchell credits the influence of Farah and the coaches at Brentford’s academy for making him realise how much dedication would be required. “They helped me getting to training and staying focused on my dream. They played a massive role in getting me to where I am today. Obviously as a young person you love playing football but when you’re younger the whole professional aspect is hard to grasp. Like being punctual and things like that. It’s not like just going outside and kicking a ball with your friends. “Sometimes I felt like I sacrificed the professional side to just be a kid and stay out late with my friends. I didn’t really understand what football could be at that time. But the rest of the coaches told me: ‘You have a real chance here – don’t throw it away …’ It’s not always about having fun – sometimes you have to be professional and they helped me understand that.” Yet Brentford’s controversial decision to close their academy to focus on their “B” side playing top opposition in friendlies left Mitchell and many others out in the cold. “I felt that was all I knew growing up,” he says. “It was like a family, so when it closed, suddenly I was just a school pupil and not someone who was at an academy. That was one of the hardest parts but I never try to get ahead of myself. A lot of people like my friends helped me to move on and recognise that there was going to be another opportunity and to make sure I was ready to take it.” When that came in the form of an offer from Palace, Mitchell did not hesitate, despite interest from other clubs. Two days after Alan Pardew’s side had lost the 2016 FA Cup final against Manchester United, he met Palace’s academy director, Gary Issott, at the hotel where the squad had held their post-match party. “From the first meeting with Gary, there was a plan,” says Mitchell. “It was like: ‘We have these people in front of you; this person might go and this person will stay.’ I prefer someone to tell me how it is – tell me that I’ve got to get past this player. I feel like I’m a good judge of character and sometimes when people speak you feel their energy and believe what they are saying. That was the kind of vibe that I got with Gary and here we are today.” It is a measure of the esteem Mitchell is held in at Palace that the experienced Patrick van Aanholt was allowed to depart in the summer and no left-back was brought in by Vieira. After becoming Palace’s youngest Premier League goalscorer for 23 years at the end of last season against Aston Villa, he has continued that form with an assist in the draw against Newcastle and is top of the Premier League’s successful tackles chart. “Patrick was a great left-back and when he was here I learned a lot off him,” he says. “But the confidence the club and manager have put in me has made me want to repay them and show that they were right.” Mitchell has yet to take the opportunity to pick his manager’s brains about one of his heroes, however. Ashley Cole played at left-back for Palace on loan before going on to be part of the Arsenal “Invincibles” side captained by Vieira. “I haven’t really asked about Ashley Cole,” Mitchell says. “I class Ashley Cole as a Chelsea player, so I don’t really remember his Arsenal time. But that’s a good point, I am going to do that!” A picture of Mitchell was proudly included alongside other youth-team products such as Gareth Southgate, Wilfried Zaha and Aaron Wan-Bissaka as part of a mural outside Palace’s new academy that was officially opened last week by the England manager. The next stage of development at the £20m state-of-the-art facility in one of the country’s talent hotspots is about to begin and their latest homegrown star is expecting plenty more to follow in his footsteps as a result. “I think there is going to be a massive production of players coming through,” he says. “There is nothing you can’t get at Palace that you will get at another club. It’s crazy. I won’t be surprised if the whole of the south play for Palace.”Some vulnerable children excluded from mainstream schooling are being educated in unregulated and illegal schools based in caravans on farmland, and on industrial estates and business parks, Ofsted inspectors have told the Guardian in an attempt to lift the lid on a murky world. Victor Shafiee and Sue Will, who focus on unregistered and illegal schools brought to the inspectorate’s attention through referrals from a worried parent or local authority, say alternative provision (AP) for children who cannot be accommodated in mainstream education is complex and growing. For children struggling in mainstream schools there are high-quality state-funded pupil referral units and good independent alternative provision, registered and monitored by Ofsted, that can offer a good short-term fix. But because of a shortage of places, there is also a growing unregistered sector, which is what concerns Ofsted. If an AP offers part-time provision, it is not required to register and so will not be inspected by Ofsted. It becomes illegal if it is not registered yet is offering full-time or near full-time education. The landscape becomes even murkier when children who have been excluded are referred to over-subscribed pupil referral units. They may then be subcontracted to an unregistered setting. It means troubled and challenging children, some as young as five, are being sent to “schools” in unsuitable accommodation, with unqualified staff, and may be receiving little in the way of education. Five- and six-year-olds may be placed alongside older teenagers, with no specialist provision for either. The inspectors described how a 14-year-old boy with zero interest in hair and beauty was placed in a setting specialising in hair and beauty. Children roll up at 11am and there may be no staff checks, no curriculum oversight, no data. “It’s awful, isn’t it?” said Shafiee, Ofsted’s deputy director of unregistered and independent schools. “The big question for me is: what’s happened out there? Have children suddenly got worse behaved? What is it that’s fundamentally changed that means more children are going to APs, and primary kids are increasingly going to APs? Because this area is so obscure we just don’t know.” Inspectors are also seeing a growth in online APs, which can in some circumstances be helpful, though not always. “A child is having behavioural problems. What do we do? We ask them to sit in front of a computer and go on to an online AP,” said Shafiee. And a lot of money is changing hands. If a child has an education, health and care plan for severe special needs, large sums of money can follow that child, with annual fees of £30,000 or even more being paid by local authorities to private providers. “Why have we got ourselves into a situation where some of the most vulnerable children are being cared for or educated by people that probably aren’t as qualified as normal teachers?” said Shafiee. “What’s going to happen to them? If at a very young age you end up in an illegal or unregistered AP, what are your chances? “I can’t tell you hand on heart that this child is going to be returned back to school very quickly, he or she is going to behave much better and life is going to be all roses. There’s a lack of data about how many of these children end up back in mainstream or how many end up in the judicial system. Isn’t that a bad place to be? We just don’t know how many of our children go to these places. Forgive me if I sound really emotional about it.” Will is one of a small team of Ofsted inspectors who since 2016 have been going out to unregistered and illegal settings across the country. “I’ve been to settings in caravans on farmland, we’ve been to grubby halls, another favourite is on industrial estates,” she said. “We have started to identify more primary children at these settings in the last 18 months, but that’s not to say they weren’t there before. We’re really working in the dark here. There’s no regulation. There’s no requirement for paperwork. It really is the unknown.” She has come across children as young as five in these settings. “You imagine a five-year-old being written off. At five,” said Will. Shafiee added: “They deserve the system to help them as much as any other child.” He said: “There is a place for alternative provision in the system, taking a child that’s having problems out of a particular environment, giving him a short break, a different outlook helps them to calm down, to get themselves sorted. We can’t have these children disrupting hundreds of children’s education at the same time either. “But writing them off, or parking them somewhere is not the answer. It’s not fair to them and it’s not fair to the taxpayer who pays for it and it’s not fair to their parents or the society at large.”Ricardo P Lloyd was nervous as he stepped into the plush offices of a major British talent agent. The agent, who is white, represents stars across British TV drama. “You feel like if you impress this person, your life could change,” says Lloyd. Then 25, he was used to reading for small “gang roles” but Lloyd was hot after a successful run in a special birthday celebration of Shakespeare at Westminster Abbey (the production starred Mark Rylance and was described by Michael Billington as “one of the most moving celebrations of Shakespeare I’ve experienced”). “Diversity is the new thing,” said the suited agent, by way of greeting his potential client. It was an “automatic red flag”, Lloyd says, but he gamely sent over a few tapes. His rejection came with a cursory “we’ve already got someone who looks like you on our books”. Lloyd felt foolish to think it was his talent, rather than the colour of his skin, that got him in the room. Recounting the story, his big eyes are wet with tears: “Every actor feels like they’re not good enough but deep down I know there’s still a barrier to me being accepted … The industry keeps shutting me out, but I will find a way to do what I love.” Ricardo P Lloyd (the P stands for Paris) is sitting on a bench in London’s Queen’s Park. He grew up in nearby Kensal Rise. It is now an affluent residential area, but 20 years ago the area was rife with gangs, guns and crack cocaine. It was drama that would provide his way out. “It started as escapism for me,” he says of his starring roles in school productions of Bugsy Malone and West Side Story. For five years it was his job, too. But work was inconsistent, a problem he exacerbated by turning down many of the typecast roles that came his way. “I’ve got two degrees, I’ve done Shakespeare, but I’m still the roadman saying: ‘Man’s gonna stab you up” with a spliff in my mouth,” he says. Now, approaching 30, Lloyd says he needs to know where his next pay cheque is coming from. Indeed, lockdown could not have come at a worse time, after a period of near-misses (including callbacks for major Amazon Prime and BBC dramas). Unable to find work, Lloyd was broke and, shortly after, homeless. “That’s when the depression came,” he says. It is not only up-and-coming actors such as Lloyd who struggle to find work on screen in the UK. David Harewood is 55 and one of the most successful Black actors Britain has ever produced. “I’ve never played a leading character on British television,” he says. Born in Small Heath, Birmingham, Harewood won a place at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (Rada) at 18. In 1997, he became the first Black actor to play Othello at the National Theatre in London. Best known for playing the CIA counter-terrorism director David Estes in Homeland – which routinely drew more than 2 million viewers on Channel 4 – Harewood is now a bestselling author after the publication of his memoir, a rumination on the racial abuse he suffered and the psychosis it fuelled. Throughout the book, Harewood is glowing about his time at Rada and says he was “very lucky” to have had a principal who was intent on “moving away from the model of a pretty blonde person”. But the industry was not so progressive and Harewood struggled for onscreen roles. “I had to come to terms with the fact that I was not going to play strong, authoritative characters. That plays directly into your mental health because you know something’s not right,” he says. “The path to global recognition is clearer than the path to national recognition. Here, we’re still dealing with people’s perceptions of what Black can be.” Other British actors who have had to head to the other side of the Atlantic to find success include the Academy award winner Daniel Kaluuya, Idris Elba and Bridgerton’s Regé-Jean Page. While Weathers read a scene from the Noel Clarke film Adulthood, one of his tutors commented on how he would have no trouble sourcing props. “He told me: ‘I’m sure you could get a gun,’” he says. He adds that “it became a big joke … being constantly confused for the only other Black person in my year”. A survey of soap actors by the diversity and inclusion consultancy Inc Arts UK found that 16% had been mistaken for another Black person on set, while 54% reported that they never get mistaken for someone else as they are “normally the only Black person on set”. Many young Black actors cannot afford to attend drama school in the first place. Undergraduate fees currently stand at £9,250 a year before living expenses. Mascuud Dahir, 22, turned down a place at London’s Central School of Speech and Drama (Central) this year after failing to raise the £69,000 required for him to complete the three-year course. “I feel a bit put off for the time being but I’m not ready to give up,” he says. Like Lloyd, Dahir attended Intermission Youth Theatre, an arts charity patronised by Naomie Harris; Rylance is also on the board of trustees. “It’s not just about money,” says Lloyd. “I didn’t have the knowledge or connections to know about drama school.” To a young person of colour, a prestigious reference on their CV can make all the difference. But the recent controversies rocking UK drama schools reflect the fact that, for years, these institutions have acted as a gatekeeper to all but the token few Black and Asian faces who possess undeniable levels of wealth or talent. “It took a man to die halfway across the world for people in Britain to realise racism is a thing,” says the actor Reice Weathers, 28. He grew up in Islington and went to Laycock primary school, now the base of Make Believe, his performing arts school for children. After graduating with a BA in acting from Central in 2015, Weathers found himself back there last year, in heated discussion with the school’s hierarchy over allegations it had failed its students of colour. “There was “a lot of virtue signalling from companies and brands that gaslit people for years. Central was no different,” he says. Professor Gavin Henderson resigned last year as the principal of Central School of Speech and Drama, after apologising for “the lived experiences of students of colour” at the school. He had earlier dismissed the idea of implementing access quotas by saying: “We have a school to maintain and a reputation to maintain in terms of the standards of who we are engaging.”When Weathers arrived at Central in 2012 and saw the third-year acting shows (the public showcase for the graduating class) he noticed that “all the Black and brown people were playing butlers and servants”. Weathers estimates that he is in more than £40K of debt from his time at Central. “I was taught how to speak RP or northern or a Black Country accent but I was never taught Jamaican or African accents that I’d be more likely to need in the industry … Everyone pays the same but they don’t receive the same amount of training.” Rada has also come under scrutiny over issues around race. Last year, students sent an open letter calling for the name of Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw to be dropped from its theatre due to his views on eugenics, and also implored Rada to stop performing Restoration comedies due to their association with Empire-building. Rada released a statement saying it was “committed to supporting all Black students” but acknowledged “there is work we must do”, after a former student said she was told “there are no Black playwrights, we can’t teach you that, they don’t exist”, by a tutor. Inc Arts UK’s CEO, Amanda Parker, says the role of drama schools in shaping the wider industry, for better and worse, cannot be overstated: “They have a duty of care to ensure that all emerging talent is supported at every stage. Hasty casting decisions, a lack of care about how sensitive subjects are tackled on stage, a lack of support from someone else who understands their lived perspective: drama schools must be mindful of how these shortcomings can add up to significant barriers to an actor’s career.” Ian Manborde, Equalities and Diversity Officer at the performing arts workers’ union Equity says: “the day-to-day working lives” of the union’s black and Asian members are “distinguished by an experience of casual, systemic racism. This racism excludes them from and limits their opportunities in the sector, and leads to stereotypical and racist portrayals in art.”” “I’ve never felt intimidated, being the only Black person in the room,” says David Harewood. “But it’s hard to speak up because the minute you do, you’re a troublemaker. There are so many hierarchical lines that Black people have to tread in order to keep their fucking jobs.” At drama school level at least, it’s all change at the top. Henderson was replaced as principal at Central in February by Josette Bushell-Mingo, the former head of acting at Stockholm University of the Arts, Sweden. Bushell-Mingo was born in London to Guyanese parents and trained at the RSC. She is the first Black head of Central in its history and the school’s first female head since 1942. Pamela Jikiemi, head of film, television and radio at Rada since September 2019, says: “Drama schools are very much held in a chokehold by the white establishment … When you’re white you get actor training, when you’re Black you get training to be white.” She says that Rada has sought to address the big picture in order to tackle the longstanding issues at the school. Following the formation of a steering group on racial equality in July 2020, Rada has hired a consultant, Prof Vini Lander, to oversee the organisation’s work on race. “We’ve had to outline: this is what racism looks like, this is what protected characteristics are. This is what you need to address in the curriculum,” says Jikiemi. “There’s no point just saying: ‘We’ll take that play out and put a Black one in’.” She adds: “My dad used to say if you’re going to eat a frog, eat a fat one.” Since the pandemic hit, there have been no sofa receptions with high-profile agents for Lloyd. For much of the past two years, he has claimed universal credit. “I’ve questioned my acting, my identity, my purpose. Imagine working with Mark Rylance and being homeless a year later?” Lloyd says he is slowly building his life back. There have been some Zoom calls with a couple of Hollywood agents. “I’m still fighting to get through the door in my country, but coming from north-west London and speaking the way I speak, it can feel like the industry’s against you. It’s classism as well as racism.” “Things are starting to change,” he adds. “There might be a Black James Bond soon but as long as the structural system remains … it’s just tokenism.”Like many of you, this autumn I’ve gone back into work for the first time since the pandemic started, though in my case that workplace is a tasting room. “Call that work?” I can imagine you thinking, but it’s actually harder than it sounds, honest: the lineup’s typically 100-plus wines that you sniff and spit out one after the other. “I wouldn’t be able to tell them apart after tasting half a dozen,” many people tell me, and although that’s what we’ve trained ourselves to do, you can’t deny that a certain palate fatigue does set in, and that it’s far from the experience that you, the reader, will have when you drink the same wine. The plus – and this is something you don’t experience when you taste just a handful of wines in isolation – is that you get an overview of what a particular retailer is doing, and can then compare it with the competition and how they’ve done in the past. This autumn, for example, I’ve found Morrisons slightly disappointing, with a few notable exceptions such as the sauternes in today’s pick, and Sainsbury’s considerably better value for reds than for whites, many of which I felt had been rushed into store earlier than they should have been. Wine needs time to settle after bottling, and many 2021s are still out of kilter. Waitrose, on the other hand, which has been rather dull of late, had a really good tasting, with some excellent new additions to its Cellar range and an expansion of the Loved and Found selection – a name, it has to be said, that bears an uncanny similarity to Marks &amp; Spencer’s Found. I’m not sure who came up with the idea first, but surely it should be Found and Loved rather than the other way around? Anyway, all credit to them, not least because it includes a wine I’ve never even heard of called bukettraube, which is an off-dry South African white not dissimilar to a vouvray. I confess I prefer the equally obscure fernão pires in this week’s pick, which is reduced to a ridiculously good-value £5.24 on the current 25%-off six bottles promotion. While you’re at it, you might as well also pick up a bottle of the marselan and the castelão (two quaffable reds) for the same price. The supermarket I’m always impressed by, however, is the Co-op, which manages to deliver decent wine at fair prices year in, year out, due largely to a well-established group of buyers who haven’t just been transferred from the pet food-buying team. The store’s French range is particularly strong, and includes some very decent basic bordeaux that wouldn’t be at all out of place on a traditional wine merchant’s list. Five standout supermarket wines Morrisons The Best Sauternes £10 a half-bottle (on offer, down from £12 until 23 November), 14%. Made by one of the region’s top producers, apparently, though they won’t say which. Utterly luscious. Sainsbury’s TTD Discovery Collection Faugères Syrah Grenache 2019 £10, 14%. Rich, spicy, Rhône-ish red from the talented Laurent Miquel. Would be great with a steak. Waitrose Loved &amp; Found Fernão Pires 2021 £6.99, or £5.24 on the current 25%-off six bottles deal, 12.5%. A fresh, crisp, aromatic white that you normally find in Portugal, though this one’s from South Africa. Would be great with south-east Asian food. Roblin Sancerre 2020 £15 Co-op, 13%. Sancerre is so often a disappointment, but this beautifully crafted example, with its trademark gooseberry fruit, is well worth the money. Marks &amp; Spencer Classics Stellenbosch Chenin Blanc 2020/21 £8, 13%. A rich, creamy white made for M&amp;S by South Africa’s top chenin man, Ken Forrester. Buy the 2021 if it’s available. • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comThe schools inspectorate Ofsted has launched an urgent inquiry into a sharp rise in the number of primary-age children – some as young as five – being excluded from school and placed in institutions that can be unregulated, “unkempt and unsafe”. The chief inspector of schools in England, Amanda Spielman, told the Guardian that some children were being removed from mainstream schools because their needs and behaviour were seen as “too challenging”, and were being placed in alternative provision (AP) “with little thought of their futures”. She has called on the government to make it a legal requirement for all AP to be registered, warning that inspectors have found pupils in unregistered settings playing video games all day in unkempt and unsafe buildings where staff do not appear to care whether they attend or not. Some “exist on the edge of the law”, she said. Ofsted inspectors have reported visiting schools in caravans and on industrial estates. Local authorities can pay annual fees of £30,000 or even more to private and sometimes unregistered providers. According to Ofsted, the number of pupils taken out of their primary school and referred to alternative educational settings has risen 27% in the last four years, and there are more than 7,000 pupils aged 11 and under being taught in AP. While the reasons behind the increase are unclear, there are fears the figure will rise further in the coming months as many vulnerable children struggle to adapt to the demands of the school day after disruption caused by the pandemic. Writing for the Guardian, Spielman said: “Every child, regardless of their background, deserves a good education and the chance to reach their full potential. But some children – often the most vulnerable – just don’t get that. While most children have been back in the classroom since September, some children with behavioural, emotional or health problems are instead in alternative provision instead of a normal school.” AP is for children who struggle with conventional education or whose needs cannot be met by mainstream schools. Many come from deprived backgrounds, some have families affected by alcohol and drug abuse as well as mental illness, and 80% have special educational needs and disabilities (Send). “Sometimes it is a useful short-term fix for excluded pupils, serving a valuable purpose in re-engaging them in education; sometimes it does a good job of teaching young people right through to age 16,” said Spielman. “But I am concerned that it is sometimes used just to move on children whose needs and behaviour are deemed too challenging, with little thought of their future.” According to Ofsted, the overall number of children in AP has increased 14% over the last four years. Spielman said: “I’m particularly concerned that the number of primary-age children referred to AP has risen by 27% since 2017 – there are now over 7,000 under-11s in AP. We’re seeing children as young as five attending AP settings, after headteachers have taken what must be an extremely difficult decision to exclude them from primary school. “In light of this, I have commissioned new research to better understand the role that AP plays in the education system, and to find out why primary pupils are being referred to alternative provision in the first place. We will also explore how the pandemic has changed the AP landscape.” The Department for Education (DfE) disagreed with Ofsted’s claim that there had been an increase in numbers of primary placements in AP in recent years, disputing the inclusion of placements in non-maintained special schools in its calculations. A DfE spokesperson said the number of pupils in state-funded AP had gone down over the past few years, but added: “We are looking at reforms to incentivise more early support, and to ensure that those who are permanently excluded remain safe and supported, as part of the ongoing review of the Send system. This includes pupils in unregistered settings and in primary AP, though permanent exclusion of young children is rare. “We are investing in programmes that support pupils to remain engaged in their education and training, and the chancellor has announced an additional £2.6bn to deliver new places and improve existing provision for pupils with Send, including those who require AP and special schools.”Every child, regardless of their background, deserves a good education and the chance to reach their full potential. But some children – often the most vulnerable – just don’t get that chance. While most children have been back in the classroom since September, some children with behavioural, emotional or health problems are instead in “alternative provision” – also known as AP – instead of a regular school. AP exists for children who struggle with conventional education, or whose needs cannot be met by mainstream schools. Sometimes it is a useful short-term fix for excluded pupils, serving a valuable purpose in re-engaging them in education; sometimes it does a good job of teaching young people right through to age 16. But I am concerned that it is sometimes used just to move on children whose needs and behaviour are deemed too challenging, with little thought for their futures. While the government does not collect specific data, it seems a likely estimate – based on the Department for Education’s own statistics for England – that the number of children in AP has risen by 14% over the last four years to more than 45,000. And, with the detrimental impact that Covid and lockdown have had on many young people, we may well see a further rise this year. I’m particularly concerned that the number of primary-age children referred to AP has risen by 27% since 2017 – there are now more than 7,000 under-11s in AP placements, including those in state-funded pupil referral units and independent special schools funded by local authorities. We’re seeing children as young as five attending AP settings, after headteachers have taken what must be an extremely difficult decision to exclude them from primary school. In light of this, I have commissioned new research to better understand the role that AP plays in the education system, and to find out why primary pupils are being referred to alternative provision in the first place. We will also explore how the pandemic has changed the AP landscape. The types of AP vary – from therapeutic independent schools, to training providers specialising in skills such as car maintenance or hairdressing. Providers can be further education colleges, charities, businesses, independent schools or the public sector. Some APs only offer part-time education, while others operate full-time, and much provision is subcontracted. This scale and diversity in the sector mean oversight arrangements can be complicated and the quality of education varies greatly. Children of all ages are referred to AP. Many come from deprived backgrounds, and many have experienced troubles at home, such as alcohol and drug abuse, mental illness, domestic violence or family breakdown. These children need strong support from expert professionals, in well-run providers. There are a great many good and outstanding alternative providers, where children get a worthwhile education. These APs give children a second chance and can transform their lives. However, other children – often those in unregistered AP – are not so lucky. My inspectors have visited unregistered providers where children are left to play video games all day, where premises are unkempt and unsafe, and where staff appear to care little about the children they’re supposed to be looking after, or even check that they’re attending on any given day. These APs exist on the edge of the law, where they can avoid monitoring and regulation. Put simply, some of the children most at risk of harm or exploitation are being sent to the places with least oversight. The law says that if an AP provider operates full-time, it must be registered with the Department for Education and inspected by Ofsted. Otherwise it is an illegal school. But unregistered provision gets no comparable, consistent scrutiny. For the past 10 years we have been calling for mandatory registration of all AP, no matter how many hours they are open or how many children attend. Without this there is little assurance that their pupils are getting a good full-time education. Schools and local authorities are responsible for finding AP placements for pupils who can’t stay at their school. Most schools will make sure that any AP they use is safe and suitable, but some are failing to check even that basic standards are met. And the blurred lines around which APs are required to register mean it’s too easy for a child to find themselves in unregulated provision, with no one checking they’re getting a good deal. No child deserves to be left to languish and fail. We need consistently good AP, that helps re-engage these children in education. For their good, and for the good of society, I am again calling for all APs to be required to register, so that the failures can be weeded out. Children deserve no less. Amanda Spielman is Ofsted chief inspectorOn the opening night of the Wales Millennium Centre’s Festival of Voice, a performance of Max Richter’s Voices had its own logic. But the real significance of this piece is as a meditation on the United Nations’ 1948 Declaration of Human Rights, the inalienable rights of every individual to freedom, justice and peace. Richter uses Eleanor Roosevelt’s voice to begin the whole work, passages from the Declaration were then spoken in litany by the eloquent narrator Imtiaz Dharker, with briefer extracts recorded by different voices and languages from all over the globe emerging as urgently whispered or chanted sounds from around the auditorium, as though joining hands to unite the musical fabric. At a time when democracy appears to be being undermined daily, to be reminded of the declaration’s powerful resonance was to wonder at its aspirations and idealism and, simultaneously, to be made conscious that these ideals are still being betrayed. As the wordless singing of the ethereal soprano soloist Grace Davidson and a chorus of female voices seemed to echo in lament and reflect on what has been heard, hope and horror came in waves. With Richter himself playing keyboard and the extended piano solos, and with Robert Ziegler conducting Sinfonia Cymru – their string ensemble giving a more intimate, scaled-down version of the original that was premiered last year at London’s Barbican – the instrumentation favouring cellos and double basses had the effect of a deeply grounded sound. Electronic tape and voices gave a further overall vibrancy. This music doesn’t go anywhere in the conventional sense, but there was something quietly compelling about its ebb and flow. Richter’s intention was to offer a musical space in which to connect again with the declaration’s fundamental principles: as Mari Samuelsen’s final searing violin solo became an uplifting message, here, indeed, was an urgent exhortation to act for the ultimate good of humanity. • Festival of Voice continues until 7 November at the Wales Millennium Centre, Cardiff.Alongside a post-work dram of whisky and a lunchtime haggis, delegates at Cop26 have been getting acquainted with another Scottish delicacy: Irn-Bru. Gleaming mounds of the rust-coloured drink are on sale throughout the SEC convention centre in Glasgow, and it has proved a hit with people from all corners of the planet – and a miss with others. The Zimbabwean presidential spokesperson got the party started on Monday, sharing a picture reportedly showing members of the delegation emerging from a Glasgow Costco with trolleys full of Irn-Bru and alcohol for an event that evening. The drink, which Donald Trump banned from his luxury golf resort in Turnberry in 2018, also has a new fan from the South Pacific. Dreli Solomon, a negotiator from Vanuatu, has drunk the orange fizzy drink twice a day since he first tried it. “It’s my first time in Scotland. I’ve never seen this drink before. I’ve tasted it and I am hooked on it,” he said, enjoying a can over lunch in the Cop26 food hall. “It’s boosting me, giving me adrenaline. I like it.” Azeez Abubakar, a youth climate campaigner from Nigeria, has also given the drink a thumbs up. “Since I got to Scotland, it’s the main drink. It’s mostly available in the different stores and I have discovered that it’s unique to Scotland. I don’t see it anywhere else in the world,” he said at a a nearby table in the food hall. “Our Airbnb host left us Irn-Bru for when we arrived,” said Abubakar’s colleague, Ines Yabar. “That was one of our welcome gifts.” Irn-Bru – often referred to as Scotland’s other national drink – first hit the shelves in 1901 to satisfy the thirst of steel workers working on the Glasgow Central station who were drinking too much beer, according to the legend carried by its manufacturer, AG Barr. The bright orange combination of 32 flavours alongside a number of other ingredients, including aspartame and caffeine, has been heavily debated in Scotland ever since. To some, it is reminiscent of fizzy bubblegum. Others have dismissed it as sweetened mouthwash. At Cop26, the argument continued this week. “In the Rwandan delegation, we were asking what it was. Is it lemonade? Is it cola? Is it alcohol? It’s not even written what it is. I don’t understand it,” said Malaika Doucelline Rousseau while drinking her first ever Irn-Bru in the canteen. “There is only this brand. I don’t understand why no Coca-Cola, no Fanta. It’s not very good. It’s like water with a strong sugar taste with a little bit of flavour,” she said. Due to a sponsorship deal with AG Barr, there is no Pepsi or Coke available in the conference centre. The American diplomat Philip Thomas Reeker had prepared himself and his team for what to expect before Cop26 – posting a tasting session on Twitter beforehand. But would Rousseau recommend it to others? “No. No way.” The German delegate Michael Buechl was also a sceptic. He had his first can a few days ago with fish and chips, and was busy forcing himself to drink a second in the food hall. Buechl was drinking a can of Irn-Bru Xtra – one of the three types available at Cop26. “My head told me: just get another one. You get used to it,” he said. “I knew it was typically Scottish because I watched the film The Angels’ Share [a Ken Loach movie set in Glasgow]. So I had to try it. It was not not the nicest experience I’ve ever had. The first sip was rather shocking. But then it fits quite well together with the fish and chips. So I just got got another one. “It will not become my favourite drink and probably I won’t drink it outside of Scotland. But it just becomes part of the experience.” Some delegates said they were drinking Irn-Bru out of necessity. Ivan, a delegate from Quebec who did not give his second name, said: “It’s the only thing I can drink here. It’s low-fat and sugar-free. It’s good!” In 2018, a decision to reformulate the drink due to a new sugar tax from the UK government was met with outcry, with reports that angry Scots were stockpiling the drink before the change. Ryan Allen, who started the Hands Off Our Irn-Bru campaign, called the drink “a natural treasure” in Scotland, “well known to alleviate the effects of a hangover and … many a person’s craving, saviour or go-to drink after a night on the tiles”. In March this year, campaigners got their wish, and the original version returned to the shelves.A fifth teenager accused of killing 15-year-old schoolboy Keon Lincoln has been cleared of murder but found guilty of manslaughter. Kieron Donaldson was convicted of the lesser charge by a majority 10-2 verdict at Birmingham crown court after a trial heard he “helped and supplied weapons” for the premeditated attack on Lincoln in January this year. The 18-year-old, of Perry Barr in Birmingham, will be sentenced later this month alongside four other teenagers who were convicted of Lincoln’s murder on Thursday. A 14-year-old from Birmingham and a 16-year-old from Walsall, who cannot be named for legal reasons, were convicted of murder alongside Tahjgeem Breakenridge, 18, and Michael Ugochukwu, 18. DI Jim Colclough from West Midlands police, who led the investigation, said: “We have not been able to establish why Keon was murdered. Only his killers know that, but they will now have a long time to reflect on their actions.” “The utter sadness here is that not only has Keon’s family been left without him, but these young killers now face life in prison, away from their own families, and for what?” In the middle of the afternoon on 21 January, Keon was talking to a friend outside his house in Handsworth when several young people jumped out of a car. He jumped over his garden wall and was chased up the road, before being stabbed from behind. One of two gunshots hit him in the stomach, and the group attacked him with machetes and large hunting knives as he lay on the ground. He managed to get up and run again, but was again chased and slashed after falling to the floor a second time. He was pronounced dead at Birmingham children’s hospital two hours later. Police used DNA evidence found in the car, which was crashed and abandoned nearby, to identify the killers. Keon’s mother, Charmaine, and his sisters ran to his side as he lay in the street. “I’m in a nightmare that I cannot wake up from,” she said. “My heart is broken beyond repair. A piece of my soul has been taken from me. I see my baby boy’s face as he lay slumped on the ground struggling to breathe.” The Rev Neville Popo, a close family friend, called the attack “heinous and diabolical”. “We would like to know what would have motivated them to do such a thing but we do not know,” he said. Popo said the family wanted justice for Keon. “It’s not about getting back at the people who have done the crime; it’s about getting justice. This has to stop. There has to be a way we can reach our young people across the city to stop this level of crime that has been created. It’s quite devastating.” The five teenagers will be sentenced on 29 November.A Russian diplomat found dead near the country’s embassy in Berlin last month was an undercover intelligence agent, German media have reported. The news magazine Der Spiegel reported on Friday that police had recovered the body of a Russian diplomat who apparently fell from an embassy window, and that the man had been identified as a member of the Federal Security Service (FSB), Russia’s main intelligence and law enforcement agency. The death has not previously been reported. Der Spiegel said police had discovered the body near the embassy on 19 October and that emergency services were unable to resuscitate. The news outlet reported that German security sources were not sure of the cause of death and that the Russian embassy had not authorised an autopsy. The embassy has declined to comment on the death of any of its staff. The German foreign ministry has confirmed the death of a Russian diplomat but said it cannot give more information. The investigative news outlet Bellingcat, citing leaked databases, identified the intelligence agent as the son of a high-ranking FSB officer, a deputy director of the intelligence agency’s Second Service, which has been accused of plotting overseas assassinations. Those include the 2019 murder of Zelimkhan Khangoshvili. The former Chechen rebel commander, who was a Georgian citizen, was killed in Berlin’s Kleiner Tiergarten. Other targets of the Second Service have included the Russian opposition leader Alexei Navalny, who almost died after a poisoning attack in 2020. Russia has denied it was behind both attacks. According to Bellingcat, the diplomat arrived in Berlin two months before Khangoshvili’s murder. There is no evidence linking the two events, the outlet reported. Before that posting, the diplomat was posted to Russia’s mission to the United Nations in Vienna.It is funny how things work out. Wolves were set for a tough season when Nuno Espírito Santo left and Bruno Lage lost four of his first five league matches. While Nuno subsequently flopped at Tottenham, Lage has turned Wolves around in impressive fashion and they go into the meeting with Crystal Palace as one of the form teams in the Premier League, with 13 points from the last 15 available. Palace are also unbeaten in five – including last week’s stunning win at Manchester City – and would be higher than 12th but for a nasty habit of conceding late equalisers. Stephen Hollis Saturday 3pm Venue Selhurst Park Last season Crystal Palace 1 Wolves 0 Referee Graham Scott This season G4 Y16 R0 4 cards/game Odds H 6-4 A 2-1 D 11-5 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Butland, Kelly, Clyne, Tomkins, Riedewald, Banks, Hannam, Street, Rak-Sakyi, Mateta, Schlupp, Ayew, Benteke, Milivojevic Doubtful None Injured Eze (achilles, 20 Nov), Ferguson (achilles, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y17 R0 Form LDDDDW Leading scorer Édouard, Gallagher, Zaha 3 WOLVES Subs from Ruddy, Hoever, Boly, Dendoncker, Cundle, Campbell, Podence, Traoré, Silva Doubtful Marçal (ankle) Injured Jonny (knee, unknown), Mosquera (hamstring, unknown), Neto (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y20 R0 Form LWWWDW Leading scorer Hwang 4An edifying week in the government of Britain, a country run by the third prize in a competition to build Winston Churchill out of marshmallows. Yup, this man is our sorry lot: this pool-float Targaryen, this gurning English Krankie cousin, this former child star still squeezing himself into his little suit for coins. The sole bright spot for Boris Johnson is that furious Tory MPs are currently only comparing him to the nursery rhyme Duke of York. Still, give it time. On, then, to the unforced blunderrhoea of the Owen Paterson affair and its fallout. The sheer full-spectrum shitshow of it makes sense when you understand two things: the Carl von Clownewitzes behind the government’s shameful “strategy” for sweeping aside a vital democratic check on corruption; and the fact that for Johnson, none of it was to do with Owen Paterson. The departing MP for North Shropshire was simply useful for the prime minister’s personal goals – until he wasn’t. We’ll deal with the second point first. By far the most consequential investigation currently approaching Kathryn Stone’s in-tray concerns the man already investigated more times than any other MP in the past three years by the standards commissioner: one Boris Johnson. Once an Electoral Commission probe into the same business has reported, a parliamentary standards investigation is widely expected to look at the extravagant refurbishment of Johnson’s Downing Street flat, how it was paid for, how the public was told it was paid for, when and in what order they were told it, what the PM’s wet fish cabinet secretary (Simon Case) and pet fish “standards adviser” (Christopher Geidt) were told – and a whole lot of other difficult questions that have the prime minister sweating like The Silence of the Lambs’ Buffalo Bill on Grand Designs. Or like Theresa May in a field of wheat. Or simply like Boris Johnson being asked a straight question to which the answer can’t be, “She’s just a friend, I swear.” Take your pick. It’s odd – given his hideously negligent mismanagement of the pandemic – that many Westminster experts believe the flat refurbishment has the greater potential to damage Johnson with voters. But there it is. There’s no accounting for taste, neither in red lines nor soft furnishings. Perhaps it’s because most normal voters, who simply want £840-a-roll gold wallpaper and handcrafted rattan backscratchers and so on, pay for such things themselves when the bills are presented. At least seven months and a lot of press reports later, Johnson eventually reimbursed the taxpayer £58,000 for the flat makeover. But that isn’t the end of discussions on the matter, and you can quite see why the obliteration of the standards commissioner ASAP might seem so appealing. (No 10 insists the two are unrelated.) Anyway, we move on to the personnel involved in this week’s epic fail, with the ringleaders being Johnson himself, Tory chief whip Mark Spencer, and leader of the house Jacob Rees-Mogg. I don’t know if Johnson knows anything at all about classical history and the ancient world – he wears his learning so lightly, it’s just impossible to tell – but I think you’d stop shy of hailing this particular brains trust as the third triumvirate. Even given how badly the second one turned out. Quite why Johnson, the Conservative party, and indeed wider society continue to tolerate Rees-Mogg being in any sort of position of responsibility or judgment is anyone’s guess. The justification that he has some kind of yoof “following” feels desperately 2017, a relic of a time when this country’s ruling class could afford irony. Lavishly inept, the Moggster convinces about as much as an English toff from an early-90s American movie, played by some beta Derek Nimmo. I never quite understand why the Grenfell-victim-blaming, frontbench-lolling Rees-Mogg is so keen to cite his Nanny in public. It’s like someone defecating in the middle of your drawing room floor while telling you which finishing school they attended. And if Nanny wishes to sue me for saying Jacob turned out atrociously, then I’d be very pleased to see her down the Strand for four days of courtroom fun. As for Johnson’s other consigliere in all this, Spencer, he’s done an absolute Bismarck. The ship, unfortunately – not the diplomatic genius. His cunning plan to overhaul the standards regime has been shelled, torpedoed and scuttled, and is now at rest 15,000 feet under the Atlantic. It is genuinely beyond comprehension that Spencer failed to predict that opposition parties would simply refuse to support the government’s new standards stitch-up: a committee chaired by John Whittingdale (who was himself once investigated by the standards committee over a trip to the MTV awards in Amsterdam with his girlfriend, a dominatrix sex worker). There may well be toe fungus with more of a tactical clue than Spencer. You can quite see how he is being wishfully lined up as the second fall guy of the week. The first, of course, was Owen Paterson, who was absolutely bang-to-rights on the breach of rules, but who has clearly been through the most unspeakable tragedy and should have been handled thousands of per cent more sensitively and intelligently by his friends. However, none of those friends was Boris Johnson, who last indulged in male friendship some time around the John Major administration, and now feels it only as the twitch of a phantom limb. Johnson’s very much the best man who lets you down on the morning of the wedding. “Mate, is it today? Fuck! I’m an idiot. No mate, can’t do it. I’m still in Verbier. Gutted I won’t be able to try to shag her at the reception now. Anyway, have a good one.” All of which makes the prime minister’s statement on Paterson’s resignation one for the do-me-a-favour files. “I am very sad parliament will lose the services of Owen Paterson,” this ran, “who has been a friend and colleague of mine for decades.” Mmm. If that’s the case, how come your friend reportedly only found you were pulling the rug out from under him when a BBC reporter phoned him in the supermarket, a U-turn which could realistically only lead to his resignation a few short hours later? Let’s play out with how the British prime minister spent the eve of this shameful vote. Boris Johnson had left his own climate conference on a private jet, incidentally, to have dinner at the Garrick Club with the longtime climate denialist Charles Moore. Also incidentally, Moore used to be Johnson’s editor when he published his various fabrications about the EU. Incidentally – again – Johnson fairly recently sought to install Moore as chairman of the BBC. (Moore has, incidentally, previously been a licence-fee refusenik). Still incidentally, Moore is a real friend of Owen Paterson’s, and has been a significant advocate for his foolhardy defence … We sadly have no space for any more of the incidentals, incestuous connections, hypocrisies and potential stitch-up attempts in this single meeting between two chaps in a men-only club. But then, all that really needs to be said is that this is Boris Johnson’s Britain. We just live in it. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistA Belgian court has reduced the sentence of a police officer convicted of accidentally shooting dead a two-year old girl during a high-speed chase of suspected people smugglers. An appeal court cut the officer’s suspended sentence for involuntary homicide from one year to 10 months. The court left a €400 (£343) fine unchanged. Mawda Shari was shot in the face in May 2018 while she sat on her mother’s lap in a van full of people that was being chased by Belgian police on a motorway near Mons. The Shari family from Kurdistan were attempting to reach the UK with Mawda and their three-year old son. The officer was found by the court to have used his firearm “inappropriately” during the pursuit of the Peugeot Boxer van, which was carrying 26 adults and four children. The officer shot into the vehicle while it was travelling at 90km/h, after a 60km chase. In his defence, the officer said he intended to shoot out a tyre, but his car swerved sharply, causing the misfire. He was said to be disconsolate after the shooting. At the original trial, the court said using a gun to immobilise a car was a disproportionate use of force that endangered the lives of the passengers and other road users. The appeal court verdict restated that police could only use their weapons in “extreme cases” in line with Belgian law. In separate proceedings this year, the van’s driver was sentenced to four years in prison and another suspected people smuggler was acquitted. Mawda’s death became emblematic of the struggles of people from war-torn countries in the Middle East desperately searching for a better life in Europe. Before beginning their journey, the family had already had asylum applications refused and been deported from several European countries, including Britain and Germany, where Mawda was born. The family have since been given indefinite leave to remain in Belgium. After the appeal court verdict on Thursday, Mawda’s parents and their lawyers called for a parliamentary inquiry. Through a statement issued by the group Justice4Mawda, they said they were satisfied that the facts “at the very least are not minimised” but questions remained about the “numerous dysfunctions” of the original police investigation. Shortly after the shooting, a lawyer for the family accused police of dismissing the case as an accidental death and failing to interview witnesses and suspects quickly enough. Mawda died without her parents being allowed in the ambulance. The couple were informed of their daughter’s death hours later while sitting in police cells.In eight derbies since Ole Gunnar Solskjær’s tenure began, Manchester United have lost only twice to Manchester City. How the besieged manager would love even a draw – there has been one in those eight – against the champions at Old Trafford because a defeat, particularly a heavy one, would lead to more demands that the Norwegian is sacked. Pep Guardiola may look at how Liverpool demolished United 5-0 – by driving through a fragile midfield and defence – and inform his side to do the same. Jamie Jackson Saturday 12.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Old Trafford Last season Manchester United 0 Manchester City 0 Referee Michael Oliver This season G8 Y25 R1 3.25 cards/game Odds H 7-2 A 4-6 D 3-1 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Heaton, Henderson, Shoretire, Matic, Mata, Hannibal, Van de Beek, Dalot, Mengi, Pereira, Jones, Lingard, Telles, Elanga, Martial, Cavani, Sancho, Rashford Doubtful Lindelöf (knock) Injured Varane (hamstring, Dec) Suspended Pogba (second of three games) Discipline Y24 R1 Form WLDLLW Leading scorer Bruno Fernandes, Ronaldo, Greenwood 4 MANCHESTER CITY Subs from Steffen, Carson, Palmer, Fernandinho, Jesus, Aké, Mbete, Zinchenko, Sterling, Gündogan, Delap Doubtful Walker (match fitness) Injured Torres (foot, Dec) Suspended Laporte (one game) Discipline Y16 R1 Form DWDWWL Leading scorer Foden 3Italy’s senate has approved a law banning street adverts deemed sexist or discriminatory amid fury from far-right politicians and anti-abortion groups. The law, which forms part of a transport and infrastructure decree, bans adverts on streets and all forms of transport that are demeaning to women and perpetuate gender stereotypes as well as those considered harmful to civil and political rights or containing discriminatory messages against gay people, ethnic and religious groups or people with disabilities. In addition, the measure bans adverts that discriminate against people based on their gender identity, an element described by Lucio Malan, a senator with the far-right Brothers of Italy, as “an ideological norm aimed at limiting freedom of expression”. Opponents are especially furious as it was the reference to gender identity that in effect led to the senate, or upper house of parliament, last week rejecting a bill aimed at fighting homophobia. “It’s a measure that was introduced treacherously,” said Malan. Andrea Bertoli, another senator with Brothers of Italy, said the “shameful” anti-homophobia law had been “reproduced in a transport decree”. The measure also provoked a chorus of complaints from anti-abortion groups, as, by extension, it will prevent them from plastering the streets with billboards that are offensive to women who have had abortions. The ProVita association regularly rolls out aggressive anti-abortion campaigns across the country, placing huge posters on walls featuring foetuses in the womb or those which have equated taking the abortion pill to consuming poison. “The law doesn’t specifically refer to abortion but it widens the measure in a very intelligent way, meaning there will be action taken to block this kind of publicity,” said Luisa Rizzitelli, a women’s rights activist. Abortion has been legal in Italy since 1978 and so the law will ban advertisements that infringe upon this right and attack women for having an abortion, added Rizzitelli. Antonio Brandi, the president of ProVita, also took aim at the gender identity element of the law. He said: “Will it still be possible to affirm in an advertisement that baby boys are male and baby girls are female? That a baby is born to a mother and father?” Rizzitelli said the measure was “a great step forward” in banning sexist publicity “which is everywhere across Italy”. “The big brands have become much more attentive but in smaller towns we still find adverts which are offensive to the dignity of women,” she added. There was an outcry in January over a street billboard in Lizzanello, a town in Puglia, depicting a woman dressed as a French maid offering cleaning services “free for a month”. Food and beverage adverts have often featured women wearing only underwear, while in 2017 the jewellery chain Pandora was forced to scrap a pre-Christmas series of ads asking if women would prefer “an iron, pyjamas, an apron or a bracelet” as a gift. “All the women’s associations have been trying for years to stop this,” said Rizzitelli. “This law could help to bring about a cultural change too.” The amendment to the transport and infrastructure decree was introduced by Alessia Rotta, a deputy with the centre-left Democratic party, and Raffaella Paita from the centrist Italia Viva party. “The amendment is the result of a lot of hard work that allows us to give a social value to these issues,” she said. Nadia Rossi, a politician with the Democratic party, said: “It’s a first step towards a definitive stop to hateful messages that are conveyed through advertising. It is not in any way about limiting communication, but of realising how much advertising can influence the thinking of young people, and affect minorities and the most vulnerable.” The divisive anti-homophobia law was blocked by the senate after months of protests by far-right and Catholic groups, arguing it would have suppressed freedom of expression and promoted “homosexual propaganda” in schools.Chelsea will expect to tighten their grip on first place when they host Burnley. Thomas Tuchel’s team are in good form and have been boosted by Christian Pulisic’s return from injury. Mason Mount could also return after wisdom tooth surgery and, although Marcos Alonso has joined Romelu Lukaku, Mateo Kovacic and Timo Werner in the treatment room, Chelsea should have too much for Sean Dyche’s side. Jacob Steinberg Saturday 3pm Venue Stamford Bridge Last season Chelsea 2 Burnley 0 Referee Andre Marriner This season G5 Y25 R2 5.4 cards/game Odds H 1-4 A 11-1 D 5-1 CHELSEA Subs from Arrizabalaga, Bettinelli, Chalobah, Sarr, Baker, Azpilicueta, Saúl, Loftus-Cheek, Mount, Pulisic, Vale, Barkley Doubtful Mount (wisdom tooth) Injured Alonso (ankle, 20 Nov), Lukaku (ankle, 20 Nov), Kovacic (hamstring, 20 Nov), Werner (hamstring, 20 Nov) Suspended None Discipline Y11 R1 Form WLWWWW Leading scorer James 4 BURNLEY Subs from Hennessey, Norris, Pieters, Bardsley, Thomas, Barnes, Lennon, Long, Cork, Rodriguez Doubtful Lennon (illness) Injured Stephens (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y22 R0 Form LDDLDW Leading scorer Cornet 4Exhibition of the week Peru: A Journey in Time Thousands of years of art and history should make for a revelatory experience, from the Nazca earth drawings that some connect with alien landings, to the splendour of the Incas and beyond. • British Museum, London, 11 November to 20 February. Also showing Jeremy Deller: Prints and Posters 1993 to 2021 The imaginative and witty radical presents a retrospective of his poster art, from I Love Melancholy to Fuck You 2020. • Modern Institute, Glasgow, until 22 January. Listening to the Anthropocene Sound and moving image art that senses our impact on earth. With Sarah Badr, Ben Rivers and more. • Coventry Cathedral until 22 January. Mind and Mortality Late portraits by Stanley Spencer in the picturesque locale where he lived and worked. • Stanley Spencer Gallery, Cookham, Berkshire, until 27 March. Poppies The ceramic poppies first seen at the Tower of London find a new installation and permanent home in Manchester. Imperial War Museum North, Manchester, from 9 November. Image of the week Spacecial, by Spanish artists Anna Devís and Daniel Rueda – who trained as architects, although buildings appear only as props or sets for meticulously posed characters in their work. Their images can look like illustrations and yet are photographs, created with very little digital editing. Spacecial is from their series What the Hat, which turns a fedora into an avocado stone, a musical note and a daisy. See full gallery here. What we learned Posters in Liverpool for Homotopia festival’s Queer the City exhibition were vandalised Tracey Emin said she had been written off as a “narcissistic, deranged, screaming banshee” A “museum of the future” in Rotterdam will open up the huge Bojimans collection A new photographic collection captures the upbeat, joyous side of life in the Arab world Statues and ruins of an hedonistic Roman party resort are now a marine visitor attraction Sculptor Sergio Furnari conceded he didn’t have permission for his New York Central Park Covid heart monument Ai Weiwei said it was ‘“positive to be poor as a child. You understand how vulnerable our humanity can be” Teaching art can help prisoners History, georgraphy and Black British masculinities are being explored in Nottingham Petrit Halilaj depicted the trauma of war as a child The Queen Elizabeth platinum jubilee landmark in Northumberland will go ahead despite opposition Winners of Australia’s national architecture awards were announced … … while a plan for an almost windowless student megadorm in California raised alarm The Australian sculptor Ramesh Mario Nithiyendran revealed his most cherished objects … … while Melbourne artists are in survival mode as galleries reopen “Starchitects” Herzog &amp; de Meuron reject the idea of having a “moralistic standpoint” John Constable’s late paintings are figurative, abstract and staggering to behold … … while Fragonard’s true genius was revealed after restoration of The Swing Photographer Paul McDonald has turned the lens on himself and his male friends … … while Rankin revealed the magicians behind London’s West End shows … … and photos by Martin Parr have been twinned with images by amateur snappers Classic seven-inch singles have been turned into paintings Marilyn Stafford blazed a trail for female photographers William Blake’s cottage is at risk of being lost, says Historic England The amateur snaps twinned with Martin Parr’s – in pictures The names of the winners of the Emerging Photography awards 2021 How Thom Yorke and Stanley Donwood made artworks for Radiohead … And how Hogarth said adieu to gin and became a proud European Masterpiece of the week John Dee’s Magical Mirror, Aztec, 1300s to early 1500s This disc of polished black obsidian belonged to the astrologist and magician John Dee, who performed occult services for Queen Elizabeth I and may have been Shakespeare’s model for Prospero in The Tempest. Its association with the most famous conjurer of the English Renaissance gives it a fascinating frisson of hocus pocus that is enhanced by its reflective dark sheen, like a vision of a black hole. But it came from Mexico where it was originally part of the magical and religious rites of the Aztec empire. So a supernatural Aztec object became a supernatural European object, suggesting the New and Old Worlds were not so different after all. • British Museum, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comFormer officers at the Oklahoma City jail are being accused of torturing at least four former detainees with methods that ranged from physical attacks to being forced to listen repeatedly to loud music, according to a federal lawsuit. In a civil rights suit, reported by the Washington Post, that was filed in federal court this week, four people formerly incarcerated at the Oklahoma City jail said that they were subject to “torture tactics” that included verbal and physical assault as well as standing for hours at a time while being forced to listen to the children’s song Baby Shark. The lawsuit was filed against the Oklahoma county sheriff, Tommie Johnson III, county commissioners, the jail trust and two former officers. Baby Shark and popular music in general has a long history of being used as a “device to torment”, said the Oklahoma lawsuit. In 2019, Florida officials played Baby Shark on loop to prevent homeless people from sleeping or setting up camp in parks. At Guantánamo Bay, interrogators notably blasted heavy metal music at high volumes to torture detainees. In Oklahoma, Daniel Hedrick, a plaintiff in the suit, was taken from his cell and into an attorney visitation room, where two officers played the song on loop, forcing Hendricks to stand for more than an hour. Joseph Mitchell, another plaintiff in the suit, was escorted to an empty room on 30 November 2019, where he was handcuffed behind his back, restrained to the wall, and also forced to listen to Baby Shark while standing for three to four hours. Another plaintiff, John Basco, endured similar conditions: isolated, restrained and forced to listen to the song for nearly two hours. “The volume of the song was so loud that it was reverberating down the hallways,” noted the lawsuit. Ja’Lee Foreman Jr, the fourth plaintiff and former detainee, was not forced to listen to the children’s song, but was subject to verbal and physical assault by jail officers, one who vowed to make Foreman’s life “hell”. The lawsuit noted that the men “posed no threat to the officers or anyone else”, were “compliant” and “not actively resisting any lawful command”. After an investigation into these incidents last year by Oklahoma’s district attorney’s office, the two former jail employees as well as their supervisor were charged with cruelty to a prisoner and conspiracy, according to the lawsuit. In an interview with the Associated Press, former Oklahoma county sheriff PD Taylor said that officers Christian Charles Miles and Gregory Cornell Butler Jr, officials who allegedly initiated the torture, and Lt Christopher Raymond Hendershott, who the lawsuit says was aware “but took no action to intervene and stop the misconduct”, retired. Miles and Butler have a history of mistreating detainees and both were the subjects of several complaints, the Oklahoma county district attorney, David Prater, confirmed, after an investigation. Prater called the use of Baby Shark in the jail “cruel and inhumane”, saying it put “undue emotional stress on the detainees who were most likely already suffering”, according to the lawsuit.Lockdown gave Bare Kind founder Lucy Jeffrey the push she needed to say goodbye to her corporate life and start her own fashion brand For the UK’s microbusinesses – and the rest of us, really – the internet became even more vital in March 2020, as the first stay-at-home order was announced. According to Google’s 2020 Impact Report, 280,000 businesses started selling online for the first time as a result of the pandemic. One such person is Lucy Jeffrey, who was motivated over lockdown to expand an online business, Bare Kind, which she founded back in 2018. “It was the year that single-use plastic was coming into the limelight and it was becoming a big trend to reduce your plastic consumption, so I started with a few different products like reusable straws, recycled T-shirts and other things in that vein,” she says. “I wanted to do something that helped the world in some way and I didn’t feel I was getting that from my day job at a bank.” At that time, Jeffrey saw her project as an experiment and decided to try some other items. “I wanted to bring out a product where 10% of the profits were donated to charity and I landed on socks because I think most people love socks – they’re an easy gift. I contacted the Turtle Foundation [a conservation charity], got the designs going and brought the product to market fairly quickly just to test the idea,” she says. The “save the turtle” socks were a success and Jeffrey began planning an expanded range of socks featuring other animals, each in support of different charities. Jeffrey carried on working full-time, but concentrated on developing Bare Kind whenever she could. The pandemic, however, gave her pause for thought about working in a corporate environment. “I was always looking for ways to get out because it wasn’t my long- term plan and I had a massive commute, so after the pandemic hit, I was like: ‘OK, this is it, I can’t go back to the office now that I know what working from home is like.’” She handed her notice in at the end of November 2020. Since then, Jeffrey has become something of an expert at finding support to boost her business. She benefited from the bounce-back loans launched during the pandemic; hired her first recruit via the government’s Kickstart scheme that reimburses employers for hiring 16- to 24-year-olds on universal credit; took on an intern from the University of Warwick; and signed up to an organisation called Enterprise Nation. “Through them I found out that Google was offering free one-on-one training.” She registered for a session with a mentor from Google to make sure she was doing all she could to be found online. “He went through my website and said: ‘You’ve actually ticked quite a lot of boxes here’ – so it helped to validate that I was doing the right thing. There are all kinds of free Google resources for small businesses, so it was just a case of going through and checking that I was actually using all of them. I would definitely recommend it to people who are just starting up.” She’s also taken advantage of Google Business Profile, a tool that enables business owners to make sure that their most up-to-date details can be found in Search and Maps as well as engage with customers through reviews – much as you would for a bricks-and-mortar business. “Obviously when you search for a restaurant it’ll come up on Google with the location details, whereas if you’re an e-commerce business you don’t have that. When someone sees my business details on there, it’s a good source of trust.” Jeffrey also likes that it aggregates and displays her business reviews. “I’m quite lucky that I generally get good reviews, but if someone is unhappy and leaves a bad one I can deal with it there and then – and people can see that I’m sorting it out with the customer. So a bad review isn’t necessarily a bad thing.” After a year that many of us would give zero stars out of five, it’s a reassuring thought. To see the Bare Kind collection, visit barekind.co.uk Ready, set, glow: how a skincare brand went from a hobby to a successful business Roshanne Dorsett, founder of The Glowcery, loves customer feedback online. Photograph: Amara Eno/Guardian A plant-based diet inspired Roshanne Dorsett to start making her own skincare products: she wanted to nourish her skin in the same way she fed her body – with lots of natural ingredients. She launched her skincare company, The Glowcery, two weeks before the first lockdown hit. She explains how she overcame that challenge and went on to see her products feature in Vogue, Refinery29 and more When did you first want to own a skincare business? I started making my natural skincare products as a hobby when I was at uni and that’s when my sister said: “Maybe that’s something you could turn into a business.” So my first business was making lip balm with coconut and lemon oils. I got my products ready, I got ready to launch and then I got hit with a cease and desist letter from a trademark lawyer who said the name of the product was too similar to an existing brand. Over the next few years, you took a skincare qualification and launched The Glowcery – two weeks before the first UK lockdown. How did the timing affect you? I think one of the things that the pandemic did was to force me to step out of my comfort zone. I’m a Gemini and people think Geminis are really extroverted, but I’m an introvert. I naively thought I could start a business and no one would see my face. But with the pandemic, there was a need to keep up communication with customers. It forced me to step up and be like: “This is me, this is what I’m up to, this is why I started my business.” What has been your greatest challenge starting out? Self-belief. I have bouts of imposter syndrome and worry about being good enough to keep going. As an online business, you don’t have that constant feedback you would have if you had a physical shop with customers. So I enrolled for free on Google Digital Garage to learn how to get a better sense of what my customers thought. What I took away from it was an understanding of the best online platforms and types of content to connect with customers. For example, I was able to use the language of my target customers in pictures and videos on social platforms that led to increased likes, shares and comments on posts, therefore increasing brand awareness, which as a startup in a saturated industry was so helpful. It’s great to have tools such as Google Digital Garage to better yourself as an entrepreneur. And your greatest reward? This comes back to the customers again. I love hearing from people who have been able to alleviate long-term issues such as acne. I thought about reviews from the outset, because you can’t sniff or test products online, so you need that social proof and sense of community. I recently launched on Google Business Profile, which is a really useful tool for adding that extra validity as it displays customers’ reviews in Google Search results. Finally, what advice would you give to anyone thinking of starting a business? If it’s a passion of yours, lean into it! The barriers to entry now are much lower than they have ever been. If you don’t go for it, you’ll never know what could have happened. People just need to take a chance on themselves. To visit The Glowcery website, go to theglowceryshop.com Discover the tools, training and support Google provides to help businesses across Britain grow at g.co/growbritainDowning Street has declined to rule out the possibility Owen Paterson could receive a peerage after his decision to step down as a Conservative MP amid a lobbying scandal. Boris Johnson’s spokesperson also did not deny reports that some Tory MPs had been warned they could lose future funding for their constituencies if they did not support a Commons vote to halt punishment for Paterson and rip up the anti-sleaze rules he broke. Paterson, a former Northern Ireland and environment secretary, announced on Thursday he would quit the Commons. It came hours after Johnson withdrew his support for moves to shield Paterson from punishment for lobbying on behalf of two companies who paid him more than £100,000 a year between them. MPs had been due on Wednesday to vote on Paterson’s 30-day Commons suspension for what the standards committee called an “egregious case” of breaching lobbying rules. But instead Downing Street backed an amendment suspending the punishment and creating a new standards body with a built-in Tory majority. Following an outcry over perceived corruption, and disquiet among many Tory MPs, Johnson U-turned on Thursday, prompting Paterson, who has never accepted any wrongdoing, to resign as MP for North Shropshire. Asked about reports the disgraced MP could be made a peer, Johnson’s spokesperson said: “I’ve seen the speculation on that. There’s obviously a formal process for peerages, which isn’t one for me.” A Downing Street source did deny Johnson had specifically discussed the idea of a peerage with Paterson before he resigned. However, they did not rule out a future move to the Lords. The Financial Times reported that party whips warned at least one MP they could lose future funding for their constituencies if they did not vote for the amendment on Wednesday. “You’ll appreciate that questions around whipping are not ones for me,” he said. “More broadly there is obviously a lot of speculation around today which I’m not going to get into.” Asked to confirm he was not denying this, he added: “It’s not a question for me, it’s a question for the whips’ office.”The route to Owen Paterson’s resignation on Thursday afternoon was marked out more than two years ago, when in 2019 the Guardian exposed his lobbying on behalf of two companies from whom he has received at least £500,000 in payments. Documents released following freedom of information requests revealed that the MP had repeatedly demanded access to ministers and regulators on behalf of his paying clients. This raised the question of whether he had broken parliamentary rules that prohibit MPs from undertaking paid advocacy– rules that have existed in various forms since the 17th century. The Guardian evidence led the parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, to start her own investigation. That resulted in last week’s damning report from the cross-party Commons committee on standards. It concluded that Paterson’s 14 approaches to ministers and public officials were an “egregious” case and that he had brought parliament in to disrepute. In 2018 the Guardian began making inquiries about a little-known company called UK 2020 that Paterson had formed in 2014 after he lost his ministerial post as environment secretary. He described it as a Conservative thinktank. Funded by donations from private entities, it published occasional reports on issues including the environment and the NHS. But it also began donating thousands of pounds to Paterson, its sole director. Between 2014 and 2019 it donated almost £40,000 to fund various overseas trips by him. MPs are required to declare the identities of their political donors in the register of members’ financial interests. Paterson only ever declared his thinktank as the donor in the parliamentary register, so the original source of the thousands of pounds funding him was in effect hidden from the public. Following the Guardian article, the Labour party demanded that the standards commissioner investigate the true source of the funds, but this apparent bypassing of the rules did not form a part of her later investigation. Paterson closed the thinktank down in October 2019. The Guardian was able to identify just two donors to UK 2020. The first was a trade association representing agrochemical manufacturers, which paid for UK 2020 to host panels at Conservative party conferences in 2015 and 2016. The second was the Northern Irish clinical diagnostics company Randox Laboratories, which sponsored a 2016 report from Paterson’s thinktank criticising the outcomes of the NHS compared with the health systems of other countries. Randox, headquartered in Belfast, is owned by Peter Fitzgerald, a Northern Irish polo-playing multimillionaire doctor. The company hired Paterson, a former Northern Ireland secretary, as a consultant from 2015, initially on £49,000 a year, later doubled to £100,000 a year. Paterson’s salary as an MP was about £80,000. Paterson declared these payments in the register of MP’s financial interests. Documents show that he then devoted considerable time and energy to lobbying on Randox’s behalf. Paterson talked and then wrote to Priti Patel, then the secretary of state for international development, requesting a meeting so that Randox could discuss its “state of the art technologies” and outlining the advantages of the firm’s products. A meeting was later arranged between Paterson, Randox and Patel’s then junior minister, Rory Stewart. “This meeting covered Randox’s laboratory quality assurance systems … and DfID [Department for International Development] procurement routes and potential commercial opportunities that Randox may wish to explore”, a DfID internal memo recorded. DfID told the Guardian it had never itself awarded any contracts to Randox. In December 2016 Paterson also began working as a consultant for another Northern Irish company, Lynn’s Country Foods, which trades under the name Finnebrogue. He declared consultancy payments from this company of £12,000 a year. The company sells Finnebrogue Naked bacon, which it markets as a healthy alternative to traditional bacon. Its product is processed without the nitrite-based preservatives in most cured meat, which have been linked to cancer. Paterson assisted the company in a sustained lobbying campaign with the Food Standards Agency (FSA) that lasted more than a year, the documents obtained by the Guardian and later published by the standards commissioner show. Paterson’s early work was to raise concern about a competitor’s cured meat product that claimed to be all natural. Lynn’s and Paterson argued it could not justify the label under EU regulations. In the course of repeated meetings with Paterson and top-level FSA staff including its chair, which sought action against the rival’s product, emails say Lynn’s took the opportunity to promote its own “innovative” bacon product, “which is being prepared for launch in the new year”. Lynn’s marketed the new product as being free of E-number additives, but the FSA found that it did contain an additive mix that needed to be declared on the label. Over many months, Lynn’s and Paterson sought to persuade the FSA that they did not need to put it on the label. Emails between officials note the “considerable resources” being used up on Paterson’s paying client. They also allege that Paterson misrepresented what was said in meetings and counter the assertion that Lynn’s additives had been approved by other EU countries, which turned out not to be the case. The dispute appears to have ended in December 2018, when Lynn’s agreed to declare on the label of Finnebrogue Naked bacon that its product contained an additive. Paterson maintains that he only raised these issues because they were important matters of public safety. He says the same applies to his lobbying of the FSA for Randox over antibiotic residues in milk. FSA briefing notes of meetings with Randox and Paterson record that the “primary aim for discussion” was the “use of Randox technology for screening of residues”. Randox had tested UK milk for antibiotic residues and found a banned drug in them. Illegal antibiotic use in livestock is a known problem in Northern Ireland. Randox wanted the FSA to adopt its new techniques for detecting contamination. It could not, however, show which part of the UK its samples came from, and its testing methods had not been accredited. The FSA did its own sampling across the UK and found no evidence of residues. It judged there was no safety risk. The company would not long after win £500m of government work for the NHS’s Covid test and trace programme. The company had already been favoured with a visit to its labs in Northern Ireland by the then health secretary, Matt Hancock, in 2019. The National Audit Office confirmed the existence of a VIP lane whereby companies with government or official contacts were referred for Covid PPE contracts. Neither the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) nor Paterson answered our questions asking whether Randox had been referred to any similar VIP fast track for test and trace work. A Randox spokesperson told the Guardian Paterson had no involvement in the contracts being awarded. He did not answer when asked why Paterson had attended a meeting between Randox and a health minister in charge of Covid procurement in April 2020. The DHSC continues to resist an FoI request for documents relating to that meeting. Paterson continues to insist that he is innocent of any wrongdoing. “My integrity, which I hold very dear, has been repeatedly and publicly questioned,” he said in his resignation statement on Thursday. “I maintain that I am totally innocent of what I have been accused of and I acted at all times in the interests of public health and safety.”Sitting is the new smoking is the mantra of health gurus and standing desk enthusiasts worldwide (including Apple CEO Tim Cook, who used it during 2015’s Apple Watch reveal) but for Britons emerging from lockdown restrictions it may sound like a curse. Despite the boom in running and online workouts, overall the nation’s physical activity dropped by roughly a third during the pandemic. And with some amount of home working set to remain a part of many lives, are we all effectively smokers now? I asked Dylan Thompson, professor of human physiology at the University of Bath. I don’t smoke, but I sprinted for a bus while commuting and my breathlessness definitely had a ‘20-a-day’ vibe. Have I Netflix‑and‑chilled myself ill? I don’t believe that sitting is the new smoking, if that’s what you’re asking. It might be a nice way to try to convey that sitting is associated with health risks, but it’s not comparable. The damage caused by smoking can’t be offset. But a moderate level of physical activity can offset high levels of sitting. Even just a little bit can do powerful things: one of our studies found that two minutes of light activity every half hour will keep your blood glucose concentrations at a normal level. That’s a relief. It feels like everything fun is bad these days and I do love a good sit. Just how risky is it? If you spend long periods sitting, then you can’t dispose of the glucose in the food that you’re eating. It accumulates in your blood and increases the risk of diabetes. You can’t remove the lipids in the fat from your blood after eating a meal, and that will put you at high risk of cardiovascular disease, heart disease and stroke. Weird to think of sitting in an office as especially dangerous, although I always said that Microsoft Excel would kill me. Is this just an office worker problem? Not really – we’ve engineered a lot of physical activity out of our lives across many demographics, workplaces, and in leisure time. Social media, iPhones – these things might not be designed to be used while sitting but it’s what happens. We’ve done research and even in schools, the children are spending only a tiny fraction of their day engaged in physical activity. The rest of the time they are sitting. Work is so all-consuming these days. British employees are some of the most stressed in Europe. If work culture is making us sick, shouldn’t we change work culture? I think it’s reasonable for people to focus on reducing sitting. It will almost certainly make them more physically healthy, and contribute to mental health as well. It’s just about finding effective ways to avoid sitting. Sometimes I do walking meetings. You were involved in setting the physical activity guidelines with the chief medical officer in 2018, which prescribed 150 minutes of exercise a week. In light of home working, should we be doing more? Back then, we didn’t have a firm consensus on how much physical activity was required to offset the impact of too much sitting. We still don’t. We do know that one of the biggest risk factors for ill health is unemployment. People have suggested that’s because people stay at home and don’t have the incidental activity associated with getting up, commuting etc. But I imagine it’s highly individual. On that note, I think it’s high time I took a walk. Thank you, Dylan! Sounds good, bye now!Incorporating spices traditionally used for savoury baking into sweet things is a wonderful way to jazz up old favourites, and create something a little more unexpected. I’ve got so many variations of these shortbread-style cookies, and have tried everything from pink peppercorns to fennel seeds and even coriander. Here, I’ve gone for something warming; black pepper is not as fiery as the usual chocolate-chilli pairing, and brings a different kind of heat, one that comes through at the end and lingers just long enough. Chocolate chunk black pepper cookies Prep 30 min Chill 2 hr+ Cook 20 min Makes 12 200g salted butter, softened 110g caster sugar 1½ tsp coarse black pepper, freshly ground, plus ½ tsp extra to roll 300g plain flour 160g dark chocolate, roughly chopped 50g granulated sugar 1 egg white Flaky sea salt, to finish Using a stand mixer or electric whisk, beat the butter, sugar and black pepper for three or four minutes, until pale and fluffy. Tip in all the flour, mix on a low speed until just combined, then add the chocolate and mix again briefly to distribute it evenly. Tip out the dough on to a sheet of clingfilm and shape it into a thick, 23cm-long log. Wrap the dough in the clingfilm, roll on a worktop to smooth out the edges, then chill for two to three hours, or overnight, until firm. Heat the oven to 190C (170C fan)/375F/gas 5. Line two large baking trays with greaseproof paper. Put the granulated sugar and half a teaspoon of black pepper in a wide, shallow dish. Unwrap the dough log, use a pastry brush to coat in egg white, then roll the log in the pepper sugar until evenly coated. Use a sharp knife to cut the log into 12 rounds and place these on the baking trays a few centimetres apart. Top with a little flaky sea salt, then bake for 20-25 minutes, until the edges are firm and starting to brown. Remove and leave to cool completely before eating. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoThe Czech Republic’s ailing president has signalled an end to prolonged political uncertainty in the country by saying he will accept the resignation of its prime minister, Andrej Babiš, following a general election defeat. In his first public comments since being rushed to hospital nearly a month ago, Miloš Zeman said he planned to invite Petr Fiala, the leader of the centre-right grouping Spolu (Together) to form a new government. Zeman disclosed his intentions in a telephone interview with a Czech radio station, Frekvence 1, a day after being moved from an intensive care unit to a standard room at Prague’s central military hospital after doctors said his condition had improved. His comments ended weeks of speculation that his presidential powers – including the right to choose a new government – could be transferred to parliament after a vote to declare him unfit, as permitted under the constitution. They also appeared to seal the fate of Babiš, his erstwhile ally whose surprise defeat last month provoked a flurry of political guessing games that Zeman might seek to use his constitutional powers to keep him in office. Zeman said he had already spoken to Babiš by phone and agreed that he would submit his resignation after the newly elected parliament meets for the first time on Monday. “The government must resign after the constituent assembly meeting,” the president said. “But I think there will be no problem there. Because Andrej Babiš, who I spoke to on the phone a little while ago, is not interested in becoming prime minister. The reason is quite simple, nobody wants to deal with him.” Babiš, who previously said he would not accept any invitation to form a new government, confirmed he would submit his resignation in writing. “We are waiting for the chamber of deputies [parliament’s lower house] to establish the authorities. If it does, I will immediately convene the government and submit the resignation,” he said. Prime ministers are supposed to tender their resignations in person under the Czech constitution. But Babiš and other visitors have been barred from visiting Zeman under tightening hospital Covid rules amid a soaring infection rate with cases rising to nearly 10,000 a day and 40 people dying from the virus on Wednesday alone, the highest single-day death toll since March. Fiala, a 57-year-old political science professor, is expected to be invited to form a government when he speaks to Zeman by video link on Saturday. His Spolu grouping has concluded a coalition agreement with a liberal bloc, Pir-STAN, with which it commands a parliamentary majority. “I welcome President Zeman’s announcement that he is ready to appoint me as prime minister and to take all the constitutional steps necessary to form a new government,” Fiala wrote on Twitter. “I will contact him tomorrow and inform that the representatives of both [opposition groupings] have been able to agree very quickly on the main programme principles and that they are ready to form a functioning government as soon as possible.” Czech politics were thrown into flux when Zeman, 77, was taken by ambulance from his presidential countryside retreat to hospital on 10 October, a day after Babiš’ Action for Dissatisfied Citizens (ANO) party was defeated at the polls. His hospitalisation left him unable to conduct the traditional presidential role in forming a new government, prompting talk of a transfer of power. Zeman’s diagnosis has not been revealed, although Czech media have speculated that he suffers from acute liver disease. The president, a renowned drinker and heavy smoker, said his hospitalisation had left him feeling better, adding that he had not smoked in a month. “My real condition is based on the fact that I don’t like to eat and that I have bad digestion. The steps that have been taken here in the hospital have led to me being completely normal,” he said. He added that he had no plans to step down and expected to complete his presidential term, which ends in March 2023.When the MPs’ expenses scandal exploded in 2009, my friend Andrew McDonald, who has died aged 59 after a long illness, was charged with clearing up the mess. As the first chief executive of the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority (Ipsa), he played a leading role in creating and implementing a new set of rules, removing parliament’s self-policing role and introducing greater transparency. Born in Barking, Essex, to Eileen (nee Sharkey), a former nurse, and Albert McDonald, a civil servant, Andrew was the youngest of five children. Growing up in Hornchurch, he attended Emerson Park school and, to his parents’ great pride, won a place at St John’s College at Oxford University to read modern history. After studying for a PhD at Bristol University, in 1986 he followed his father into the Public Record Office (PRO), where he spent the first half of his distinguished 28-year career in the civil service. Andrew moved to Whitehall in 2000, serving as tribunals reform director and acting chief executive of the Public Guardianship Office in the Lord Chancellor’s Department before being appointed as the first constitution director in the newly formed Department for Constitutional Affairs (DCA) in 2003. In this role he played a leading part in implementing freedom of information legislation across the government and was later, while chief executive of Government Skills, deployed as a senior adviser to Sir Hayden Phillips’ review of political party funding. Andrew took the Ipsa role in 2009 with a deep conviction that its task was to help restore the public’s confidence in the work of their parliamentary representatives so damaged by the expenses issue. This was not enough, however, to prevent often bitter attacks from MPs themselves, with one describing its regulations as a “bureaucratic morass of irrational rules” and another likening it to “a Stasi operation”. Pressure of a different kind was to have a more profound impact though. In 2007, Andrew was diagnosed with Parkinson’s and six years later was told he had incurable prostate cancer too, forcing his retirement from Ipsa and the civil service on medical grounds. It was a devastating blow to a dedicated public servant but served only to redouble Andrew’s determination to make a difference elsewhere. He took up charity work, serving on a number of boards including as chair of Scope between 2014 and 2019. He led a number of personal campaigns too. One, shaped by his own medical treatment, called for improvements in the way healthcare professionals communicate with their patients. With his health rapidly worsening, Andrew spent most of his last 12 months writing. His book on constitutional reform and national identity, Changing States, Changing Nations, was published earlier this year and, this summer, he completed two more – a personal story of his last years and a novel based on the life of a wartime pilot. An avid sports fan, Andrew was even able to spend a day watching cricket at Lord’s (he was a MCC member) and then see his beloved Spurs lose at Arsenal in the north London derby in the last weeks of his life. He was a devout Catholic, and never felt bitter about having to cope with two serious conditions. “I don’t feel angry about it,” he told the Observer in 2014 just before stepping down from Ipsa. “You have to deal with the cards you’ve been dealt.” In 1992 he married Louise London; they divorced in 2017 but remained close friends. He is survived by their daughter, Juliet, and by two sisters, Janet and Linda, and two brothers, Peter and Hugh.While low-slung jeans and string tops are making serious claims to 2021’s last fashion-trend crown,a far less revealing item looks to have pipped these to the post. The balaclava, the snood-like headwear more often seen on ski slopes and in combat, is the surprising trend of the season. In the past month, the secondhand clothing site Depop has had a 145% increase in searches for balaclavas. Likewise, on the global fashion platform Lyst, page views for the one-piece are up 18% month on month. Lyst attributes the balaclava’s rise in popularity to Kim Kardashian’s headline-grabbing Met Gala outfit by Balenciaga, which comprised a full-face covering, after which searches for balaclavas jumped by 62% within 48 hours. As a result, the “wider ‘fetish facewear’ trend has been gaining traction on our platform over the past few weeks,” says Lyst’s content lead, Morgane Le Caer. Depop, meanwhile, points to TikTok, which is seeing a revival of “retro accessories” in styling videos with generation Z “reclaiming the trend”. There are plenty of retro options on the secondhand market to repurpose and recycle balaclavas (named after the Battle of Balaclava in the 1854 Crimean war). Meanwhile, fashion designers such as Stella McCartney, Marine Serre and Stone Island are placing the head gear front and centre of their new collections, starting at £150. Other designers are attempting to break new ground. Givenchy has a mesh-mohair balaclava with built-in horns for £340; the Danish designer Cecilie Bahnsen’s version (£305) has a frilly pie-crust neck; and Loro Piana has a chunky argyle-knit number for £900. On the high street, more understated options are available from Arket, &amp; Other Stories and Urban Outfitters, from £15. The fashion industry has Raf Simons, the current co-creative director at Prada, to thank for making them cool again, says Highsnobiety’s editorial director, Christopher Morency. Simons has featured them in his ready-to-wear collections since the early 2000s. “When brands see the success of an unexpected item elsewhere, merchandisers across the board can’t help telling their design teams to recreate it,” says Morency. “In that way, fashion isn’t as original as it tells you it is.” He cites UK rappers such as Skepta and Pa Salieu as modern-day pinups for the balaclava and says the privacy, practicality and protection that comes with wearing one is another factor for its resurgence. Morency adds that “shoppers are getting more comfortable with taking sartorial risks”. Far from being a fleeting trend, he predicts the balaclava’s longevity. “Now that growth has become the only acceptable performance metric in fashion as business has taken over, that means brands will sell you anything that sticks,” he says. “I think therefore the balaclava will certainly be around for a long time. The group who wears it might opt in and out, and evolve; the item will not.”US employers added a solid 531,000 jobs in October as the American economy appeared to withstand the impact of coronavirus and continued its recovery. The strong number provides a boost to Joe Biden, whose presidency has been battered by political setbacks in recent months as it struggles to enact his domestic agenda and suffered a major defeat in the race for governor of Virginia. October’s job growth outpaced the 450,000 new jobs economists had predicted from the job market, mitigating fears of slow growth in the jobs sector after far fewer jobs were added in September than was expected. The boost in jobs was expected after Covid cases and hospitalization rates declined in October. “It is a historically strong recovery … our economy is on the move this morning,” Biden said in remarks on Friday. Biden pointed to the $1.9tn relief bill that he passed earlier this year and the deployment of the Covid-19 vaccine as reasons that “the economy is starting to work for more Americans”. “Not only are more Americans working, working Americans are seeing their paychecks go up,” he said. “Vaccinated workers are going back to work, vaccinated shoppers are going back to stores.” The rise has meant a continued decrease in the unemployment rate, which was 4.6% in October. The decrease in unemployment was mostly seen among white and Hispanic workers, while the Black and Asian unemployment rate has remained unchanged. The Black unemployment rate stands at 7.9% – more than 3% higher than the white unemployment rate of 4.2%. October’s job surge was largely seen in the leisure and hospitality industry, which includes hotels, entertainment and restaurants. The industry was bolstered by 164,000 jobs in October, reaching the highest number of people employed in the industry since the start of the pandemic. Other industries that saw increased growth in October include professional and business services, which includes marketing and accounting, manufacturing and transportation and warehousing. Hourly and weekly wages also rose in October, a continuation of an upward trend over the last few months, particularly as employers have had to entice workers to apply for jobs amid labor shortages.Schools in England should not encourage pupils to take part in climate protests or join campaigns, according to a draft strategy paper on sustainability and climate change published by the Department for Education. The document was published after Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, said students concerned by climate change should consider careers in science and technology, and warned they risked incurring fines if they skipped classes to join protests. The draft strategy acknowledges that “young people are anxious to create a greener, more sustainable world” but says that “while schools should support pupil’s interest in climate change and tackling both its causes and effects, it would not be appropriate to encourage pupils to join specific campaigning groups or engage in specific political activity, such as protests”. It says teachers are not obliged to present opposing views on climate change for the sake of balance. “Teaching about climate change, and the scientific facts and evidence behind this, does not constitute teaching about a political issue and schools do not need to present misinformation or unsubstantiated claims to provide balance,” it says. But it warns that “political issues and partisan political views, for example on social and economic reform” should be handled in line with existing legal duties on political impartiality in the classroom. The document – a draft of proposals to be presented next year – sets out the need for a voluntary “model curriculum” for primary schools to teach about climate change as part of science, while lesson plans will be offered to secondary school teachers wanting to include climate change in subjects where it is not already covered. Nadia Whittome, the Labour MP for Nottingham East, said the proposals would not do enough to equip pupils with the skills they need to tackle climate change. “This is not the comprehensive review of the curriculum, with climate change embedded across all subjects, that we have called for. Teaching about the climate will remain voluntary, so many young people will continue to miss out,” Whittome said. Outside of the classroom, a climate leaders award scheme is to be developed, modelled on the Duke of Edinburgh awards. By 2030 “significant numbers of young people will have graduated from the climate leaders award with the skills needed to enter the green skills economy”, the document says. The draft strategy named Zahawi as the DfE’s climate change minister, and was published as the education secretary was hosting a panel of education and environment ministers as part of the Cop26 climate summit. Declining to take part in Friday’s march by young activists including Vanessa Nakate and Greta Thunberg in Glasgow, Zahawi said: “I wish they were doing it on a Saturday and a Sunday, not in school time.” He said students should “think about their own career in science and technology and innovation” rather than protesting. “I would urge children not to miss school, not to miss class – we don’t want to get into a situation where teachers and headteachers are having to issue fines for missing education,” Zahawi said.Marks &amp; Spencer’s online Christmas food ordering service has already sold out of the biggest turkeys, puddings and even Brussels sprout gratin, as shoppers go into overdrive over fears the supply chain crisis could hit this year’s celebrations. More than 40% of the range of 85 products that makes up the retailer’s guaranteed “food to order” service has sold out, including free range Berkshire Bronze turkeys and crowns, as well as Aberdeen Angus beef joints costing nearly £100. There are still turkeys available but only smaller-sized birds, with those serving 10 or more people already snapped up. The web service, which is allocated a quota of stock on a “when it’s gone, it’s gone” basis, has also sold out of 12-month-matured Christmas puddings. M&amp;S said the pre-ordering service had always been very popular “but this year, more than ever. Our slots are filling up but customers will still be able to find all the M&amp;S food they need for Christmas in our food halls.” The company said many of its new Christmas products were in stores, with deliveries of fresh lines such as turkeys and desserts arriving throughout November and December. Just 48 of the “food to order” items were still available on Friday, although that figure included turkeys where some weights were sold out. The speed with which products have gone has caught fans of M&amp;S’s upmarket fare offguard, with shoppers complaining on social media after missing out. Trudie Davidson, who was unable to buy a small turkey joint, wrote on its Facebook page: “How can they be sold out already??”, while Jude Kane commented: “So many things sold out already … Gave up and ordered some lovely bits from Asda.” There is anger from customers in Northern Ireland, where the service is not available this year. The Irish Sea border has affected M&amp;S’s ability to supply its stores there and it decided there was “too much risk” that customers could be let down on key items. After 2020’s cancelled festivities, Britons appear determined not to have another Christmas ruined. John Lewis launched its festive advert a week early, after seeing a rise in searches for Christmas products. M&amp;S’s own research found customers were further ahead than usual, with nearly half expecting to finish gift shopping this month. Two in five intend to do more to mark Christmas than pre-Covid, while nearly 70% are preparing for a big family Christmas. The early focus on Christmas is supported by new Office for National Statistics (ONS) data, which found one in eight adults had already started shopping for presents and food they would normally have bought a bit later in the year. In the second half of October, 12% of the 4,400 adults surveyed by the ONS had already bought items they would usually buy nearer the time. The most common items being bought or pre-ordered were food, toys and clothes. The study also found that 43% of adults were still experiencing shortages when shopping, but that figure was down from 53% last time. Almost a fifth reported being unable to buy essential food, while a similar number were unable to get fuel. About two-thirds said they had encountered less choice or found that items were sold out.I am 16, and identify as an ace lesbian (NMLNM, or non-men loving non-men). I have questioned my sexuality since the age of 12 or 13, thinking I was bisexual. I downloaded TikTok, which allowed me to explore my identity more and interact with other queer young people. Until this summer, I questioned my identity multiple times a day (exhausting and not affirming), but I slowly began to feel confident in labelling myself as a demi-romantic, asexual lesbian (I like to use labels). However, that feeling didn’t last long. I felt dysphoric a lot of the time, and I hated my breasts. Fortunately, after about a month, I rediscovered the term “demigirl” and it just fitted. I am also trying out she/they pronouns, but haven’t told anyone. My gender is quite fluid – some days I feel more neutral, other days ultrafeminine. I am open about my sexuality at school and online, and would happily tell most people that I am gay, but don’t want to “come out” to my parents. I think it’s a combination of fear, not of rejection (they are supportive of the LGBTQ+ community), and the fact that I hate the idea of having to “come out” if you are queer; I don’t want to contribute to our heteronormative society. Should I tell my parents so they have time to process it, or should I wait until I have a partner to introduce to them? Also, I feel obliged to inform them of my pronoun change, but I don’t want to be the one to teach them how to use she/they pronouns. I wish they would educate themselves. If I tell them my gender and/or sexuality, I don’t want them to perceive me differently. I know how they react is not in my control, but ideally our relationship will stay the same or improve. Obviously, whatever you say to your parents, and the timing, is up to you. But it sounds as if your sexuality and orientation will be no surprise to them. I wondered what feels different about telling others, and why you find that easier? You said you weren’t sure about telling your parents and that it was partly out of fear, but didn’t spell out what it is you fear. Is it that you feel you need to give yourself a fixed label in order to “come out” to your parents? I think it’s fine to say just what you’ve said to me (you could even show them the letter you sent in, it’s beautifully eloquent), which is that you like labels, but how you identify and therefore label yourself can change. I contacted psychotherapist Charlie Beaumont, who has a lot of experience in gender issues. “It’s interesting that you like labels,” he said. “It seems you’re really looking for an identity, and at this stage of life, things often feel uncertain. There’s a lot of fluidity in the way you feel about yourself, and a label can help you feel more secure.” He asked: “What would be wrong with having an ordinary discussion with your parents? I understand what you say [about not wanting to contribute to a heteronormative society], but if you can open up the conversation, it might be better all round, rather than turning up with a partner when you’ve never discussed anything before.” Beaumont also wanted to assure you that “you shouldn’t worry too much about being fluid: that’s an ordinary process. People don’t always use labels, but it’s far more common now [to be fluid].” I realise it’s tiring having to educate people on pronouns, but, being realistic, some do struggle with them. I often think that if you educate one person, they go on to teach others, so it’s a good investment. Beaumont did want to sound a gentle word of warning, generally, about forming an identity solely via social media. “The best way of getting to know oneself is to be part of groups that you know, face to face.” He stressed it was “even better to be part of various different groups. You can test who you are in the real world.” Of course it’s your choice, but it might be good to have your parents alongside you on your journey. And who better to educate your parents than their own child? If you would like advice on a family matter, email ask.annalisa@theguardian.com. See gu.com/letters-terms for terms and conditions Conversations With Annalisa Barbieri, a new podcast series, is available hereStephen Colbert Tuesday was a “disappointing” night for Democrats, said Stephen Colbert on Thursday evening, as they lost the Virginia governorship to Republican Glenn Youngkin. But “the media – who all live in Virginia and New Jersey, coincidentally – are freaking out so badly that NBC is launching a new Sunday show, Sedate the Press,” the Late Show host joked. One former Democratic official even described the election to Politico as “2009 all over again”. “Yes! Back in 2009 Americans were all enjoying the old man in Up,” said Colbert, “and now we’ve elected that man president.” The rough election night has re-energized congressional Democrats to pass crucial social and infrastructure plans – last week, due to opposition from the West Virginia senator Joe Manchin, Democrats removed paid family leave from the Build Back Better bill. But after the defeat in Virginia, the House added a provision to provide four weeks of federally paid family and medical leave. “OK, that’s something!” said Colbert. “It’s not what anyone asked for, but it’s better than nothing. Coincidentally, also the slogan of RC Cola.” Colbert then turned to other news, namely the reveal that the Green Bay Packers quarterback Aaron Rodgers tested positive for Covid-19 and was unvaccinated, a status he had gone to great lengths to disguise. Rodgers previously told reporters he was “immunized”, but ESPN learned this week that he received an “alternative” treatment which he petitioned the NFL to consider as a vaccination. The league refused, as it was a homeopathic treatment provided by Rodgers’s personal doctor to raise his antibody levels. “Uh oh, my Goop senses are tingling,” said Colbert. “I’m no expert, but I’m guessing it’s a lot easier just to play football with a shot in your arm than a jade egg stuck where the sun don’t shine. Then again, they are called the Packers.” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers also clarified the election results on Tuesday, which wasn’t all bad news for Democrats – the party eked out a win for governor of New Jersey, as Chris Murphy became the first Democratic governor to win a second term since the 1970s, and maintained control of the state legislature. “So, yes, the results were bad for Democrats and, yes, they absolutely need to learn some real lessons from it, but you didn’t need an election result in Virginia to tell you that things aren’t exactly great for Democrats right now,” Meyers said. “Biden’s poll numbers are in the toilet, concerns about the economy and inflation are on the rise, people are exhausted and angry after 20 months of pandemic life, and Democrats in Congress have spent what feels like an eternity haggling over a bill to deliver on Biden’s agenda, and they still can’t agree on a deal. “It doesn’t seem that complicated to me: you need to do popular things that people like and then you need to tell voters that Republicans will take them away,” he added. “I mean, this is a party that’s pretending to be a pro-worker, populist movement, but in Virginia, they just elected multimillionaire private equity executive” Glenn Youngkin, who often wore a simple, folksy vest on the campaign trail. “Don’t let that vest fool you,” said Meyers. “He’s got sleeve money.” Trevor Noah And on the Daily Show, Trevor Noah investigated the legal maneuverings of the health products giant Johnson &amp; Johnson to avoid liability for its popular talcum baby powder. The company is facing thousands of lawsuits over allegations that its powder was contaminated with asbestos. Johnson &amp; Johnson has long denied the link, but documents reveal the company knew about small amounts of asbestos in its products as far back as 1957. The company has recalled the product and been forced to pay hundreds of millions of dollars in settlements for women who attribute their ovarian cancer to the powder. “That’s a lot of lawsuits,” Noah said. “I mean, you know you fucked up when your company is giving away more money than Power Bowl. “You cannot be selling baby powder with asbestos in it,” he continued. “People are rubbing the stuff all over their bodies. Not to mention the cocaine dealers who mix it in with their product – now you’ve got innocent cokeheads snorting asbestos – it’s unacceptable!” Johnson &amp; Johnson has found a cure, Noah noted, “but unfortunately, it’s not a cure for the cancer. It’s for the company’s legal problems.” Through an audacious legal loophole, a shadow company of Johnson &amp; Johnson, based in New Jersey, filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in Texas. J&amp;J founded the alternative company, LTL, in Texas, a state with lax regulations; dumped all the billions of legal liability into it; and then promptly filed for bankruptcy. “This is insane, people – Johnson &amp; Johnson is pretty much trying to do the first thing everyone thinks of when they get caught: blame it on your evil identical twin,” said Noah. “I mean, we’ve all tried it, but it somehow actually works if you’re a large corporation. Honestly, I’m almost impressed, I just wish they put as much effort into Covid immunity as they did into legal immunity.”It might only be early November but ’tis already the season for Netflix to litter its halls with boughs of cheap Christmas content, the most obvious time of the year for the streamer to model itself after the Lifetime and Hallmark channels, a strategy that’s undoubtedly, somewhat depressingly, paying off. Last year’s truly execrable A California Christmas was the streamer’s biggest film for a week, beating out bigger-budget options (a sequel drops next month), despite being almost maliciously incompetent, following on from the continued success of The Princess Switch franchise. And so this year there’s more questionable options than ever, from Brooke Shields in A Castle for Christmas, Elizabeth Hurley in Father Christmas is Back and Netflix’s first LGBTQ Christmas comedy, Single All the Way. Aside from the odd exception (2019’s Let It Snow was a surprise charmer), it’s mostly background noise to wrap presents to, exactly the right level of expectation one should have before pressing play on Love Hard, the streamer’s first festive offering of the year, an inoffensive time-filler that’s hard to love but easy to like. It’s not exactly a ringing endorsement but it’s a palatable regurgitation of formula, knowing what to do and doing it competently – which in this subgenre and on this platform is already, sadly, one heck of an achievement. It’s a story focused on the familiar trope of the city woman heading to a small town for the holiday season (the set-up for about 90% of Lifetime and Hallmark channel Christmas movies). This time our protagonist is Natalie (The Vampire Diaries alum Nina Dobrev), who miraculously makes her living as a dating columnist living in Los Angeles, or whatever bits of British Columbia can pass for Los Angeles. Her swiping might be good for business (the worse the date, the better the story) but she’s still waiting for the one, or any one who isn’t a total disaster. Encouraged by her laughably stock romcom best friend (the kind that probably deactivates when she leaves the room), who tells her that all LA men are assholes, she changes her app settings and starts chatting to a guy living on the other side of the country. The two hit it off and Natalie decides to surprise him in person for the holidays, only to find that she’s being catfished. So the person she thought was Tag (Never Have I Ever’s Darren Barnet) turns out to be Josh (Silicon Valley’s Jimmy O Yang), leading to, you know, hilarity. The film then splits into two farcical scenarios: one has Natalie pretending to be Josh’s girlfriend to impress his family and the other has Natalie romancing Tag, pretending to be the woman of his dreams with help from Josh. It’s all predictably silly yet not entirely unengaging, thanks to a game Dobrev, who has a spiky chemistry with an amiable Yang. The big ole lessons might be painfully obvious ones (beauty is more than skin-deep yada yada yada; perfection is overrated yada yada yada) but there’s a base satisfaction in watching Hernán Jiménez energetically join the dots without breaking a sweat. The script, from Danny Mackey and Rebecca Ewing, is nowhere near as witty and incisive as it thinks it is (press materials ambitiously refer to it as When Harry Met Sally meets Roxanne) but there are a handful of well-constructed moments – a surprisingly sweet “woke” riff on date-rape anthem Baby It’s Cold Outside and a Love Actually-inspired ending – that help us power through some of the lazier ones. As micro-budgeted Canadian-shot yet American-set Christmas romantic comedies go, Love Hard is more tolerable than most and, in Netflix’s dank grotto of subterranean expectations, that will do for now. Love Hard is now available on NetflixThe Suez Canal Authority is increasing the fees it charges ships passing through the critical waterway, in a move expected to pile further inflationary pressure on global supply chains. It will seek to capitalise on the recovery in cargo trade by raising its transit tolls by 6% from February, 11 months after the canal was blocked for nearly a week by the Ever Given container ship. About 12% of international trade passes through the canal, which is the shortest maritime route between Asia and Europe. The Suez Canal Authority has benefited from the rebound in economies since the first wave of coronavirus lockdowns were lifted. It cited an International Monetary Fund and World Trade Organization forecast that global trade traffic will rise by 6.7% in 2022, which it said would mean “good profits” for shipping companies. The increase in fees will not apply to liquefied natural gas vessels. Cruise ships will also be excluded because the sector experienced a deeper shock than others from the pandemic. “The tourism and travel sector has suffered major losses worldwide, including cruise ships and sea yachts, and is expected to complete its recovery by 2022,” the authority said. Last month, the canal recorded the highest monthly tonnage in its history, at 112.1m tons. A total of 1,847 ships travelled through the canal in October, 14% more than a year ago. The canal authority also reported record revenues in the last financial year, despite the six-day blockage after the 220,000-ton Ever Given ran aground in March. Revenues rose to $5.84bn in the 12 months to 30 June as strong demand for goods drove a recovery in trade. Shipping companies have benefited from this rebound, too. Maersk, the world’s largest container shipping group, posted its most profitable quarter ever this week. It also predicted the global supply chain crisis would continue well into next year, with shortages of dockworkers and lorry drivers causing disruption. The global shipping industry is still recovering from the disruption caused by Ever Given, according to George Lawrie, a vice-president and principal analyst at the research firm Forrester. “Since the pandemic, changes in consumption and shopping patterns, including a surge in e-commerce, have already increased import demand for container shipments of consumer goods to North America and Europe. In addition, new markets for Asian manufactured goods require more ships for a weekly service, which in turn means yet more containers on the high seas,” he said this week. “Compounding the problem, the global container circulation had still not recovered from the recent Suez canal blockage.”How many more times does it need to happen? How much more proof do we need that the country is run by a man with contempt for the rule of law, who believes that he and his friends are beyond its reach? Boris Johnson demonstrated that again to the nation this week, as vividly as he could. Faced with the prospect that Owen Paterson, a comrade from the Brexit trenches of 2016, would be punished for what parliament’s standards committee called “an egregious case of paid advocacy”, Johnson instructed MPs to let his chum off the hook. The prime minister’s orders, dutifully followed by 250 of his troops, were to halt Paterson’s 30-day suspension from the House of Commons and to scrap the system that had found him guilty, replacing it with one that would be gentler in its treatment of Conservatives – because Conservatives would design it and dominate it. The move was shocking because it was so brazen, not because it was novel. For this was merely the latest instance of Johnson deciding that an ally clearly in breach of the rules should escape all consequence. The roll call should be familiar by now. When Dominic Cummings decided the national lockdown did not really apply to him, Johnson stood by him. When Robert Jenrick fast-tracked an “unlawful” planning decision that would save Richard Desmond, a Tory donor, £45m in local taxes, Jenrick stayed in his post. When Priti Patel’s bullying behaviour was found to be a violation of the ministerial code, she too kept her job. If you’re on Team Johnson, the normal rules don’t apply. Sometimes it’s about rewarding loyalty or a valuable favour. So when the Lords Appointments Commission decided that another Tory donor, Peter Cruddas, was not fit to receive a peerage, Johnson gave him one anyway. But just as often, the prime minister’s disregard for the rules extends to the gravest matters of state. One of his first acts in office was to suspend parliament altogether, a move struck down by a unanimous supreme court. Later he proposed post-Brexit legislation that a cabinet minister cheerfully admitted on the floor of the Commons would break international law. Johnson does not regard even those laws he himself put on the statute book as binding. An impeccable source reports that, at the G7 meeting in Cornwall, the prime minister told French president Emmanuel Macron that he had only “sort of” signed the Northern Ireland protocol, currently the cause of so much tension between the two countries. And sometimes these two elements – favours for pals and rule-breaking in matters of state – come together. The most obvious example is in the bonanza of Covid-related contracts handed out to chums at the start of the pandemic, with a “high priority” VIP lane created for those lucky enough to be in a minister’s contacts book. That created a stampede of ministerial mates, often hawking goods or services that didn’t work, which both cost taxpayers’ £2.8bn and wasted precious civil service time. As the Good Law Project’s Jolyon Maugham puts it: “So keen were they to get their mates to the trough they interfered with getting the right stuff.” Even the Paterson case’s ugliest aspect – retrospectively changing the rules to produce a desired outcome – is becoming all too familiar. This week the government rewrote the job spec for the new chair of Ofcom after its favoured candidate, the former Daily Mail editor and ardent Brexiteer Paul Dacre, failed to meet the initial standard. Handily, the new job description is receptive to a more, ahem, confrontational candidate. The pattern is now clear. Rules that might hold the government to account, that might act as a check on its power, are either to be ignored or rewritten. The bodies that enforce those rules are similarly to be hobbled or neutered in the name of “reform”. Johnson wanted to do that this week to the parliamentary standards system, adding it to a target list that already includes the courts and the electoral commission. Meanwhile, his culture secretary threatens the BBC, announcing that fearless questioning of the prime minister by one of its interviewers has cost the organisation “a lot of money”. We hesitate to use the word because it sounds so hyperbolic, but this is how the slide to authoritarianism begins. Not as it was in the old newsreels, with strutting dictators and balcony speeches, but with cronyism and special treatment; with enforcement of the law for “them” and exemptions for “us”; with the steady weakening and eventual removal of the constraints on government power. It is the dismantling, bit by bit, block by block, of the apparatus that holds up a liberal democracy. I spoke with a minister late on Thursday who, though furious over the Paterson debacle – “It’s a total car crash” – rejected the notion that Johnson is like Hungary’s Viktor Orbán in Eton tails. “This was the Brexit gang looking after one of its own,” he said. Johnson keeps making special dispensations for his friends not out of a power-crazed desire to demolish the democratic architecture, but because “he wants to be liked … It’s a damaged neediness.” Add to that, he says, a Vote Leave self-righteousness that tells itself: “Elites have let the country down; we don’t have to follow their norms.” Even if you buy all that, it doesn’t matter. It’s not the motive for Johnson’s actions that counts but their impact. He didn’t get his way this time: fury from usually supportive newspapers and on the Tory benches forced a rapid climbdown. But this was what he wanted, and what most of his MPs were ready to give him – a shredding of the rules to ensure those in power are unbound, and ever harder to remove. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistAL SADD-NESS IN THEIR EYES It’s been a big week for the yellow ticker. Forget your “Nicky Shorey signs new Reading contract” and “Stuart Watkiss takes temporary charge of Grimsby” as examples of unmissable breaking news, there’s been actual happenings, keeping those hard-working people on Big Website very busy indeed with managerial comings and goings, and not-comings and not-goings. Don Antonio Conte has already presided over his first Tottenham match, a topsy-turvy 3-2 Tin Pot win over Vitesse Arnhem that embraced his new club’s finest traditions of flakiness. His eyes burned wilder than ever. Up north, Unai Emery has turned up his up-turned nose at Newcastle. They have instead turned to Eddie Howe, someone whose last job in football was taking his team down to the Championship. That may come in rather handy. But new Newcastle being new Newcastle, an administration that doesn’t seem to appreciate the perils of being six points from safety on Bonfire Night, the “Eddie Howe-ay The Lads” and “Howe Toon Is Now” headlines were being kept on the sketchpad when the yellow ticker fired up once more on Friday morning. That’s because Qatari Stars League champions Al Sadd announced they had “agreed on Xavi Hernández’s move to Barcelona after the payment of the release clause stipulated in the contract”. In what was not exactly a shock move, Barça have a new coach. But Barcelona being the new Barcelona, what looked a slam-dunk deal, the return of the ultimate keeper of the flame, the crown prince of tiki-taka, has taken rather longer than expected. After all, the main reason Barça are in this mess and looking for a new manager is that they have less money in the bank than Weird Uncle Fiver after a heavy night at the local dog track. The rule of thumb for Barcelona bosses is that they either need to be Dutch or a former player to succeed. Or both. Though that didn’t work out too well for Ronald Koeman. Even allowing for having the likes of Pedri, Gavi, Ansu Fati, Frenkie de Jong and Martin Braithwaite to call on, Barcelona have a long road back to the top. Caretaker Sergi Barjuan will continue in the dugout for Saturday’s match at Celta Vigo before Xavi assumes the reins, and tries to do, well, more of the same really. That’s because Xavi is someone dripping in the haughtiest of Catalan footballing pretensions: passing the ball where others would launch it, 4-3-3, wanging on about Johan Cruyff and La Masia and trousering a few quid off the Qataris. If trying to do the same thing again and again is a definition of madness, then what is trying to do the same thing again and again but without Lionel Messi in the team? LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Luke McLaughlin from 8pm GMT for hot Premier League MBM coverage of Southampton 0-0 Aston Villa. QUOTE OF THE DAY “It feels fantastic. Considering how many hot dogs I have eaten over the years, I can say that I am a good representative of the hot dog. But I never expected that I would get this nice prize” – Sweden coach Janne Andersson is recognised by the country’s Sausage Academy for his services to eating them. Seriously, it’s his thing. FIVER LETTERS “Neil Richardson asks whether he possesses the Fiver World Record for ‘longest absence’ (yesterday’s Fiver letters). Surely that award goes to … humour?” – Richard Prangle. “We can obviously see what might have caused Neil to cancel his subscription. But may I wonder what on earth encouraged him to come back?” – Simon Mazier. “Welcome back to The Fiver readership after all these years, Neil. You might notice that Morris-Dancing Fiver’s son is now playing for England and Fiver Towers. At least he claims to be his son. Do Morris-dancers really procreate?” – Justin Kavanagh. “Congrats on 20 years. I was a 31-year-old man, newly-moved from Clitheroe to London when a friend recommended a fresh, new, tea-timely email sent at roughly 5pm most days. Since then I’ve moved from London to Chicago, Chicago to London, London to Newcastle, Newcastle to Manchester and finally Manchester back to Clitheroe. Feels like we’ve been on quite the journey together, cyclical and pointless, but a journey nonetheless. Thanks, I suppose” – Marten Allen. “I’ve been reading The Fiver since the start. I remember the dizzy days of two lead stories, so The Fiver could demonstrate its typical childish, unfunny attempts at biased humour when discussing Manchester United and the need to grow up and get over itself when talking about Liverpool on the same day. I remember when the 1,057 pedants could only express themselves line by line threaded between a TV and Radio guide which always exhorted readers to listen to ‘Off the Ball’ with Ger Gilroy (no, I didn’t either). And I remember Paul Jurdeczka, a letter writer so prolific that he makes Noble Francis seem like Howard Hughes. I don’t know who has had the longest break, but it’s suddenly struck me that if Mr Jurdeczka has moved on and got some semblance of a life, I myself might need a break and a really hard long look in the mirror” – Jon Millard. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Richard Prangle. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS West Ham have condemned footage of their fans singing an antisemitic song towards a Jewish man on a flight to their 2-2 draw at Genk and vowed to issue those involved with bans from the club. Elsewhere in Big Vase, Leicester’s hopes remain in the balance after being held 1-1 at home by a Spartak Moscow team unable to live up to their travelling fans’ high demands. The Queen’s Celtic remain on course for the next stage, winning 3-2 at Ferencvaros, while the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers have their destiny in their own hands after a 1-1 draw at Brondby. Harry Kane likes what he sees at Spurs in Antonio Conte. “It shows great ambition, to be honest,” he cheered. “His résumé speaks for itself. Everyone knows how highly thought of he is and what he has done as a manager in the game. You have to respect that.” And after binning off Neil Cox, Firewall FC have gone for Keith Hill as their new manager. RECOMMENDED VOTING The FSA Awards are coming soon and various members of Big Website are up for gongs. Vote now and vote regularly. STILL WANT MORE? Ten of your finest Premier League things to look out for this weekend, barkeep. Crystal Palace’s Tyrick Mitchell gets his chat on with Ed Aarons. Floating brain in a jar Jonathan Wilson reckons Jadon Sancho and Jack Grealish would be better off at the other’s Manchester club. “A little year in hell”: when the biggest clubs drop down a division. By Rhys Richards. AFC Sudbury have their eyes on an FA Cup scalp when they host local rivals Colchester in the first round. Nick Ames sets the scene. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ‘IT’S TIME TO START RUNNING’Seven years ago Jake Letts, CEO of Philippine Rugby, got a call from the union’s treasurer, who explained that his godson was in Manila, and wanted to pop along to a training session Letts was running for the national under-19 team. He was only 15, Letts remembers, “but he only wants to hold some bags or whatever”. So Letts told him to go stand at full-back: “The boys will kick to you and you can collect it and kick it back.” He caught the first ball and broke into a run, past one, two, three of the bigger kids. Letts remembers looking up to the coach next to him, and asking him: “Who did you say this kid was again?” “I didn’t know anything about him,” Letts says. “I just knew right away that he had sheer talent.” It seems almost everyone who has ever worked with Marcus Smith has a story like that. For Jim Evans, who was forwards coach when Smith was at the Harlequins academy, it was an under-15s match at Harrow. “I remember thinking: ‘He has really got something about him.’” For Russell Earnshaw, Smith’s coach on the England Pathway, it was a training session at Harlequins: “I vividly remember watching him and thinking: ‘Wow, that’s quite exciting.’” And for Nick Buoy, Smith’s coach at Brighton College, it was when Smith made his debut for the first XV at 16. “We brought him on at scrum-half and he changed the whole game, turned it on its head, it was incredible to watch. And we thought: ‘Well, do you know what? He’s probably ready to start at fly-half.’” Eddie Jones hasn’t quite made his mind up about that yet, so the 80,000-odd England fans at Twickenham on Saturday afternoon may have to have to wait a little longer for their own epiphany. Smith played the two second-string Tests against the USA and Canada in the summer, but Jones has put him on the bench against Tonga. If Owen Farrell is ruled out, Smith may yet start, and maybe if he’d been fully fit in training this week it would have been that way to begin with. Because Smith has it in him to light up this England team, and Jones knows it. He has had one eye on him ever since he saw him play for Brighton College in 2015, the same week his Japan team beat the Springboks in the World Cup. That talent has always been there, in his instinctive understanding of space, and his hand-eye coordination. Paul Stephens could see it when he was coaching Smith at Centaurs RFC in Singapore. “He could actually do things other kids couldn’t even see,” Stephens says. Evans shares a copy of a self-assessment Smith wrote after an under-14s session with Harlequins: “Best thing I did today? Step-pass someone, and off-loaded out of the back of the hand. What did I learn? Trying a grubber kick opposite to a spiral, must do that in a match now.” “That’s so Marcus,” Evans says now, “even at 14 he was already a bit different.” For Earnshaw, it was exactly those qualities that marked Smith out. “I think skill is king,” Earnshaw says. “If you can pass off both hands, kick off both feet, then, well, they’re quite helpful skills to have in rugby, aren’t they? But there actually aren’t that many people who are that good at them in my experience. I work with a lot of kids that age, and I’m always trying to go backwards and ask: ‘Why aren’t they as skilful as the most skilful players I’ve coached?’” Some of it is down to his family background, and the amount of time he spent playing with his two brothers in the back garden, but Earnshaw thinks a lot of credit has to go back to the early work he did with Centaurs. “In those days there weren’t too many rugby clubs in Singapore, only us and one other,” Stephens explains, “so there weren’t actually many matches, and we spent more time coaching and training than we did playing, which is a bit of a different balance to what you get back in England. And probably it frustrated the kids at the time, but in retrospect it was a good thing because we had more time to focus on the basic skills.” Smith actually started playing touch rugby in Manila, where his mum is from, and where he lived for his first six years. He keeps up his links with both Singapore and the Philippines now. His younger brothers are both in the Philippine setup – Luc has been playing for their national team since 2019. “He definitely has a special place in our rugby community,” says Letts, “knowing that he started his rugby back with the Manila Nomads, but the best thing is he’s always been proud to be Pinoy. He’s made an active effort to give back, he passes on signed memorabilia, so we can raise money, and he contacted us pre-Covid about organising some tours to the Philippines to help develop Asia rugby, and that was off his own initiative.” Which is typical. “What you see is what you get with Marcus,” Stephens says. “He’s a genuinely nice lad.” At Brighton, Buoy says, “as amazingly proud as we are of what he’s achieving on the field, we’re almost prouder of the way he’s dealing with it all”. As Earnshaw says, skill only goes so far. Smith’s other great strength, the one everyone mentions, is his character, and especially his competitive streak. “It’s not just that he wants to win, but that he’s always trying to find ways of getting better. Marcus would learn something new every day if he could.” Stephens agrees. “He had a massive desire to better himself, so whilst he’s got a huge amount of natural talent, he’s got a huge work ethic to go with it.” At Brighton, working with Buoy, Smith found a coach who knew how to challenge him. “We would put him in environments where he was pushed all the time,” says Buoy. “Of course, there’s a balance to how hard and fast you do push people in that way, but it was clear early on that he had a lot of mental resilience, and that he enjoyed it.”. They would set him targets, like scoring a try with a cross-field kick to the prop. At England, Earnshaw would stick him in a target top and give the other players extra points for tackling him, or deliberately tell people to give him the wrong information, so that he had to learn how to speak up and contradict them. “He was always given free rein to experiment, no matter whether it was a big game or a training session, just because then he will learn more from it and be a better player for it,” Buoy says. They borrowed bits and pieces from all sports: taekwondo, judo, basketball, Aussie Rules, even synchronised swimming. And Smith just soaked it all up. “He has the ability to see what’s in front of him, and solve problems very, very quickly, the speed at which he can process information while catching, passing, kicking, is a real skill,” says Buoy. “There were other areas we had to work on, like leadership and his speed and strength, that we had to really work hard on. But one thing he had throughout was just that ability to get quick solutions to the problem in front of him.” It meant Smith grew into a player who “had the ability to make everyone around him better, because he had that ability to make people believe in him, and believe in themselves, and then suddenly you’ve got a team that believes, you start moving forwards very quickly, which is what you see at Harlequins at the moment.” At Brighton, they even moved him into coaching. In his last year at the club he coached the team at the Rosslyn Park Sevens. By the end, Buoy says, Smith “almost had the ability to get the team to score whenever they needed to. It looked very similar to what it’s like watching him play with Quins in the Premiership at the moment to be honest, where he has the ability to make things happen at the right times.” There is something gladdening about all this, a sense of the system working the way it should, a talented young player supported by coaches from school, club and country, all working together to get the best out of him. And like the rest of us, they’re all waiting to see what Smith can do for England when it really matters, just as soon as Jones gives him that chance. If his career so far tells you anything, it’s that he’s ready for it.Addis Ababa was its usual bustling self a year ago. Events were taking place day and night in the Ethiopian capital; bars and restaurants were filled with visitors from other African countries where stricter anti-Covid measures had been put in place. Now all that has changed. A year to the week since the prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, ordered military operations to commence in the northern region of Tigray, a slow deterioration in security and living standards has worsened. Events have moved quickly. Over the weekend, Tigrayan forces seized two towns on the main road heading south to the capital. Abiy, unnerved by the development, urged citizens to take up arms. On Tuesday, he declared a nationwide state of emergency, granting him sweeping powers of detention, and authorities in Addis Ababa told residents to register their arms and prepare to defend their neighbourhoods. By Thursday, security agents were going door to door in Tigrayan-majority areas and detaining people, and the city’s mayor, Adanech Abebe, said she was dispatching thousands of young people to the frontlines. Already worn down by a sharp rise in living costs and long queues for fuel, most residents the Guardian spoke to in Addis Ababa blamed Abiy for the worsening crisis. “We have lived through the terrors of TPLF for almost 30 years,” said Taye, in reference to the Tigray People’s Liberation Front, which used to dominate Ethiopia’s governing coalition. “No one wants them to come to the centre and rule again. But now we are living in another terror, caused by a leader who miscalculated every move he’s made since the beginning of the war. “I was on the streets waving my country’s flag when we celebrated Abiy’s election victory. I believed that he would break the cycle [of violence] and that my generation would not have to go through what our families experienced. But here we are repeating history. Our chance for salvation died when Abiy decided to shoot at the enemy rather than be the bigger man we thought he was and find another solution. I don’t see another deliverance for Ethiopia – may Jesus help us out of this tragedy.” Some spoke of relatives caught up in brutal fighting on the frontlines of the conflict. Yemisrach, who, like others the Guardian spoke to, did not want to give her full name, said her mother and other civilians had been killed by heavy artillery fired by the Ethiopian army in a small town near Hayk. Tigrayan forces had captured the area around her family’s property then retreated before the firing started, Yemisrach said. “The army doesn’t have accurate intelligence and is not willing to listen to genuine information given to them by the locals, which is why there are casualties,” she said. “We are worried sick about our families and the Tigrayan forces’ quick territorial gains.” Since the state of emergency was declared, long queues of cars have formed at random security checkpoints across the city. Some are panic-buying groceries in anticipation of further advances by Tigrayan forces. An accountant in the city said she expected shortages on goods to get worse. “It is not only because I think the TPLF forces will march to Addis, but also because they control most of the entry points for supplies from all over the country,” she said. “I am buying foods that are not liable to rot like rice, flour, pasta, tomato paste with long shelf lifes.” Another resident questioned the government and the military’s tactics. “The next few days are crucial for the survival of our people. Where are the Ethiopian national defence forces? Untrained young people are dying on the frontlines, people in Afar and Amhara are fighting for their survival and now those in the towns near the capital are sharing the same fate. What is this government waiting for? Mobilising untrained young people will not win the war.” • The subheading on this article was amended on 16 November 2021 to better represent the views expressed within the article.Have you ever wanted to say thank you to someone but not known how? Or is there a special person you know who’s done a lot for their community and deserves a treat? In our new series, our Guardian angel helps make nice things happen for nice people. We are asking for you to nominate a special someone – whether it’s an Elvis impersonator who made his neighbours smile during lockdown, a headteacher who spends her spare time litter picking, or a volunteer who distributes meals to homeless people each week. With your nominee’s permission, tell us about them, what they do and why you think they should have get a treat. How to get in touch If you would like to nominate someone, or find out more about the project, please fill in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in touch if we plan to follow up with you, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Covid infections have fallen among secondary schoolchildren in England for the first time in weeks, but experts from the government’s pandemic advisory body are warning that deaths and hospitalisations from the disease across the UK could soar over the next nine days. Figures released on Friday by the Office for National Statistics show that infection rates among children aged 11 to 16 in school years seven to 11 dropped to 7.5% in the week ending 30 October, ending rises throughout September, and down from a high of 9.1% the week before. While the infection rate is still far higher than in any other age group in the UK, scientists said the downturn may signify that cases have peaked in England, at least for the time being. While the data includes the October half-term week when children mixed less, the ONS said the tests performed in the week ending 30 October would have identified those infected before the break. The ONS figures raised hopes that the wave of disease that swept through schools at the start of the autumn term may finally be on the decline. “For the first time in several weeks, we are seeing a decrease in infections among secondary school-aged children in England, although rates do remain high,” said Sarah Crofts, the head of analytical outputs for the ONS Covid-19 infection survey. “We will continue to closely monitor infection rates in this age group to see any impact of half-term in next week’s data.” The data comes amid new projections from a subcommittee of experts of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) that deaths from Covid across the four home nations could rise sharply from now until Sunday week, 14 November. Estimates drawn up by the Scientific Pandemic Influenza Group on Modelling, Operational sub-group (SPI-M-O) show that the daily death toll could rise from the 155 recorded on 27 October – the day it met – to potentially as many as 350 by 14 November. The biggest increases could come in England and Wales, with a much smaller rise in Scotland and Northern Ireland. The latest figures from the ONS has revealed that in the week ending 22 October, 752 deaths occurred in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate, a slight decrease of 15% from the previous week, in which 882 deaths were recorded. In the month of October there has generally been a decrease in Covid-19 deaths across the UK. From 1 October to 22 October, 2,574 deaths occurred where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. That was down by a fifth on the same period in September, where there were 3,227 deaths. Government data on coronavirus deaths, based on whether a death occurred within 28 days of a positive Covid-19 test, reveal that in the week to 3 November, a total of 877 deaths were recorded, a slight decrease of 14% on the 1,018 deaths seen in the previous week. The ONS report paints an uncertain picture for the UK with an estimated 1,103,300 people infected in England in the week ending 30 October, or one in 50 people, a similar figure to the week before. According to the study, infections in England rose more slowly in the latest two weeks, continued to increase in Northern Ireland, with the trend uncertain in Wales and Scotland. The ONS report states: “It is too early to determine the impact of the half-term holiday on the numbers of infections among school-aged children. This is because the tests that were carried out during the week ending 30 October will have identified positive cases from those who became infected before the half-term period.” Paul Hunter, a professor in medicine at the University of East Anglia, said the report provided “some reassurance” that Covid infections in England may have peaked and supports what has been seen in the daily case reports, which have been falling for a couple of weeks.Step aside Kim Kardashian and Joe Wicks, retailers are turning shop floor managers into the new influencers, as their home-spun video clips are building a huge fanbase on social media. Marks &amp; Spencer has Craig Field at its store in Longbridge, whose enthusiastic TikTok clip about how to use self-scanning technology went viral, garnering more than 1.3m views; at the Superdrug White Rose store in Leeds, the staff TikTok stars have more followers than the health and beauty chain’s corporate account, and John Lewis’s team of insiders and personal stylists is making waves on Instagram. Brands may spend millions of pounds on mainstream advertising but these folksy, unvarnished social media clips and photos are building relationships with customers in a way glossy TV spots can’t. In an age of digital takeover, they highlight the benefits of physical stores, where regular customers can feel part of the family. Sharry Cramond, the marketing director of M&amp;S food, says the retailer began using local social media at the start of the coronavirus pandemic, when there was a demand for store-by-store updates on what was in stock and whether there were queues. Now all stores have their own Facebook page and 200 have TikTok accounts; and the company draws on the Instagram posts of a host of insiders to fuel online fashion content. M&amp;S gathers up to 3m views on store social media pages every week, with its stores in Yate, Bexhill and Gloucester all garnering more than 500,000 views a month. The Romford store’s Halloween Thriller dance pulled in more than 300,000 views on TikTok alone. The M&amp;S TikTok clips began as just a way to make videos for Facebook, which is seen as a key way to communicate with M&amp;S customers but have now taken off in their own right. “When we set this up to tell people about pasta and toilet roll we had no idea we would be standing here today with 600 Facebook accounts,” she said at the launch of M&amp;S’s Christmas ad this week. “We are creating social media stars. People are getting famous in their own communities.” She said the accounts helped to build word of mouth in local communities, which was incredibly important for a brand. “People believe people like themselves,” she said. The trend builds on the use of staff to represent a brand in television ads, a technique tried and tested by the companies such as Asda and B&amp;Q. Field, who has a stand-in cardboard cut out, such was the disappointment when shopper fans couldn’t take a selfie with him on days off, says the West Midlands store has made about 60 clips over the past year and he is in most of them after volunteering, with a colleague, to get involved. Field, whose main role is in staff training, says M&amp;S’s social media team send out a weekly package of products and services they would like promoted but store teams have “a lot of freedom to presents things how we want to”. He was a bit taken by surprise by the popularity of some posts but says: “I think customers love it. It shows someone they can relate to talking about products and services and it is not too serious. It can be a bit of fun, a laugh and a joke compared to traditional advertising.” John Lewis started working with staff on social media in 2017 and there are now 366 with Instagram accounts linked to their work. The company provides social media coaching and training on how to create engaging content but the staff have full editorial control over what they post. The retailer has a talent division, aimed at turning its most successful social media operators into influencers. Victoria Thewlis, a personal stylist who has more than 30,000 followers on Instagram, with some of her posts being viewed millions of times, says she began with picturing potential outfits laid flat. Now she posts videos and lots of pictures of herself going about daily life with tips and responding to questions she’s had from customers. “It’s not all sell, sell, sell, it’s about inspiration and ideas,” she says. Customers are as interested in what she’s wearing to work as what she’s wearing on a night out. “You have to tap into your inner narcissist,” she says. The power of Instagram became particularly obvious during the pandemic when Thewlis was able to continue working online while stores were forced to close – getting virtual personal stylist appointments via her Instagram account. Now 80% of appointments in store are also from people who have seen her social media account. “We are experts and [now] we are able to bring our help to a wider audience,” she says.Eddie Howe has been described as elite, innovative, impressive and intense by the man due to become one of his key coaching lieutenants at Newcastle United. With Howe expected to be named as the new manager within the next 24 hours, Graeme Jones is in line to take caretaker charge of the team for the third and final time at Brighton on Saturday evening. Newcastle’s Saudi Arabian-led owners hope that Howe, formerly in charge of Bournemouth, will be in the stands at the Amex Stadium but, whatever happens, Jones has been told he will be patrolling the technical area as the Premier League’s 19th-placed side aim to secure their first win. Newcastle’s interim manager worked at Bournemouth under Howe’s successor, Jason Tindall, for a few months before becoming Steve Bruce’s assistant at Newcastle in January. Now Tindall is expected to join Howe on Tyneside along with two more of Howe’s former backroom coaches, Stephen Purches and Simon Weatherstone. “I know their method of work,” said Jones, who has been told he will retain his job. “It is high-tempo attacking football with momentum. Their sessions were innovative, stimulating and detailed. That was under Jason, Stephen and Simon – but I would imagine that work came together under Eddie Howe. “So, if they do come in here, I have a good idea of what they stand for. I know the work they did at Bournemouth was elite work. It’s impressive and it is elite. I got an inside view of their method when I worked for Jason and I felt I learned when I was down there. If the speculation is correct we will transfer into that method. “They are also very pragmatic and pay attention to the off-the-ball aspect because you are only as good as how you defend.” Jones has no doubts Howe is capable of succeeding in a role some St James’ Park predecessors came to regard as a poisoned chalice. “Eddie Howe has managed 550 games, 200 in the Premier League,” he said. “He is 43 years old and has a wealth of experience. “If it is Eddie, I know he lives for the game and it’s his whole life. If you think you can come to Newcastle and do it part-time you’re mistaken. It requires every ounce you’ve got. But Eddie’s intense and has exceptional Premier League experience. He’s more than capable.” Jones expressed enthusiasm about the prospect of Howe watching from the stands at Brighton. “It could give the players a lift,” he said. “They would want to impress the new man; that’s human nature. I don’t think it could harm the situation.”British Airways’ owner, IAG, has said it is pinning its hopes on the revival of transatlantic travel next week, as it warned that pandemic disruption would drive a loss of €3bn (£2.6bn) for 2021. The IAG chief executive, Luis Gallego, said the reopening of the US border to foreign nationals from Monday was a “pivotal moment for our industry”. BA said its planes to the US, its biggest market, would be nearly full next week, and the airline would restore more services as UK leisure travellers are allowed into America for the first time since in March 2020. Bookings have surged since the Biden administration announced it would relax the Covid-19 restrictions in September. The airline’s chief executive, Sean Doyle, said the signs were “very encouraging in terms of the demand for travel … Bookings have been up 167% since the announcement came out.” While families and friends trips would push “very high load factors next week as the market opens up”, Doyle said that BA was also seeing corporate or business travel pick up in bookings from both the UK and the US. IAG, whose airlines also include Iberia and Aer Lingus, reported a €485m loss for its third quarter, the key summer period between July and September. It was lower than expected and less than the €1.3bn loss in the same period last year. An annual loss of €3bn would be lower than the €4.3bn deficit reported in 2020. Passenger capacity in the third quarter hit 43% of levels achieved before the pandemic in 2019 – almost double the 21.9% recorded in the previous quarter – with the final three months of the year forecast to hit 60% of pre-pandemic capacity. “There is a significant recovery under way, we continue to capitalise on surges in bookings when travel restrictions are lifted,” Gallego said. “All our airlines have shown improvements.” In October, the government gave the industry a boost by moving to cut the number of countries on the “red list”, which has the toughest restrictions, including 10 days of quarantine, from 54 to seven. All remaining countries were removed from the list on Monday. Coronavirus testing rules were also simplified last month, with PCR tests, which cost about £75 each on average, for international travellers scrapped in favour of cheaper and easier lateral flow tests. Gallego said that “premium leisure” travel has proved to be a strong theme among travellers aiming to finally enjoy a holiday abroad, while there were also signs of recovery in business trips. “Long-haul traffic has been a significant driver of revenue, with bookings recovering faster than short haul as we head into the winter,” he said. “Premium leisure is performing strongly at both Iberia and British Airways and there are early signs of a recovery in business travel.” IAG reported €2.7bn in passenger and cargo revenue in the third quarter, almost triple the €750m in the same period last year. The company said that operating cashflow in the third quarter was positive for the first time since the start of the pandemic and is targeting a return to profitability in 2022, possibly as early as the second quarter. Gallego said that BA’s plans to restart operations at Gatwick airport, serving primarily short-haul leisure routes, under a new BA-branded subsidiary were moving forward again after stalling in early talks with unions. Doyle added: “We succeeded in negotiating the flexibility and the competitiveness we need with our crew agreements and we are now working through the final stages of negotiations with our ground staff and with Gatwick airport, but we’ll be firming up our plans imminently in the coming weeks.” Shares in IAG, which expects capacity overall this year to be 37% of 2019 levels, fell 1.5% in early trading on Friday morning but rebounded to be up 4% by mid-afternoon. Analysts said recovery would be slow. Russ Mould, an investment director at AJ Bell, said IAG was “still stuck on the runway” and could not point to a return to profitability in 2022 with any degree of confidence.It may have been his toughest meeting yet. A delegation of mothers from all over the world, all of whom had seen their own children suffer health damage from air pollution, met the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, on Friday morning to demand an end to fossil fuel financing. The delegation was led by Rosamund Adoo-Kissi-Debrah, who lost her nine-year-old daughter, Ella, to severe asthma that was officially linked to air pollution in London. She was joined by Dr Maria Neira, the director of public health at the World Health Organization (WHO), and other mothers from India, Brazil, South Africa, Poland and Nigeria, to present a letter to Sharma. “Lots of words and no action – and toxic pollution on our streets – is fuelling a public health crisis that is making our kids sick and threatening their futures,” said Kissi-Debrah. “We need urgent action now.” “We put Alok Sharma on the spot and played him a soundscape of children fighting to breathe,” she said. “He genuinely looked moved – we think he shed a tear or two.” The delegation represented almost 500 parent groups from 44 countries and may be the biggest parent mobilisation on any issue in history. More than 90% of children around the world breathe toxic air today, with fossil-fuel burning largely responsible. Coal, oil and gas are responsible for 8.7 million premature deaths a year, one in five of all deaths. The parents’ letter said: “There are already more than enough fossil fuels to dangerously heat our planet beyond 1.5C and keep poisoning our children’s air.” It calls on the world’s leaders to listen to the International Energy Agency, which warned in May that there should be no new oil or gas exploration or coal-fired power stations. “We make decisions every day for our children’s long-term future, and here at Cop26, so do you,” the letter said. “You have a unique responsibility and opportunity to protect all children, present and future.” The women in the delegation have all seen their own children suffer as a result of air pollution caused by fossil fuels. Bhavreen Khandhari, from Warrior Moms, a group of mothers fighting air pollution in India, lives in Delhi, which has some of the dirtiest air in the world. “For children to have the lungs of a smoker by their teens, through no fault of their own, just by breathing air is absolutely unacceptable,” she said. Xoli Fuyani, from Our Kids’ Climate in South Africa, said: “I implore Cop delegates to think of a child they know, and act in their interests. Children in the global south are already feeling the brunt of the climate crisis. Why are governments still subsidising the search for more fossil fuels with public money every year?” Kamila Kadzidlowska, from Rodzice Dla Klimatu in Poland, said: “My children cough and suffer respiratory diseases because of toxic coal pollution. I can’t stop them getting sick unless our leaders make bold choices. This Cop26 needs to consign new fossil fuels to history.” Maria Neira of the WHO said: “The day I joined the movement of mothers for clean air, I knew we would be able to turn the tide on climate change, as there is nothing stronger than the love of a mother for her children. Air pollution from the burning of fossil fuels is killing our children, and there is nothing, and I mean nothing, we won’t do to protect our children. So join us, or get out of our way, as we end the era of fossil fuels.” More than 40 nations at Cop26 have pledged to end the burning of coal, though campaigners said the timescales for the phase out were too long and some of the world’s biggest coal-dependent economies were missing from the deal, including Australia, China, India and the US. A group of 20 nations also pledged to stop all funding of fossil fuel projects abroad and divert about $8bn of spending to green energy instead from next year. However, China and Japan, two big funders of fossil fuel development around the world, shunned the initiative. After handing over the letter, the group joined the Fridays for Future demonstration through the centre of Glasgow. Thousands of young people were expected to attend, with activists including Vanessa Nakate and Greta Thunberg due to speak during the afternoon. About 10,000 protesters walked through the city to coincide with Youth and Public Empowerment Day at Cop26. Children were on the streets with their parents, classmates and teachers, demanding world leaders do more to stop polluters and save the planet from catastrophic rising temperatures. A larger crowd is expected on Saturday for the global day of action for climate justice, with protests expected in about 200 cities around the world. • This article was amended on 7 November 2021. Alok Sharma’s wife and daughter did not attend the event as stated in an earlier version.Books by Sally Rooney will no longer be sold in two Israeli bookshop chains, after the acclaimed writer’s decision not to sell translation rights for her most recent novel to an Israeli publisher. Rooney’s novels were previously available from Steimatzky and Tzomet Sefarim, but the books have now been removed from their websites, and will be pulled from physical shops too. The retailers have more than 200 branches between them. Rooney received both praise and criticism last month when it came to light that she had turned down an offer from the Israeli publisher Modan to translate her book Beautiful World, Where Are You into Hebrew. In a statement, she explained that while she was “very proud” to have had her previous novels translated into Hebrew, she would not sell translation rights to an Israeli-based publishing house for now, in order to support the Boycott, Divestment, Sanctions movement (BDS), a campaign that works to “end international support for Israel’s oppression of Palestinians and pressure Israel to comply with international law”. A representative from Steimatzky gave the Guardian the following statement: “The Steimatzky chain is a literary stage and a warm and embracing home for any literary work with a love of the written word. From the moment the subject was brought to our attention, as an immediate step, we removed the books from the site.” The Guardian has approached Tzomet Sefarim, which is said to have put out a statement of a similar kind, but has not yet had a response. The Palestinian Campaign for the Academic and Cultural Boycott of Israel, which is a founding member of BDS, tweeted in October that it warmly welcomed Rooney’s decision. The organisation has now reiterated its support, tweeting a statement that expressed gratitude for “the impressive growth of worldwide endorsement of the cultural boycott of apartheid Israel”. Modan, the company that translated Rooney’s previous novels Conversations With Friends and Normal People, owns shares in one of the booksellers that are no longer selling Rooney’s work, Tzomet Sefarim. Yoseph Haddad, CEO of Together – Vouch for Each Other, a social activist organisation, has been leading a campaign this week to encourage Israeli booksellers to boycott Rooney’s books. He has been encouraging Israelis to contact the two chains and ask them to stop selling Rooney’s books, due to her decision to turn down Modan’s offer. “I’m very pleased that this pressure made the two largest bookstore chains in Israel take action,” he said. • This article has been amended to clarify that the Palestinian Campaign for the Academic and Cultural Boycott of Israel is a founding member of BDS.The Metropolitan police were guilty of “institutional homophobia” for repeatedly dismissing fears that the deaths of four young gay men in Barking, east London, could be linked, an inquest heard. John Pape, a friend of Gabriel Kovari, the serial killer Stephen Port’s second victim, said he tried to help detectives by passing on information he felt could be helpful but they were “unwilling to engage” with him, and did not seem “curious” about the information he had. Pape let a room to Kovari, 22, for six weeks until shortly before he was found dead in a graveyard from an overdose of the date-rape drug GHB, and said the two had become good friends. “I think it has been said here that the police were underfunded, and under emotional strain. But I think when grieving families, and boyfriends, and friends, are getting close to the truth and trying to raise the alarm 10 months before the Met are even willing to acknowledge that the deaths are even suspicious, then it can’t be a funding issue,” Pape told jurors. “The only thing that makes any sense of how disturbingly incompetent this investigation was is prejudice, conscious or unconscious. And in my opinion, if this means the lives and deaths of young gay and bi men aren’t treated with significance and respect, I think that amounts to institutional homophobia.” By September 2014, Port had murdered Anthony Walgate, 23, Kovari, and Daniel Whitworth, 21. He left a fake suicide note on Whitworth’s body claiming he had accidentally killed Kovari with an overdose of GHB. Pape was in Facebook contact with Kovari’s former boyfriend Thierry Amodio. Amodio had been told by a “Jon Luck” on Facebook that Whitworth and Kovari were together at an orgy in Barking before their bodies were found in the same graveyard three weeks apart. Luck, it later transpired, was Stephen Port. Pape said he was alarmed there were “too many unexplained deaths in one area”. “My concerns went beyond what happened to Gabriel and became: is there something happening in Barking that is dangerous to other young gay men?” he said. But police dismissed his concerns, he said. He said he raised doubts at Kovari’s first inquest over whether he and Daniel even knew each other. Police admitted at the time the only evidence that linked the two was the suicide note – which would later turn out to have been faked by Port, jurors were told. Pape said he wished there had been an LGBTQ+ liaison officer at Barking he could have contacted, “someone allied to the LGBTQ+ community, someone I felt that had some genuine insight into the issues surrounding this”. He said he contacted gay charities, the gay press and the campaigner Peter Tatchell to express his concerns, adding: “I didn’t trust the police to link it properly.” On Port’s arrest, he said, he felt “anger” that he had not been listened to: “I wish I had pushed myself to do more.” Peter Skelton QC, representing the Metropolitan police service, said officers involved in the case had apologised for the police response but suggested to Pape that “incompetence does not always equate to prejudice”. Pape replied: “‘You have to ask why are they consistently making so many mistakes. What’s behind it? To my mind, it’s because they just didn’t value those four young men; that it wasn’t worth keeping an open mind and being curious about them. “I would agree that what happened here was incompetence … but behind that incompetence there has to be a reason why so many people were making such shocking mistakes.” DC Jackie Baxter, who was appointed as family liaison officer (FLO) to the Kovari family, admitted she did not contact them. “I can only put that down to the workload I was working on. That’s no excuse I know,” she said. She agreed that she had not “done my job properly by not contacting the family” and apologised to them. She also accepted she had failed to respond to emails from Pape, or to pass on or follow up on information he provided to her, describing them as “one gentleman’s thoughts”. She also admitted she had erroneously referred to Kovari being from Lithuania rather than Slovakia. The hearing continues.Azeem Rafiq A talented off-spin bowler who captained Joe Root, Ben Stokes and Jos Buttler with England Under-19s, Rafiq rose through the academy ranks at Yorkshire and had two spells at the club between 2008 and 2018. In a series of interviews in August 2020, Rafiq divulged that he was the victim of racial harassment during his time at Yorkshire – something which led to suicidal thoughts – and saw the club launch an investigation run by the law firm Squire Patton Boggs in response. The report, which took 12 months to complete and remains unpublished, upheld seven of his 43 allegations and accepted he had faced “racial harassment and bullying”. Yorkshire announced last week that no current employees would face action as a result. Rafiq will give evidence to parliament’s digital, culture, media and sport select committee on 16 November. Roger Hutton A partner at the Leeds-based law firm Clarion, Hutton became chair of Yorkshire in April 2020 – 18 months after Rafiq’s departure from the club – and launched the investigation into the allegations in September that year. Hutton apologised “unreservedly” to Rafiq when tendering his resignation from the position on Friday and took responsibility for failing to persuade senior management at Yorkshire to take “appropriate and timely action”. His statement also accused the England and Wales Cricket Board of failing to support the club’s investigation from the outset and bemoaned a culture at Yorkshire that “refuses to accept change or challenge”. Tom Harrison The chief executive of the ECB since 2015, Harrison led the board decision on Thursday evening to suspend Yorkshire from hosting international cricket in response to the club’s handling of the scandal and concerns over its governance and management. While endorsing Hutton’s decision to step down, Harrison rejects a claim that the ECB refused to help at the outset of the investigation, insisting as the sport’s regulator it could not be part of the panel that oversaw the process. The ECB finally received an unredacted copy of Yorkshire’s report last week and has begun its own deliberations. Mark Arthur, Martyn Moxon, Hanif Malik Rafiq says he reported his experiences of racism to Arthur, Moxon and Malik at the club at the time of his release in 2018, only weeks after he and his wife’s first child was stillborn. Arthur has been Yorkshire chief executive since 2013 after a previous spell in charge at Nottingham Forest football club. Moxon, a former opening batsman, became Yorkshire’s director of cricket in 2007 and oversaw the club’s County Championship victories in 2014 and 2015. Malik is a nonexecutive director who also serves as chair of Yorkshire Cricket’s equality and diversity committee. None have spoken on the record about the subject since the investigation began. Michael Vaughan The former Ashes-winning England captain is accused of telling a group of Yorkshire players with Asian heritage – comprising Rafiq, Adil Rashid, Ajmal Shahzad and Pakistan’s Rana Naved-ul-Hasan – that there were “too many of you lot, we need to do something about it” in 2009. Now a prominent pundit with the BBC and a columnist at the Telegraph, Vaughan says he “completely and categorically” denies saying those words. On Friday Naved said he too heard this at the time. Gary Ballance Ballance, who has played 23 Tests for England, admitted on Wednesday to being a player who used racial slurs towards Rafiq. The 31-year-old described Rafiq as previously being his “closest supporter in cricket” and said such exchanges went in both directions as part of a regular “verbal attack” between close friends. In a statement Ballance said: “I am aware of how hurtful the racial slur is and I regret that I used this word in immature exchanges in my younger years, and I am sure Rafa feels the same about some of the things he said to me as well.” Ballance is suspended from representing England until the outcome of the ECB’s investigation.Since becoming prime minister, Boris Johnson has faced repeated accusations of seeking to undermine people and organisations that independently scrutinise the government, or trying to trim their powers. Here are some examples: Kathryn Stone – parliamentary commissioner for standards Johnson is charged with trying to push out or sideline Stone, the independent officer tasked with investigating claims that MPs have breached rules, over her inquiry into the now resigned Tory MP Owen Paterson. After Stone recommended Paterson be suspended from the Commons for 30 days for breaking paid lobbying rules, a decision subsequently supported by the cross-party standards committee, Johnson backed a move to suspend this, and introduce a standards committee with a built-in Tory majority. While Johnson was forced into a swift U-turn following an outcry, opposition parties said the PM was trying to hobble Stone, who has previously found him in breach of rules, and is likely to investigate who paid for the controversial refurbishment of his Downing Street flat. Alex Allan – independent adviser on ministers’ interests The high-ranking civil servant quit abruptly in November 2020 after Johnson overruled him by refusing to sack Priti Patel despite a formal investigation finding evidence that the home secretary had bullied civil servants. Johnson argued that because the report said Patel’s breaches of the ministerial code might have been unintentional, this exonerated her. Allan clearly disagreed. Earlier that year, the most senior civil servant in Patel’s department, Philip Rutnam, had also resigned, saying the home secretary had orchestrated a “vicious and orchestrated campaign against him”. Ofcom – attempts to fix recruitment of a new boss Ofcom is one of the most powerful independent regulators in the country, with a remit covering telecoms and broadband as well as broadcasting, and as such, there is considerable interest as to who might become its new chair. Paul Dacre, the former editor of the Daily Mail, is very much Johnson’s choice for the role, but was turned down after an interview panel did not think he met the criteria. Rather than seek a more qualified candidate, ministers instead reopened the process with a change to the job description, intended to give Dacre a better chance. Electoral Commission – limiting its powers and independence Among a series of measures in the government’s elections bill, introduced to the Commons in September, are some that critics say would limit the Electoral Commission, which, regulates elections across the UK and can launch prosecutions for wrongdoing. The commission has been examining whether Johnson committed any offences in the way the Downing Street flat refurbishment was financed. Its report is now understood to have been sent to No 10. The elections bill would stop the commission launching prosecutions, and would oblige it to follow a “strategy and policy statement” put together by the lead Cabinet Office minister, Michael Gove. Critics say this would give Gove the ability to limit its work, although the government says the statement would have to be approved by MPs. Judicial review – restrict its use The judiciary is one of the most fundamental elements of oversight in politics, and critics say ministers are trying to cripple this by limiting the use of judicial review, where a judge examines the lawfulness of an action or a decision of a public body. While ministers say the right has been abused, a number of MPs and peers have warned the plans would greatly limit accountability.My friend Patsy Musto, who has died aged 74 of leukaemia, co-founded and ran the educational travel company French Encounters, which organised French language trips for British schoolchildren. Born in Alexandria, Egypt, Patsy was the daughter of Gordon Callow, a British naval officer stationed there, and Soula (nee Cassolou), who was from a Greek family that had escaped to Alexandria from war-torn Smyrna in 1922. In 1949 the family moved to Jamaica, and in 1955 to the UK, eventually settling in Bromsgrove, Worcestershire, where both parents were teachers. As a child Patsy frequently visited the south of France to stay with maternal cousins, which contributed to her passion for multicultural encounters and the importance of speaking other languages. After leaving Bromsgrove County high school, she studied English at the University of East Anglia. She did not complete her degree, instead training as a secondary school teacher at Shenstone teacher training college in Bromsgrove, graduating in 1968. She taught in London until 1971, when she returned to Bromsgrove and, after a brief spell teaching at a school, worked for more than 20 years as a senior lecturer in management studies at Birmingham College of Food, Tourism and Creative Studies. While working there, Patsy gained a BA degree through the Open University (1982) and a master’s in social science from the University of Birmingham (1986). In 1981 her mother went to work in Normandy, France, for Guardian Overseas Education, which organised language trips for school pupils from the UK. I met Patsy through working for Soula during this time. After the Guardian withdrew from this activity in 1986, Soula and Patsy took it over through French Encounters. Patsy left the College of Food in 1993 to manage French Encounters full-time, and in 2000 she and Soula bought a house at Villequier as a permanent base in Normandy for the company. Patsy tirelessly developed the programme and, with more than 1,000 pupils participating every year, its impact on language learning was significant. Many of the company staff were gap-year students, away from home for the first time, and Patsy was hugely supportive of them. She discontinued the educational travel side of French Encounters in 2007, but kept the company going, providing bed and breakfast at her Normandy home. Promoting young people’s communication skills in their own as well as other languages, Patsy made an immense contribution to the English Speaking Board, including as honorary secretary during the 1990s, and was chief judge (2009-2019) in the public speaking competition organised by the Soroptimists, of which she was a committed member. She loved Shakespeare’s plays, and participated in and directed many amateur dramatic events. Patsy was a generous host, funny, outspoken and a committed socialist and internationalist. She put her heart and soul into everything she did. Dismayed by Brexit, she had recently applied for French citizenship. A marriage to David Musto in 1975 ended in divorce in 1985. Patsy is survived by several cousins.Much as I loved wearing polo necks up to a few years ago (Succession dressing: how the polo neck came back in style, 29 October), I no longer want to wear them because they form a backdrop for drawing attention to my jowly jaw. My best bet for a neckline for knitwear now is the V-neck. Margaret Davis Loanhead, Midlothian • With reference to the article on supermarket packaging (How do UK supermarkets rate on the climate crisis?, 30 October) in which Morrisons is lauded for using paper bands rather than plastic bags around bunches of bananas, why is anything required? What is the point in forcing people to buy a bunch, especially if they end up throwing some out? Carole Gray Stansted Mountfitchet, Essex • As the Christmas consumptionfest starts, John Lewis adverts and all, is there any way to give at least one gift to the NHS and care system? To recognise how much those services are strapped together and clinging on. I’d definitely opt in to a dedicated fund to improve both. Any chance we can start that campaign? We could call it “a thankful Christmas”. Ann Wilson Wakefield, West Yorkshire • I recall a Conservative prime minister memorably proclaiming: “This lady’s not for turning.” Today, we have one who does little but turn, spin, bluff, dither and U-turn. What a way to be remembered. Stefan Badham Portsmouth, Hampshire • It’s one thing having to be ever so ’umble on a daily basis on the promise of being “levelled up”. But having your parkin iced (How to make parkin – recipe, 3 November)? Just no! David Chaloner Oldham, Lancashire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.My friend Pamela Kember, who has died suddenly of a heart attack aged 66, was an art historian, critic and curator who championed the work of Asian artists, especially women. She organised shows and fundraised at the Oxford Museum of Modern Art, lectured at Chelsea College of Art, and was head of arts and learning at Asia House, the Asian cultural centre in London, where her exhibitions, discussions and events were major features of its programme. Pamela was born in Bury, Greater Manchester, daughter of Molly Tong, a psychiatric nurse, and Evan “Ken” Lloyd-Jones, a major in the Royal Corps of Transport. When she was 10 the family was posted to Hong Kong, where she quickly felt at home; but the idyll was shattered by demonstrations and bomb attacks against British rule. She attended various schools in London, Hong Kong and Germany and then took her O- and A-levels at Bishop Fox’s school, in Taunton. On leaving school, she married Christopher Ferris. They lived in Puriton, Somerset, and Pamela became an assistant at the Bridgwater library. In 1981, they moved to Taunton where they took over a bistro and she worked for a short time as a cook. When the couple separated, she went to Aberystwyth University to study art history and library studies, graduating in 1986. After a year as a postgraduate researcher in the history of art at Oxford University in 1987 she became assistant librarian at the Ashmolean Museum’s western art library. She and I met in 1989 when she moved from the Ashmolean to work as my assistant at the Oxford Museum of Modern Art. She made an immediate impact thanks to her affinity with artists from many different backgrounds and her seriousness and charm. She soon became head of external relations and an indispensable member of the small team, organising exhibitions of contemporary art. She consistently championed the work of female artists, especially from Asia. In 1991 Pamela met the architect Paul Kember, and they married in 1995. The following year he moved to Hong Kong to establish an architectural practice with his twin brother, and she joined him in 1997. Pamela was soon teaching art history and theory at the Baptist University, the Chinese University, and the Academy of Visual Arts. She became a researcher, collector, and promoter of Asian art, joined the board of the Asian Art Archive, and judged the Sovereign Asia arts prize. But she was most widely known as an arts correspondent for RTHK Radio 4. At weekends, with Paul, she volunteered at Mothers’ Choice, a government-sponsored orphanage. Through this, they adopted their daughter, Maya. In 2010 Pamela and Paul separated and Pamela moved with Maya to London, where she lectured on contemporary Asian art at Chelsea College of Art. In 2013 she became head of arts and learning at Asia House. From November 2019, she had been working independently. She is survived by Maya and by her sister, Tina, and brother, David.I found the information in your graphics feature (The climate crisis explained in 10 charts, I November) useful but was disappointed that it did not include a table on population growth. This is important because every additional person is another carbon emitter. Also, increasing population growth exacerbates the effects of climate change – such as leading to more people having to live in areas previously avoided because of flooding risks or, conversely, prone to drought. Climate change can take the blame for issues more directly linked to population growth. For example, a recent BBC report blamed Malawi’s declining fish stocks on global warming. No mention was made that in my lifetime its population has risen from under 5 million to about 20 million. With that growth in demand, it could well be that the overfishing is the real cause. Nigel Long Keynsham, Somerset • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Max Verstappen has dismissed any suggestion he will crumble under the pressure of competing for his first Formula One world championship. The Red Bull driver goes into this weekend’s Mexican Grand Prix with a slender advantage over Lewis Hamilton, who had pointedly noted that the Dutchman’s inexperience could be a factor in deciding the title. Verstappen leads Hamilton by 12 points with five races remaining. Hamilton is attempting to take his eighth F1 title at 36 having scored his first in 2008, but the 24-year-old Verstappen is at the sharp end of an F1 championship for the first time. The two drivers have been embroiled in a nip-and-tuck contest all season and the intensity is ramping up with the season’s run-in. Speaking at the Autódromo Hermanos Rodríguez, Hamilton referenced his rival’s inexperience. “I know Max has not won a championship in a long, long time,” he said. “I know what it’s like going for your first championship, and I know the pressures that come with that.” Verstappen, in his seventh season in F1 and driving a genuinely competitive car, brushed off the world champion’s remarks with a casual nonchalance that reflects the confidence he is feeling. “I like what I’m doing, so that takes the pressure off,” he said. “It’s not the first time I’ve been in a championship fight. Yes, the first time in F1 but not in my life so that doesn’t really change because you need to win, and that’s what I’ve been doing in the past, so I need to strive to do the same here.” This weekend’s race could prove crucial in the championship battle. Both drivers have two wins apiece here since the race returned to the calendar in 2015 but in the past the circuit has played to Red Bull’s strengths. Verstappen’s wins in 2017 and 2018 came when Mercedes had a superior car across the season. The altitude of Mexico City and the thin air works in favour of Red Bull’s Honda turbo-charger and in minimising the drag of their car’s high-rake design. Verstappen won at the last round in Austin, a race where Mercedes have previously dominated. One hundred and thirty points remain on the table but, should Verstappen extend his lead over Hamilton this weekend, the world champion will face a huge task in the remaining four races, including two in the next fortnight in Brazil and Qatar. Hamilton’s teammate, Valtteri Bottas, was quickest in first practice in front of the world champion and Verstappen. Verstappen was comfortably on top in the second session however, with Bottas in second four-tenths down and Hamilton third, five-tenths back.This year will mark a “turning point” for the Co-operative Bank, its chief executive has said, with the UK lender on track to report its first annual profit in a decade. The bank, which has 3.2 million personal customers, 95,000 business clients and 50 branches across the UK, said pretax profits had reached £28.5m for the nine months to 30 September, having swung from a loss of £68m during the same period in 2020. It benefited from a rise in mortgage lending, which totalled £1.1bn in the third quarter. Demand has been fuelled by the temporary stamp duty holiday and the race for larger homes during the Covid-19 pandemic. The figures suggest the bank’s turnaround plan is bearing fruit. The chief executive Nick Slape – who became bank’s sixth chief executive in nine years when he took over in 2020 – cheered the results and said the bank was finally putting its legacy issues to rest. He said 2021 was shaping up to be “the turning point year for the bank”, which “hasn’t made an organic profit on its own … for a decade”. The Co-operative Bank has struggled to return to profit since 2011, and had to be rescued by hedge funds in 2013 after £1.5bn hole was discovered in its accounts after the disastrous 2009 takeover of the Britannia building society. Its reputation also suffered after the bank’s former chairman, the former Labour councillor and Methodist church minister Paul Flowers – known as the Crystal Methodist – pleaded guilty to possession of cocaine, crystal meth and ketamine in 2014. A group of hedge funds took full control from the Co-operative Group after launching a £700m rescue deal in 2017. The group – which includes Silver Point Capital, GoldenTree, Anchorage Capital and Cyrus Capital and fund manager Invesco – collectively owns 85% of the bank, with the remainder held by a range of undisclosed institutional investors. Slape said the Co-operative Bank was considering new takeover targets after making a failed offer – reportedly worth £1bn – to acquire its rival TSB last month. The offer was ultimately rebuffed by TSB’s Spanish owners, Sabadell. “It’s not something they want to do at this time,” Slape said. “But they know that we are interested at the levels that we indicated. I would love for it to happen. I think it’s very compelling opportunity in the UK market.” “Beyond that, there are other options [which could include] assets and portfolio sales.2The carbon footprint of streaming video is higher than you report (Streaming’s dirty secret: how viewing Netflix top 10 creates vast quantity of CO2, 29 October). In the article, computer scientist Daniel Schien says streaming has a smaller carbon footprint than “muesli with milk”, implicitly comparing the carbon footprint of information and communication technologies to that of agriculture. But ICT’s electricity consumption makes a significant and rising contribution to global warming. Some IT engineers calculate its carbon footprint at 3.3% to 3.8% of global greenhouse gas emissions – well over that of the airline industry. That’s because streaming relies on an infrastructure of data centres, networks and devices that is over-engineered to anticipate future use and spur consumer demand. As customers worldwide get hooked on data-intensive streaming and calculation-intensive blockchain and AI, this infrastructure will expand further. Schien mentions that data centres and networks improve in efficiency every year. Many respected ICT engineers argue that efficiency is outstripped by fast-rising demand. Moreover, these improvements won’t last for ever. Efficiency relies on Moore’s law, whereby the number of transistors on a circuit doubles by a factor of 1.4 with each generation. Moore’s law is coming to an end, because the most commonly used CMOS transistors have been shrunk to the point where they begin to leak electrons. New transistor technologies will not be ready for production for years. As Schien says, devices are responsible for rising electricity consumption. We consumers can curb the rise by avoiding 4K TVs and keeping our phones for as long as possible. But the more we heed the siren songs of high-definition streaming video and blockchain, the more the infrastructure will expand, and with it ICT’s carbon footprint. Laura U Marks Principal investigator, Tackling the Carbon Footprint of Streaming Media, Simon Fraser University, Vancouver, Canada • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Jamaica’s top diplomat in the UK has said he is “deeply concerned” about Home Office plans to send people who came to the country as children back to the Caribbean island on a deportation flight next week. Deportation flights to Jamaica raise particular concerns because of the Windrush scandal. Although the Home Office says nobody from the Windrush generation will be on next week’s flight, some due to fly have Windrush family connections and many have lived a substantial part of their childhoods in the UK, including one person who arrived when he was three months old. Seth Ramocan, Jamaica’s high commissioner in London, said: “From a human rights perspective I am deeply concerned about cases in which persons are being removed having lived in the UK since childhood and have no known relations in Jamaica or familiarity with Jamaica. There are clear examples of these cases and I implore the Home Office to give due consideration to this concern.” Up to 50 Jamaicans are due to board next week’s flight, although it is understood that the Home Office expects the final number to be much lower than that. A survey carried out by Movement for Justice of 17 Jamaicans detained in preparation for the flight found that 10 of them have lived in the UK since childhood. One man came to the UK 31 years ago at the age of nine and was raised by his Windrush-generation aunt after his mother’s death in Jamaica. At least 24 British children are facing separation from their fathers as a result of the deportations. Before another Jamaica charter in December 2020, a deal was quietly agreed between the Home Office and the Jamaica high commission not to put people on the plane who had come to the UK at the age of 12 or under, but a similar agreement does not appear to be in place this time. A report from the former prisons ombudsman Stephen Shaw in 2018 called for an end to the deportation of people who have lived in the UK since childhood. The Home Office is planning to deport people with no criminal convictions who have overstayed visas. However, the Guardian knows of three people in detention in this position who have had their removal directions deferred in the past 24 hours. Karen Doyle, of Movement for Justice, said: “The past two Jamaica charter flights have not had anyone on them who arrived in the UK at the age of 12 or under. If you are born here, raised here, schooled here, you shouldn’t be sent to a country you no longer know. It’s a travesty and an injustice.” Bella Sankey, the director of Detention Action, said: “The Home Office has spent Black History Month planning a mass expulsion of black British residents. This government’s current citizenship and deportation laws build on colonial injustices and are inhumane. Until they are brought in line with basic human decency, airlines should refuse to collaborate.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “Those who have no right to be here and foreign-national offenders should be in no doubt that we will do whatever is necessary to remove them. This is what the public rightly expects and why we regularly operate flights to different countries. “Extensive checks have taken place to ensure no one being removed is a British citizen or eligible for the Windrush scheme. People are only removed to their country of origin when it is deemed safe to do so.”“I’m used to not winning – that’s kind of what I’m programmed for, and what I’m braced for,” says the quietly spoken South African novelist Damon Galgut, the morning after he was awarded the Booker prize for his ninth novel, The Promise. He has been shortlisted twice before: in 2003 for The Good Doctor, and in 2010 for In a Strange Room. He finds the whole thing “deeply disquieting” (his mother has helpfully given his contact details to journalists back in South Africa). The ceremony last night felt totally unreal, he says, “as if I’d been hit over the head. Obviously it was a great night for the book, so it is hard to be displeased with that.” Slight in person (he’s a committed yogi), the 57-year-old author is serious and courteous in conversation, but the sardonic voice of the novel’s shapeshifting, puckish narrator clearly belongs to him. Written in an innovative style, The Promise tells the story of a white South African family through the device of four funerals over 40 years, chronicling the decline of post-apartheid South Africa. It might be more JM Coetzee than Richard Curtis, but Galgut’s Four Funerals is surprisingly funny. (The family are called Swarts, which means “black” in Afrikaans, “a sort of in-joke”, as he puts it). With the exception of a recent “beating” in the London Review of Books, the novel has been rapturously received. “A surprising number of novelists are very good; few are extraordinary,” began one critic, just warming up. The conceit of telling the story through a series of funerals came to him after a boozy lunch in which a friend “entertained” him with anecdotes about a succession of family funerals: “Oblique angles appeal to me.” The conflict of “the promise” on which the novel rests – the dying wish of the mother that her black servant, Salome, be given the rights to the tiny dilapidated house in which she has lived on the family farm for years – was also inspired by a friend whose family, like the fictional Swarts, “in time-honoured white South African style”, found ways to not follow through on a similar pledge. The idea of broken promises runs neatly throughout the novel, which opens in 1986 and ends in 2018. Four funerals, roughly four decades apart, in recent South African history also means four presidents. “Like everyone else, I was incredibly excited at the movement from the dark days of PW Botha to the excitement of the golden Mandela era, although there was always something a bit unreal about that,” he says. “Then into the much more ambiguous terrain of Mbeki’s time and into the catastrophe of Zuma’s reign.” He didn’t set out to make any sort of political statement, intending the national mood to work as “a sort of background wallpaper”, taking in the 1995 Rugby World Cup, HIV, a rise in violent crime and the impact of climate change. But there’s no denying the novel’s downward trajectory. “The sense of promise that we had in 1994 was palpable. And that promise has pretty much dissipated,” he says. “We are not in a great place right now.” Nearly all the characters fail to live up to their promise, in particular Anton, a writer, who, like the author, grew up in Pretoria around the same time. “Apartheid was set up to serve somebody like Anton,” Galgut says. “Without any effort he could have stepped into the shoes of privilege and power. I think that promise has probably faded for white males in South Africa, which is not a terrible thing.” His otherworldly sister, Amor, is determined to make sure their mother’s legacy is honoured. Their disagreement reflects the predicament facing white South Africans: “Her solution is to renounce her inheritance, which I guess is a way, but is that a solution for South Africa?” he asks. “How do you give up your privilege? There’s no way you can hand it in, like at a cloakroom.” Brother and sister represent the two sides of his own conflicted psyche, torn between “being self-interested and not averse to the trappings of power and more saintly impulses to renounce it”. Despite being haunted by death, decay and disappointment, the novel was “great fun” to write. While the spirits of Joyce, Woolf and Faulkner loom large, so, too, does Fellini, who provides the book’s epigraph. Stymied during earlier drafts, Galgut took a break to write a film script, a tip he’d recommend for anyone suffering writer’s block. “Language is the least important element in the film,” he says. “No one cares, which is strangely helpful, because you have to take language terribly seriously if you are a novelist.” Instead he discovered “the free-ranging eye of the camera which can go anywhere inside a scene”. The only place we don’t go is into the mind of Salome, “invisible” to those around her. This silence is deliberate. “Somebody like Salome still has no voice in modern South Africa,” he says. “And that, in many ways, is at the heart of South Africa’s problems right now.” In his New Yorker review, James Wood argued that The Promise is more pessimistic than Coetzee’s Disgrace, which won the Booker prize in 1999 and takes some beating as a bleak portrait of post-apartheid South Africa. Without wanting to engage in any “pessimism competition”, it is true that Galgut can’t remember ever feeling so despairing of the future. Government corruption during the pandemic has pushed the nation “over the edge into some unknown terrain”, he believes. “We are used to the idea of politicians stealing, but politicians stealing in a situation like this seemed absolutely morally bankrupt and I think it has left the country financially bankrupt.” The eldest of four children, Galgut and his family led “an ordinary suburban existence” in Pretoria, which he describes as a “sort of nerve centre of the whole apartheid machine – not a great place to grow up”. But when he was six he nearly died of a kind of lymphoma that typically affects black children, which meant it wasn’t diagnosed until he was in a comatose state. His recovery turned him into something of a “medical miracle, always being wheeled out for doctors conferences and so on”, which he blames for his anxiety in public spaces. “I felt a little bit like that last night on stage, as if I was a medical specimen again,” he confesses. But he credits the long months of being read to – “there were no phones or videos” – during his convalescence with making him a writer. “I developed a passionate love for stories and from there it was just a short step to wanting to create them myself.” By high school he had written two “terribly bad novels”, which became his first novel A Sinless Season, published when he was just 17. “It kind of embarrasses me now.” Today Galgut lives on his own in Cape Town, a “quiet life” which he enjoys and hopes will continue largely unchanged. “I guess, in some way, we think that our life holds some promise which may or may not come to fulfilment. It usually doesn’t,” he reflects of his characters. Winning the Booker, 40 years after his first novel was published, and on his third nomination, the author has surely fulfilled his own promise. • This article was amended on 6 November 2021. Galgut’s first novel was published 40, not 50, years before he won the Booker prize, and the Rugby World Cup was hosted by South Africa in 1995, not 1994 as stated in an earlier version. • Damon Galgut will discuss The Promise in a Guardian Live online event on Tuesday 9 November. Book tickets hereProf Tim Forsyth’s criticism of productive plantation forests is out of touch with the global value of these forests (Letters, 3 November). Expansion of productive forests remains one of the most cost-effective strategies for removing and storing CO2 from the atmosphere, in addition to producing timber on a sustainable basis. A recent study showed that productive coniferous forests support up to 269% more greenhouse gas mitigation potential than newly planted broadleaf conservation forests. Only 3% of the total global forest area comprises productive plantation forest, yet they produce one-third of the world’s industrial timber. Productive forests leave a smaller environmental footprint by focusing harvesting activity in relatively small areas in comparison with expansive and damaging timber extraction from natural forests. Expansion of productive forests is not keeping pace with global timber demand, with the shortfall increasingly sourced from natural and semi-natural forests that are already under severe pressure. Productive forests yield more than 10 times more wood on an area basis than natural forests. It is incumbent on developed nations – as the biggest emitters of carbon – to increase investment in climate change mitigation strategies including expansion of their domestic productive forest areas. Developed nations are also the biggest users of wood (the UK is the world’s second-biggest importer of wood products), and increasing domestic wood production would reduce the need for imports, indirectly reducing the damage and loss of the world’s natural forests through timber extraction offsetting (ie using timber output from productive forests to reduce logging damage and loss of natural forests). Greater reliance on domestically sourced wood also reduces the carbon footprint of transporting timber products long distances. Dr Andrew Cameron Institute of biological and environmental sciences, University of Aberdeen • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The number of people crossing the Channel by small boats in a single day reached a record number for this century on Wednesday, eclipsing the daily arrival figures during the summer. Despite the low November temperatures, at least 853 people came to the UK, the Home Office confirmed. The figure surpasses the previous daily record of 828 set in August. The figures will prompt renewed concern in Downing Street and the Home Office after high-profile pledges that the numbers of people entering the UK by boat would be curbed. It was widely assumed that the numbers of arrivals by boat would drop in the winter. They come after a week of fatalities for those trying to leave France for the UK. A train struck and killed a person from Eritrea near Calais and at least two bodies were recovered from the sea and a beach. The Home Office confirmed on Friday that the UK authorities rescued or intercept 853 people in 25 incidents. French authorities said two people died this week while attempting the journey and several more were feared lost at sea last week. Bridget Chapman, a case worker at Kent Refugee Action Network, which helps young refugee and asylum seekers, said recent rivals may have made the crossing on Wednesday because of clear weather and because of their increasingly desperate plight in France. “It was a cold but calm day to cross the Channel, followed by bad weather. We also hear that the conditions in Calais for people living rough are getting worse – French police beat young men and break up roadside encampments,” she said. The figure has been surpassed on previous occasions when local people in Kent welcomed refugees. During a single day in mid August 1914, around 16,000 Belgian refugees landed in Folkestone Harbour, doubling the number of people in the coastal town. Speaking of the Calais train incident, Franck Dhersin, a regional vice-president for transportation in the Hauts-de-France region, told the French broadcaster BFM-TV they were among a group of migrants walking along the tracks in heavy rain and after dark, making it hard for the train driver to see them. As well as the fataility, one person is in a critical condition after the incident on Thursday evening and two others sustained minor injuries, according to Dhersin. Dhersin, also a village mayor near the coastal town of Dunkirk, said dozens of migrants were arriving daily in the area. He appealed for help, saying: “We feel abandoned by the government.” More than 21,000 people have made the crossing to the UK so far this year, more than double the total for the whole of 2020. Campaigners and aid charities have repeatedly called on ministers to overhaul the asylum system in light of the soaring numbers. The Maritime Prefecture of the Channel and the North Sea said one person was found dead on the beach at Wissant, near Calais, on Thursday morning after the discovery of a boat filled with water. Two other people found with them were suffering from hypothermia, and were treated by emergency services and taken to hospital. Another person died attempting the crossing on Wednesday, said French authorities, who had carried out a rescue mission in the strait of Pas-de-Calais. It is believed they were unconscious when they were pulled from the water and pronounced dead as rescuers returned to shore. Another person has been reported as missing. Two men – both Somali nationals – were rescued off the Essex coast near Harwich on 25 October and searches for any possible remaining survivors have been called off. Refugee charities have pointed out that people seeking asylum have no choice but to take extreme and dangerous journeys to find safety in the UK. In 2019, the home secretary, Priti Patel, promised to make migrant crossings an “infrequent phenomenon” by spring 2020 and pledged in August last year to “make this route unviable”. During this time, the government has agreed to pay France tens of millions of pounds to increase security on its northern coast.I am writing in response to the article by an anonymous NHS consultant (We aren’t yet into winter but pressure on the NHS is already unsustainable, 29 October). The view from primary care is equally grim, with a chronic shortage of social care beds causing delayed hospital discharges, long waits in A&amp;E, and paramedic crews queueing for hours before they can hand their patients over to hospital staff. The end result is exceptional pressure on the ambulance service. I work in general practice and had to call an ambulance last week for a baby with low oxygen levels. I phoned ambulance control, the normal process, and was on hold for 15 minutes, at which point I called 999 instead because the baby was deteriorating, only to be placed on hold again for several more minutes, during which I was calculating whether our practice oxygen cylinder would last long enough to transfer the baby to hospital in my car. In my 24-year career I have never faced a situation where there was a very real possibility that we would not be able to access an emergency ambulance. I cannot understand how this situation is not headline news and why the government insists that the NHS is not under undue pressure. Sadly, this incident was only one of many examples I could quote which illustrate how close basic medical care is to collapsing in the UK. Dr Ruth Down GP partner, Barnstaple, Devon • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I read with interest your interview with Craig Bromfield ahead of the publication of his autobiography (Brian Clough and me: ‘If it wasn’t for him, I’d be in prison’, 30 October). In the extract from the book that you published, Bromfield writes that “for a long time” Brian Clough was convinced that 97 deaths of the Hillsborough disaster were “the innocent killed by the reckless”. Clough witnessed the disaster and its aftermath. He received detailed accounts of the tragedy, giving him many opportunities to correct his erroneous view. However, he repeated in the Daily Mail the lie published in his 1994 autobiography, that “Liverpool fans who died were killed by Liverpool people”. It is no coincidence that his autobiography was ghostwritten by a Sun sports journalist. The book’s allegations renewed the newspaper’s intense hostility to Liverpool fans. Within days of publication, allegations of hooliganism and discussion about the deaths of Juventus fans at Heysel and Hillsborough were run together on BBC Radio 5 Live and across the national press. Challenges by bereaved families and survivors were dismissed as “maudlin indignation”, a “kneejerk reaction” that was a byproduct of “a city wallowing in the past”. The outcry from the bereaved, survivors, players, Liverpool and Nottingham councillors and MPs was intense. Clough, however, did “not regret what I said – Liverpool people killed Liverpool people”. Clough dismissed the campaign in Liverpool not to buy his book: “Half of them can’t read and the other half are pinching hub caps.” In a TV interview, he told Clive Anderson that in fact his allegations had been watered down: “I would have got into more trouble if it had all gone in.” There is no doubt that Clough’s autobiography and persistent attacks in the mid-1990s contributed significantly to the myth that Liverpool fans were responsible for Hillsborough. I exposed this in 1999 in my book Hillsborough: The Truth and reaffirmed it in the Hillsborough Independent Panel’s report in 2012. Finally, in 2016, the allegations were dismissed by the second inquest verdict, that all who died had been killed unlawfully, and the fans were in no way responsible. Phil Scraton Professor emeritus, school of law, Queen’s University Belfast • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.A British judge has concluded that a submarine did not cause the sinking of a fishing boat that capsized off the Cornish coast with the loss of five men almost 18 years ago. The judge Nigel Lickley QC, who has overseen an inquest on the tragedy, ruled that the French trawler Bugaled Breizh sank after its fishing gear snagged on the seabed, causing it to heel – tip to one side – and take in water. Relatives of the men lost in the tragedy have long believed the boat sank after a submarine became tangled in its fishing gear, and they saw the inquest in London as a last chance to get to what they believe is the truth. During the inquest at the Royal Courts of Justice, the UK’s most senior submarine commanders testified that there were three allied submarines at sea in the area at the time, gathering for a military exercise. However, they said the nearest – the Dutch submarine Dolfijn – was about 11 nautical miles from the Bugaled Breizh when the fishing boat sank. They also said a fourth submarine that relatives have suspected may have been involved, HMS Turbulent, was berthed in Plymouth on the day, and they told the court they were sure that no non-allied subs were in the area. Lickley said the reason for the sinking had been the subject of “debate and speculation”. He suggested this had been prompted by the sighting of a submarine during the rescue operation but said he was sure this was Dolfijn, which arrived well after the sinking to help search for survivors. The judge said he was satisfied that the Royal Navy had told the truth about the position of allied submarines that day, describing the evidence of the commanders as “credible”. “None [of the allied submarines] was close to the Bugaled Breizh at the time she sank, they were many miles away,” he said. The judge added that he believed the conclusions of naval officers that they were sure no non-allied submarines were in the area. The judge said there was “no doubt” Turbulent was in dock at the time. Lickley said that if a submarine had become entangled with the fishing gear, it would have caused more damage to the equipment. He also ruled that the “geometry” of how the gear was found was “inconsistent” with it being dragged by a submarine. “The evidence does not support submarine involvement,” he said. The judge said he believed that the sinking, on 15 January 2004, was a fishing accident. He concluded that the boat’s fishing gear became buried in the seabed, causing the vessel to heel, take on water and sink within minutes. Five Frenchmen died: Yves Marie Gloaguen, 45, Pascal Lucien Le Floch, 49, Patrick Gloaguen, 35, Georges Lemetayer, 60, and Eric Guillamet, 42. Because the first two were flown by rescuers to Cornwall, an inquest has been heard in the UK. It was delayed until now while the French authorities investigated. In his 114-page judgment, Lickley said details of the “harsh and demanding” conditions fishers worked in had emerged during the inquest. He said there was no suggestion the boat was unsafe or unlicensed, and it was entitled to fish in the spot where it sank. The crew was experienced and competent, he said. Despite the judge’s conclusions, there were snippets that will be seized on by conspiracy theorists who believe there has been a cover-up. During his summary on Friday, the judge reminded the court that one very experienced lifeboat coxswain had said this was the first time he had ever seen a submarine at a rescue. The coxswain described submariners as “secretive”. Lickley also summed up the evidence that a naval officer onboard a rescue helicopter allegedly told crew members not to mention that they had seen a submarine.John Harris says “the case for … extra-parliamentary activity feels beyond argument” in addressing climate breakdown (Politicians talk about net zero – but not the sacrifices we must make to get there, 31 October). While I understand the sentiment, there is a danger that this becomes the only route for trying to convince the country that radical action is needed. The case needs making repeatedly, even though it’s tedious for those of us who have long been convinced. What we miss is that many people have barely got their heads around the need for radical action and others completely reject the idea. Despite earlier optimism that Covid would engender a major change in outlook, the dominant narrative now is business as usual – with a modest green makeover. Direct action may feel right to activists but, to those affected, the disruption to their daily lives creates hostility to even thinking about the need for change. It’s no good telling them that blocking the road is a minor inconvenience compared with climate breakdown – they will just regard activists as zealots. The narrative around home insulation is barely articulated – we have among the worst-insulated houses in Europe. To date, the UK’s efforts at tackling this have been feeble, with tiny programmes, often abandoned. Yet a properly funded 10-year programme, following the Dutch Energiesprong model, would deliver hundreds of thousands of skilled jobs and help eliminate fuel poverty. The argument needs making every day by civil society groups and sympathetic political parties. Instead, we have a series of standoffs on the roads, with activists vowing more disruption and the government promising more draconian measures to restrict protest. The issue itself barely gets any coverage. John Rigby Much Wenlock, Shropshire • John Harris makes some cogent points about the shortcomings of our two main political parties and the need for more Green votes. However, for that to happen, journalists and politicians need to cut through the rhetoric and waffle, and make clear three things. First, why capitalism can only ever be the cause of, rather than the solution to, our crisis. This case needs to be convincingly made in terms that the majority of voters can understand, starting with a clear definition of what is actually meant by capitalism. Second, what system should replace capitalism. And third, what a truly sustainable lifestyle might look like. This picture, premised on a radical redistribution of wealth both nationally and globally, would probably be one of startling simplicity and frugality. However, it would have the unique advantage of promising voters the scarcest but most desirable commodity of all: hope. Tim Burton Whissonsett, Norfolk • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.We’re wrapping up this live blog now. Here’s a summary of the day’s main events: Labour demanded an investigation into the prime minister’s luxury holiday in Marbella. Angela Rayner said Boris Johnson’s stay, funded by the family of a friend he made a peer and handed a government job, was not declared properly. Downing Street insisted there was no irregularity in the way the gift was declared. The prime minister’s spokesman said it was not recorded on the register of members’ interests because it was a gift from a government minister and, therefore, was to be properly declared on the register of ministerial interests. The rows over the Northern Ireland protocol and fishing rights rumbled on. There was little progress in talks between the Brexit minister and the EU Commission’s vice-president, though the two agreed to meet again in London. If you’d like to follow more of our live news coverage, my colleague Oliver Holmes is running our Cop26 live blog: Schools in England should not encourage pupils to take part in climate protests or join campaigns, according to a draft strategy paper on sustainability and climate change published by the Department for Education. The document was published after Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary, said students concerned by climate change should consider careers in science and technology, and warned they risked incurring fines if they skipped classes to join protests. The route to Paterson’s resignation on Thursday afternoon was marked out more than two years ago, when in 2019 the Guardian exposed his lobbying on behalf of two companies from whom he has received at least £500,000 in payments, Felicity Lawrence, David Pegg and Rob Evans write. Documents released following freedom of information requests revealed the MP had repeatedly demanded access to ministers and regulators on behalf of his paying clients. This raised the question of whether he had broken parliamentary rules that prohibit MPs from undertaking paid advocacy– rules that have existed in various forms since the 17th century. The Guardian evidence led the parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone, to start her own investigation. That resulted in last week’s damning report from the cross-party Commons committee on standards. It concluded Paterson’s 14 approaches to ministers and public officials were an “egregious” case and that he had brought parliament in to disrepute. Downing Street has declined to rule out the possibility Paterson could receive a peerage after his decision to step down as a Conservative MP amid a lobbying scandal. Boris Johnson’s spokesperson also did not deny reports that some Tory MPs had been warned they could lose future funding for their constituencies if they did not support a Commons vote to halt punishment for Paterson and rip up the anti-sleaze rules he broke. Paterson, a former Northern Ireland and environment secretary, announced on Thursday he would quit the Commons. It came hours after Johnson withdrew his support for moves to shield Paterson from punishment for lobbying on behalf of two companies who paid him more than £100,000 a year between them. MPs had been due on Wednesday to vote on Paterson’s 30-day Commons suspension for what the standards committee called an “egregious case” of breaching lobbying rules. But instead Downing Street backed an amendment suspending the punishment and creating a new standards body with a built-in Tory majority. Lord Caine, a Conservative peer who served as an adviser to six secretaries of state, has been appointed a parliamentary undersecretary of state at the Northern Ireland Office, Downing Street has said. Caine has worked on Tory policy on Northern Ireland during his career and told the Yorkshire Post in 2019 his involvement in drafting David Cameron’s apology for Bloody Sunday was one of the highlights of his career. New Conservative MPs, especially in “red wall” seats, have shed sweat and tears this week after being strong-armed into trying to save a veteran colleague from suspension by ripping up anti-sleaze rules before the government was forced into a screeching U-turn. Some from the 2019 intake privately confessed their fury at being told by Downing Street and Tory whips to put their necks on the line for Owen Paterson, who they believed had broken Commons rules and would not recognise them in the corridor. The move has left a small but potentially permanent scar on their relationship with the top of the party, new MPs said, with trust in No 10’s ability to avoid more errors further diminished. One Tory elected in a red wall seat in 2019 said he thought the government “wouldn’t have gone to this trouble for others and it’s more a case of having friends in high places”. An edifying week in the government of Britain, a country run by the third prize in a competition to build Winston Churchill out of marshmallows. Yup, this man is our sorry lot: this pool-float Targaryen, this gurning English Krankie cousin, this former child star still squeezing himself into his little suit for coins. The sole bright spot for Boris Johnson is that furious Tory MPs are currently only comparing him to the nursery rhyme Duke of York. Still, give it time. On, then, to the unforced blunderrhoea of the Owen Paterson affair and its fallout. The sheer full-spectrum shitshow of it makes sense when you understand two things: the Carl von Clownewitzes behind the government’s shameful “strategy” for sweeping aside a vital democratic check on corruption; and the fact that for Johnson, none of it was to do with Owen Paterson. The departing MP for North Shropshire was simply useful for the prime minister’s personal goals – until he wasn’t. Šefčovič is similarly downbeat about progress made during today’s talks – and places the ball in the UK’s court. The former Conservative MP Owen Paterson has said he will be stepping away from his consultancy work following his resignation from the Commons. There has been no breakthrough in talks between the UK and the EU on the Northern Ireland protocol or on fishing rights, Downing Street says, but the Brexit minister has agreed to a further meeting next week. No 10 has said: Lord Frost met with EU Commission vice-president Maroš Šefčovič in Brussels today. Lord Frost set out the UK’s assessment of the negotiations on the protocol. He underlined that progress had been limited and that the EU’s proposals did not currently deal effectively with the fundamental difficulties in the way the protocol was operating. He added that, in the UK view, these gaps could still be bridged through further intensive discussions. He underlined that the UK’s preference was still to find a consensual solution that protected the Belfast (Good Friday) agreement and the everyday lives of people in Northern Ireland. There was also a short discussion of fisheries policy. Lord Frost reiterated that the UK had licensed 98% of EU vessels seeking to fish in UK waters, representing almost 1,700 vessels, in line with its obligations under the trade and cooperation agreement (TCA). He repeated that vessels must provide the necessary evidence of historic fishing activity required by the TCA in order to receive a licence. Lord Frost and Vice-President Šefčovič will meet again in London next week and official-level discussions will continue during the week. Labour’s deputy leader Angela Rayner has called on the parliamentary Commissioner for Standards to investigate the prime minister’s holiday in Marbella. Her letter reads: In the list of ministers’ interests published today, the member of parliament for Uxbridge and South Ruislip in his capacity as the prime minister declared that in October 2021 he stayed ‘in a holiday home in southern Spain which was provided free of charge by the Goldsmiths’. The prime minister did not declare the value of this gift, but it is reasonable to assume that the value was a significant amount given media outlets have reported that this villa is rented out at a fee of £25,000 per week. However, he has not declared this gift in the register of members’ interests. This appears to be a breach of the House code of conduct and the rules relating to the conduct of members regarding the declaration and registration of interests and gifts. You will of course be aware that the last time the member for Uxbridge and South Ruislip enjoyed a free luxury holiday your subsequent report found that ‘Mr Johnson was required under the House’s rules to register the holiday accommodation he received’ and the Committee for Standards agreed with the conclusion, stating that ‘Mr Johnson was required to register the holiday accommodation he received in the register of members’ interests … Mr Johnson was required by the guide to the rules, which has the authority of the House, to register the accommodation’. It is also worth noting that Lord Goldsmith was given a peerage and a ministerial job by Mr Johnson. The public could understandably draw the conclusion in this case that the prime minister is dishing out cushy jobs to his friends who pay for his luxury holidays. Given the member of parliament for Uxbridge and South Ruislip has a long history of breaching the rules in relation to parliamentary standards and other integrity and anti-corruption measures, it is my assumption that he will be eager to ensure that he fulfils his obligations under the rules of the House of Commons in this case. We cannot have a situation where Boris Johnson behaves like it’s one rule for him and another for everyone else. I would be grateful for your guidance on whether this is a breach of the rules, and whether you will investigate the member of parliament for Uxbridge and South Ruislip. Nine in 10 organisations supporting vulnerable families have reported a rise in children seeking help with mental health issues, a survey by a House of Lords committee has found. Services are experiencing more demand from families needing support due to domestic violence, and worsening parental addiction and mental health problems, according to research by the House of Lords Public Services Committee. The committee surveyed councils, charities and organisations supporting vulnerable families, receiving responses from 187 services across England. It found that nine in 10 reported more children coming forward for mental health support since March 2020, while 86% said the mental health issues of children already receiving help had worsened. Some 64% of the services reported a rise in families requesting help due to domestic violence. Two thirds of the services said the families they were already supporting were facing more severe domestic violence. Half reported an increase in the severity of parental addiction issues among families already receiving support. The committee’s chairwoman Baroness Armstrong said: The results of our survey show just how much the pandemic has taken its toll and added to the pressures facing thousands of children and families, and the frontline staff working hard to keep them safe. We know too that there has been a significant and worrying increase in the number of vulnerable children who are invisible to public services and not receiving any help at all since the beginning of the pandemic. The committee is due to publish a report following its inquiry into the role of public services in addressing child vulnerability. Downing Street has said it is a matter for the commissioner whether or not she opens an investigation into the initial funding of the prime minister’s flat refurbishments. Asked whether No 10 would condemn any pressure put on the Parliamentary Standards Commissioner Kathryn Stone from MPs over the potential investigation, a spokesman for the prime minister said: That’s entirely a matter for the commissioner. Obviously, we wouldn’t want to see that happening. Our focus, as we’ve been discussing, is on the appeals process and making sure we have a process in place that is similar to other walks of life. Expanding, Johnson’s spokesman insisted the prime minister had abided by the transparency requirements laid down by both the ministerial code and the code of conduct for MPs. Given the hospitality was provided by another minister, it’s right that the PM made this declaration in his ministerial capacity to ensure sufficient transparency. I also point out that this was a family holiday at the home of longstanding family friends and is unconnected with a PM’s parliamentary and political activities. The PM has written to the House of Commons registrar to set out that this holiday has been declared under the ministerial code, because the arrangement is with another minister. The spokesman did not clarify when asked whether the register had replied to Johnson’s letter, but added: “As I say, ministerial code declarations fall outside the remit of the House of Commons registrar and Parliamentary Standards Commissioner.” Asked why the holiday did not need to be declared on the register of members’ interests, Johnson’s spokesman told reporters: The ministerial code declarations fall outside the remit of the House of Commons register. And, as I say, in line with transparency requirements the PM has declared this arrangement in his ministerial capacity. Boris Johnson’s holiday in Marbella was declared in the correct way, Downing Street has claimed. A spokesman for the prime minister said: Earlier this year, the prime minister received hospitality from a longstanding friend who provided use of their holiday home. The prime minister’s met the transparency requirements in relation to this, he declared this arrangement in his ministerial capacity, given this was hospitality provided by another minister. Johnson has come under scrutiny after admitting receiving a free holiday at a luxurious Spanish villa linked to Zac Goldsmith, the former MP whom he handed a peerage and a job. The spokesman said Johnson’s ministerial standards adviser Lord Geidt had scrutinised the declaration as part of the process. He declined to answer when asked how much the holiday was worth. Lord Frost has declined to say how long the negotiations would continue. I’m not going to give any timescales or any hypotheticals, we are trying to reach agreement and we’re working very hard and we’re going to carry on trying. The Brexit minister has previously said he expects the issues around the protocol to be settled “one way or another” this autumn. The UK also wants an end to the European court of justice’s oversight role; something that Brussels has said is impossible. The European Commission’s executive vice-president Frans Timmermans told ITV’s Peston that Brussels was “bending over backwards” to reach an agreement with the UK. A significant gap remains between the UK and the EU, the Brexit minister has said, as he prepares to meet one of Brussels’ top officials. Lord Frost’s meeting with the European Commission vice-president Maroš Šefčovič comes as the UK and the bloc are still at loggerheads over the future of the Northern Ireland protocol, while a diplomatic row has erupted with France over fishing rights. Speaking to reporters ahead of the meeting, Frost said: The gap between us is still quite significant but let’s see where we can get to. To avoid a hard border with Ireland, the protocol effectively keeps Northern Ireland inside the EU’s single market for goods, resulting in some checks for products crossing the Irish Sea from Great Britain, which left the single market. Frost said he would not immediately trigger article 16, which would allow parts of the deal to be suspended. We’re not going to trigger article 16 today, but Article 16 is very much on the table and has been since July. If we can reach an agreement on the protocol that provides a sustainable solution, then that’s the best way forward. He has previously claimed the conditions for using the mechanism have been met because of the difficulties being caused. Senior EU figures are hopeful that the use of article 16 of the protocol can be avoided. A women’s charity has joined calls for an inquiry into the decades of offending by murderer David Fuller. The Centre for Women’s Justice (CWJ) said the charity had been working with Nevres Kemal, the mother of Azra Kemal, whose body was sexually assaulted in a mortuary by hospital electrician Fuller, to set up an internship programme in her daughter’s memory. The charity said in a statement: “Azra was an inspiring and much-loved young woman and we are incredibly grateful that her mother chose CWJ to help memorialise her daughter’s life. The internship project had been commenced before Nevres received the horrifying further news of her daughter’s desecration.” At least 853 people crossed the English Channel to the UK on small boats in a single day on Wednesday – a new record for the current crisis. The Home Office confirmed UK authorities had to rescue or intercept this number of people from 25 incidents. The arrival tally eclipses the previous daily record of 828 set in August and is the highest number of crossings ever recorded in one day in the current crisis, according to data compiled by the PA news agency. It comes after French authorities said two people died this week while attempting the journey and several more were feared to have been lost at sea last week. More than 21,000 people have made the crossing to the UK so far this year, analysis by PA shows. This is more than double the total for the whole of 2020. In 2019, home secretary Priti Patel promised to make migrant crossings an “infrequent phenomenon” by spring 2020 and then pledged in August last year to “make this route unviable”. During this time, the government has agreed to pay France millions of pounds to increase security on its northern coast. Campaigners and aid charities have repeatedly called on ministers to overhaul the asylum system in light of the soaring numbers. Greg Clark, MP for Tunbridge Wells, said he had attended the trial of hospital electrician David Fuller at Maidstone Crown Court on Monday. He described the murders of Wendy Knell, 25, and Caroline Pierce, 20, in his constituency as “profoundly shocking even decades on” and something which people in the area are still grieving. Clark told the PA news agency: “This week has been a huge shock because it was only on Monday that these offences, the abuse of bodies in the mortuaries, came to light, so it is only four days since this was made known. “Everyone in the area is grieving, still, the murder of these two young women who were brutally and appallingly killed. “I was in the public gallery on Monday when the prosecution laid out the case, and even decades on, it’s still profoundly shocking what happened to those two young women. “But then to add to that what has been revealed about the depravity of the abuse and the scale of it - over 100 bodies desecrated - has shocked and appalled everyone in the area.” My colleague Matthew Weaver has written the full story on Zahawi’s morning round, where the minister admitted errors were made over the Paterson affair: Education secretary Nadhim Zahawi has admitted he had not read the detail of a standards report into Tory MP Owen Paterson but said he takes “collective responsibility” for the government having “conflated” his case with the desire for wider reforms. Paterson, who had represented North Shropshire since 1997, resigned on Thursday after a 24-hour debacle where he was saved from potential suspension by Tory colleagues after being found to have breached lobbying rules, only to face a fresh vote when the government made a U-turn following allegations of sleaze. The government had backed an amendment put down by the former Leader of the Commons, Dame Andrea Leadsom, which would have prevented Paterson’s immediate suspension by launching a review of the entire disciplinary system. The controversial plan was backed by almost 250 Tory MPs on Wednesday, although there was a sizable rebellion and by Thursday morning the government was forced into an embarrassing U-turn, blaming a lack of cross-party support. But Zahawi admitted on Friday that he had not read the detail of the report into Paterson’s conduct, despite voting for the amendment which saved him from suspension on Wednesday. Labour has confirmed it will put up a candidate in the North Shropshire byelection – the seat about to be vacated by the disgraced former Conservative cabinet minister Owen Paterson. There had been suggestions that opposition parties could band together to support an “anti-sleaze” candidate, after Paterson stepped aside following a botched attempt by Boris Johnson to protect him from punishment for paid lobbying. An alleged terrorist accused of fatally stabbing Sir David Amess will enter pleas in December. Ali Harbi Ali, 25, is charged with murdering the Conservative MP for Southend West during a constituency surgery in Leigh-on-Sea in Essex on 15 October. He is also charged with preparing acts of terrorism between 1 May, 2019 and 28 September this year. According to a draft indictment, Ali engaged in reconnaissance of locations of targets to attack including addresses associated with MPs and Houses of Parliament. He also allegedly made in internet research relating to targets to attack. On Friday, Ali appeared at the Old Bailey for a preliminary hearing by videolink from Belmarsh prison. Wearing a pale blue jumper, Ali spoke only to confirm his name. Judge Justice Sweeney set a preparatory and plea hearing for 21 December. A provisional trial date has already been identified for 7 March next year. Following the brief hearing, the defendant was remanded into custody. Ali is accused of travelling by train from his home in Kentish Town, north London, to attend Sir David’s surgery at Belfairs Methodist Church. During the meeting, he allegedly produced a large knife from his pocket and repeatedly stabbed Sir David. The veteran MP was pronounced dead at the scene at 1.10pm. Former Conservative MP Owen Paterson has officially resigned from parliament, the Treasury has confirmed. In a statement, it said: “The Chancellor of the Exchequer has this day appointed the Rt Hon Owen William Paterson to be Steward and Bailiff of the Manor of Northstead.” There is no official process for an MP to stand down from the Commons and the parliament website says that “unless they die or are expelled they must become disqualified if they wish to retire before the end of a parliament”. However they can be made ineligible to be an MP under the law by taking one of two offices of profit under the Crown – Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Chiltern Hundreds, or Crown Steward and Bailiff of the Manor of Northstead. The unpaid roles have no responsibilities and the Manor of Northstead, a former medieval estate in North Yorkshire, has been redeveloped and forms part of Scarborough. However, the process allows MPs to resign within the law. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, has been challenged over his previous earnings outside parliament. On Times Radio, it was put to Zahawi that, between 2015 and 2017, he was working for Gulf Keystone Petroleum, at one point earning almost £30,000 a month. But he said: “My attentions were always focused on my constituents, any outside interest I had had nothing to do with my parliamentary duties.” He added: “As I’ve said to you, and I absolutely agree with the prime minister that any form of paid lobbying is wrong. There should be no crossover between an outside interest and what you do for your constituents and parliament, and I always put my constituents first.” But he defended the ability of MPs to have jobs outside parliament and said: “There are MPs who are doctors, there are MPs who are lawyers, there are MPs that are engineers. Should MPs have that ability and that enrichment of parliament, of understanding the economy or the legal system or the education system or the healthcare system? “I think, in my view, that’s a healthy parliament. How we do this is up to parliament to decide on a cross-party basis.” MPs in areas where hospital electrician David Fuller carried out sex attacks on corpses in mortuaries are calling for a public inquiry, according to Greg Clark, the Conservative MP for Tunbridge Wells. Clark told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that an NHS investigation is “not sufficient”. “There’s never been a case in Britain in which the number and the scale of the abuse of dead bodies have been revealed in this way and it raises such important questions as to the security of mortuaries for every hospital in the country,” he said. “I do think it’s now necessary, as well as obviously seeing Fuller go to jail for what I hope will be the rest of his life, that we move on to ask serious questions as to how this could have happened and we establish that it can never happen again.” Clark said that he, along with neighbouring MPs, has written to the health secretary and home secretary to ask that an inquiry be set up “without delay”. Fuller admitted murdering and then sexually assaulting two women decades before carrying out dozens of attacks in mortuaries. The fallout from the Owen Paterson row has continued after Boris Johnson’s U-turn that saw veteran Tory MP Owen Paterson resign from parliament after Downing Street ditched a bid to shield him from lobbying claims. The education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said the government cannot be complacent in the face of perceptions of sleaze. Asked on LBC about opinion polling following the Owen Paterson row, Nadhim Zahawi said: “I take from it that we can’t be complacent, that it was right to come back to parliament and say we made a mistake. “I think actually people, listeners, participants in polls, will understand that it is only human when you know you’ve made a mistake to come back and say we made a mistake and we’re going to correct it. “And that we want a fairer system of appeals. They know that because it’s right in other walks of life and other sectors of the economy. “So I think it’s the right thing to do, and of course, the really important poll would be the general election.” Sir David Lidington, former leader of the House of Commons, said the Owen Paterson row has damaged politicians’ reputations. “Clearly there was a pretty appalling set of misjudgments involved,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “The reputation of the House of Commons as an institution and MPs of all parties will have been damaged by the events of the last 24 hours.” The former Conservative MP also said the affair has “weakened the government”, making it harder for Boris Johnson to win support from backbench MPs on potentially unpopular measures in the future. “If you ask your troops to march through the lobby on something like this and which they don’t think is right and then you U-turn on it, it’s going to be more difficult next time around,” he said. Morning and welcome to the politics live blog, bringing you the latest news. Please get in touch if you have any questions, comments or news tips to help as I work today. Twitter: @sloumarsh Instagram: sarah_marsh_journalist Email: sarah.marsh@theguardian.comMajor League Soccer has engaged Janice Rubin and Melody Jahanzadeh of Rubin Thomlinson LLP to conduct an independent review of the Vancouver Whitecaps’ handling of misconduct allegations brought by members of the organization’s women’s team against former coaches Bob Birarda and Hubert Busby. “The investigation will consider the club’s internal processes and overall culture at the time of the allegations, including what steps it took in response to the allegations,” MLS said Thursday in a statement. “The review will also consider the club’s current policies and procedures and provide any recommendations on preventative measures to ensure that all players and staff within the Whitecaps organization work in a safe environment, free of all forms of harassment and fear of retaliation.” US player Malloree Enoch detailed allegations of inappropriate behavior by Busby between 2010 and 2011 in an interview with the Guardian. Enoch said Busby promised to sign her as a player, then repeatedly made her room with him on trips and eventually attempted to pressure her for sex. Enoch said she shared her concerns with Dan Lenarduzzi, the team’s soccer development director, after signing in 2011, but no action was immediately taken. Enoch said it culminated in a group of players bringing their concerns about Busby and their overall treatment as players to management. Busby’s contract with the now-defunct Whitecaps women’s team expired in October 2011. He was appointed head coach of Jamaica’s women’s team in January 2020. In 2019, former Whitecaps player Ciara McCormack detailed alleged abuse by Birada, with others coming forward with similar accusations. Birada, a former Canadian national team coach, was let go by the Whitecaps in 2008 after an internal investigation. He is currently facing charges including six counts of sexual exploitation, two counts of sexual assault and one count of child luring, involving allegations spanning 20 years from 1998-2008. Axel Schuster, the chief executive officer of the Whitecaps, said executives affiliated with the incident have been placed on administrative leave as MLS investigates. He also apologized to Enoch for how the team treated her initial allegations.Colin Powell, who rose from a humble background to serve as America’s secretary of state, was honored at Washington’s National Cathedral on Friday, following his death last month at the age of 84. The funeral service was attended by the current president and first lady and former presidents, first ladies and secretaries of state, in an atmosphere akin to a state funeral. Presidents Joe Biden, George W Bush and Barack Obama were all in attendance, along with their wives, Jill Biden, Laura Bush and Michelle Obama. Bill Clinton could not attend because he is recovering from an infection, while Jimmy Carter, at 97, is too frail to travel. Donald Trump did not attend. Powell was revered as a four-star army general, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff and a statesman who appealed to both sides of the aisle and had made history as the US’s first Black secretary of state. He was also known as an approachable presence in a capital city so often bound up by protocol. His professional reputation had been marred by his pivotal role in precipitating and attempting to justify the 2003 invasion of Iraq, decisions about which he later expressed regret. However nothing negative was heard during the service under the vaulted roof of the huge cathedral, with over 1,500 present to honor Powell on a clear, crisp and breezy November afternoon, and speeches were more personal than political. A Republican, Powell nevertheless endorsed Democrat Barack Obama in his 2008 campaign that saw him become the first Black US president. Powell rose to the heights of military and diplomatic service from relatively disadvantaged beginnings, having been born in New York City to Jamaican parents and raised in the tough South Bronx neighborhood, where he was educated in public schools before he entered the army, via a college officer training program. Powell’s widow, Alma Powell, sat alongside their children, Linda, Michael and Annemarie, as the service began on Friday afternoon. Eight military pallbearers carried his flag-draped coffin up the steps of the cathedral, as trumpeters inside played, and his coffin was blessed at the door before being carried inside as the clock’s midday chimes boomed beneath the vaulted ceiling. Powell was eulogized by former secretary of state Madeleine Albright, friend and former diplomat Richard Armitage, and Powell’s son Michael. Albright was Powell’s predecessor as secretary of state, and she called him “a figure who almost transcended time,” and “one of the gentlest and most decent people any of us will ever meet”. She added: “This morning my heart aches because we’ve lost a friend and our nation one of its finest and most loyal soldiers. Yet even as we contemplate the magnitude of our loss, we can almost hear a familiar voice asking us – no, commanding us – to stop feeling sad, to turn our gaze once again from the past to the future and to get on with the nation’s business while making the most of our own days on Earth, one step at a time.” Biden’s secretary of state, Antony Blinken, and former secretaries of state Hillary Clinton, a Democrat who ran for president, and Condoleezza Rice, who served George W Bush, were also seated prominently in the cathedral. The dignitaries all wore face masks to help prevent the spread of coronavirus. Powell died of complications from the disease at Walter Reed national medical center in Bethesda, Maryland. He was fully vaccinated against coronavirus but had a compromised immune system having been treated for blood cancer. He also suffered from Parkinson’s disease. Announcing his death last month, his family said they had lost a “remarkable and loving husband, father, grandfather and a great American”. At the service, former deputy secretary of state Richard Armitage spoke of Powell receiving a visit from the Harlem Globetrotters in his office, with music playing. “Nothing made Colin Powell happier than to sneak away from his security detail,” Armitage said. In additional to religious music, a military band at the cathedral played Abba’s Dancing Queen and Bob Marley’s Three Little Birds, reflecting Powell’s love of the Swedish pop group and his Jamaican roots. In February 2003, as secretary of state, Powell appeared before the UN security council and made categoric claims that the then Iraqi leader, Saddam Hussein, had biological weapons and was developing nuclear weapons. He said his intelligence was based in part on accounts of unidentified Iraqi defectors. The invasion went ahead without UN authorisation. The following year the CIA’s own Iraq Study Group released a report that concluded that Hussein had destroyed the last of the country’s weapons of mass destruction a decade previously. Powell stepped down as secretary of state in November 2004, after Bush’s re-election. He later insisted that he had tried to warn Bush of the consequences of invading Iraq, but had supported the president when the decision to proceed was taken. Powell was chairman of the joint chiefs of staff from 1989 to 1993. The Associated Press contributed reportingTwo officials have been thrown out of the Aiba World Amateur Boxing Championships in Belgrade after being flagged as suspicious by a groundbreaking automated phone questionnaire which asked them: “Have you ever cheated in a boxing event?” Prof Richard McLaren said the technology, which is used by law enforcement agencies, had given each of the 50 referees and judges, plus 20 international technical officials, a risk score ranging from low to high. McLaren, whose review into match-fixing at the Rio 2016 Olympics continues, added that the voice detection software was part of a new screening process intended to make the sport less corrupt. Those identified as particularly suspicious were subject to interviews and further vetting procedures. “It is a big, huge historic step forward in eliminating bout manipulation,” said McLaren, who revealed that two officials had been removed before the tournament because of the technology and another two during it after further analysis and interviews. “The investigators and analysts utilise the voice analytical tool to help screen officials,” he said. “It measures the cognitive functions of the brain in the verbal responses and – given pertinent questions – finds whether that person is low risk, medium risk, high risk in terms of being an official at the championships.” McLaren said the tool could also be a blueprint for other judging sports: “I think the technology has incredible potential. It has to be combined with other work in order to make it effective, but it clearly identifies problems and protects the officiating core.” The technology was welcomed by Roy Jones Jr, who was cheated out of a gold medal at the 1988 Seoul Olympics by a judging scandal. “It would have been very beautiful to have this technology in that time,” he said. “However, it’s better late than never. And hopefully no other Olympic – or any other international athlete in boxing – will have to go through the same things that I went through.”It sounds like the plot of a thriller. A fishing boat sinks off the Cornish coast as submarines converge for a naval exercise. Years of allegations, conspiracy theories, and denials by military chiefs follow. More than 17 years after the Bugaled Breizh sank with the loss of its five crew members, bereaved relatives remain convinced a submarine pulled the trawler down, but an inquest has now ruled otherwise. What happened to the Bugaled Breizh on 15 January 2004? The 24-metre-long Bugaled Breizh – whose name means “children of Brittany” in the Breton language – was fishing 15 nautical miles south of Lizard Point on a rough day when it sank. A major air and sea rescue was launched but none of the five crew members were saved. What investigations have taken place? The sinking was investigated for years by the French maritime authorities and courts. There are two theories: either it sank after its trawl gear burrowed into the seabed – a “soft snag” – or that a submarine became entangled in its warps, heavy lines that connect a boat to its nets. In July 2008 the French investigating judges stated that only the involvement of a submarine provided a coherent explanation. However, they could not identify any submarine as having been present. On Friday a British inquest judge concluded that a submarine did not cause the sinking. Were there submarines in the Channel at the time? Yes, three allied submarines were there, ready to take part in a Nato exercise. Closest was the Dutch submarine Dolfijn, which reported that it was about 11 nautical miles from the sinking at the time. A German submarine, the U22, was more than 40 nautical miles away and the British submarine HMS Torbay about 100 nautical miles away. Dolfijn helped in the search and rescue mission. Its presence surprised some. One rescuer, Philip Burgess, the coxswain of an RNLI lifeboat, said he had never seen a submarine involved in a rescue. “They’re a secretive lot,” he told the inquest. The pilot of a navy rescue helicopter claimed at the inquest that his commanding officer told them: “We don’t need to mention the submarine.” The pilot said he found this “strange”. Could there have been any other submarines in the area? Relatives have long suspected that a second British submarine, HMS Turbulent, was involved. The inquest heard testimony from the UK’s most senior submarine commanders that it was berthed in Devonport, Plymouth, that day. Another theory was that a US submarine was in the Channel keeping an eye on the loading of nuclear waste in France. The US has said none of its submarines were within 100 nautical miles. The Royal Navy said it was certain no non-allied submarines were within 50 nautical miles. Has this convinced the families? No. The families do not believe the soft snag theory. They argue the crew were too experienced to let such an accident happen. In court their barrister, Oliver Hymans, said that although no submarine had yet been placed at the scene, the soft snag idea did not explain the sinking. What was the response to the cover-up claims? Commander Daniel Simmonds, responsible for all UK submarine tasking, told the inquest it was “unthinkable” that logs and other documents recording the allied submarines’ positions had been falsified. But the families were angry they were not allowed to call into question the credibility of the navy by asking the commanders about the case of the Karen, a trawler whose gear was snagged by a Royal Navy submarine in 2015 off Northern Ireland. The UK’s Marine Accident Investigation Branch criticised the navy for not revealing until almost five months after the incident that a submarine was involved. Hymans said they had wanted to use the case of the Karen to test the MoD’s credibility.Time to wrap up after quite a busy week. Here’s today’s main stories: Goodnight, and best wishes for the weekend. GW Stocks in London have closed at a new pandemic high. The blue-chip FTSE 100 ended the day 24 points higher at 7304, its highest close since the start of the market crash in February 2020. Travel and hospitality stocks led the risers, on hopes that Pfizer’s experimental antiviral pill, paxlovid, could help avoid future lockdowns and pandemic restrictions. IAG, which owns British Airways, jumped 6% to 180p, followed by jet-engine maker Rolls-Royce which gained 5.8%. Conference organiser Informa (+5.6%), engineering firm Melrose (+4.3%) and broadcaster ITV (+3.3%) also rallied. On the FTSE 250 index, cruise operator Carnival jumped 9.5% and ticketing firm Trainline gained 7.3%, on optimism of a pick-up in travel bookings. Danni Hewson, AJ Bell financial analyst, says: “More records fell across the pond with those travel operators boosting the S&amp;P 500, particularly the cruise sector which relies on trade from older travellers who might still have been a little wary despite the vaccination programme roll outs. Pfizer’s antiviral is making headlines across the globe and it and a similar treatment from MSD could well be game changers for a world still a little wobbly and uncertain about what the future will hold as colder weather rushes in. “The week has been tumultuous, it’s delivered surprises, both to delight and dismay. Earnings have held up despite rising prices and supply chain log jams, plus in the US jobs and more jobs are back on the menu. Next week there’s plenty more data to dig into from the latest US inflation numbers to a look at how the UK economy performed once the long summer holidays came to an end and normal service was just about resumed.” Back in the UK, more Bank of England policymakers have been explaining yesterday’s decision to leave interest rates on hold at record lows. The BoE’s new chief economist Huw Pill told an online briefing that officials see “some need” to raise interest rates to fend off a jump in inflation. Pill, one of seven officials to vote to leave Bank Rate at 0.1%, said: “I think across the committee, there is a recognition that, at least on the basis of today’s information, there is some need for action with the Bank Rate. Deputy governor Sir Dave Ramsden, one of just two who did vote for a rate hike, said he was concerned about a recent rise in inflation expectations in Britain. Ramsden explained: “That move in the UK above, and materially above, what was a relatively stable historical average, has been something I’ve been concerned about. [A survey last month showed a record proportion of the British public thinks inflation will accelerate over the next 12 months] But a more dovish MPC member, Silvana Tenreyro, argued for a cautious approach to raising interest rates. Tenreyro, who voted ‘no change’ yesterday, told a conference hosted by the International Monetary Fund that the Bank shouldn’t move too quickly, while the economy is below its pre-crisis level and the health of the labour market is hard to read “Central banks, not just the Bank of England, will need to balance their inflation and real-economy objectives. This balancing requires in my view a cautious approach,” Tenreyro echoed governor Andrew Bailey’s point this morning, that the Bank wants to see the impact of ending the UK’s job protection scheme. Policymakers should meanwhile be “very watchful” of wage pressures, she added. “As soon as we see that picking up, that’s where monetary policy has a bite. Monetary policy cannot really do anything about a spike in energy prices” [Many thanks to Reuters for the quotes] President Joe Biden has welcomed the jump in job creation last month. Today is “another great day for our economic recovery.” Biden declared, after seeing 531,000 jobs added in October, and more gains in September and August than previously thought. Speaking from the White House, Biden says: “America is getting back to work. Our economy is starting to work for more Americans,” The president credits the economic plan introduced earlier this year, and the successful vaccine deployment, for the ‘historically strong’ jobs recovery. He also welcomes the substantial fall in unemployment among Hispanic Americans. [as flagged earlier, the US has added 18m jobs since the record losses in April 2020, but is still over 4m shy of pre-pandemic level] President Biden also said on Friday that the United States has secured millions of doses of Pfizer experimental antiviral pill for Covid-19, which the company says can cut hospitalisations and deaths by nearly 90% “If authorized by the FDA we may soon have pills that treat the virus in those who become infected,” Biden said. “We’ve already secured millions of doses. The therapy would be another tool in our toolbox to protect people from the worst outcomes of Covid.” Our US Politics Liveblog has full coverage, with the US House of Representatives is expected to vote on the social policy and climate-change bill and a bipartisan infrastructure bill that form the centerpiece of Biden’s legislative agenda. US employers added a solid 531,000 jobs in October as the American economy appeared to withstand the impact of coronavirus and continued its recovery. The strong number provides a boost to Joe Biden, whose presidency has been battered by political setbacks in recent months as it struggles to enact his domestic agenda and suffered a major defeat in the race for governor of Virginia. October’s job growth outpaced the 450,000 new jobs economists had predicted from the job market, mitigating fears of slow growth in the jobs sector after far fewer jobs were added in September than was expected. The boost in jobs was expected after Covid cases and hospitalization rates declined in October. The rise has meant a continued decrease in the unemployment rate, which was 4.6% in October. The decrease in unemployment was mostly seen among white and Hispanic workers, while the Black and Asian unemployment rate has remained unchanged. The Black unemployment rate stands at 7.9% – more than 3% higher than the white unemployment rate of 4.2%. Pharmaceuticals giant Pfizer has also given good news - its experimental antiviral pill for Covid-19 cut rates of hospital admission and death by nearly 90%. Shares in Pfizer have surged 10% in early trading, as it joins the race to bring the first easy-to-use medication against the coronavirus to the US market. The New York Stock Exchange has opened at a new record high, as October’s strong jobs report boost the markets. The Dow Jones industrial average, the broader S&amp;P 500 and the tech-focused Nasdaq all hit new highs in early trading Dow: up 277 points or 0.77% at 36,401 S&amp;P 500: up 33 points or 0.7% at 4,713 Nasdaq Composite: up 91 points or 0.6% at 16,031 The pick-up in job creation is boosting market confidence in the recovery. Ben Laidler, global markets strategist at the multi-asset investment platform eToro, says: The US jobs market bounced back sharply last month, setting up the economy for a strong rebound into the end of the year and validating the Fed’s move to taper its bond buying programme this week. The US economy saw 531,000 new jobs last month, above expectations and well up from the prior month’s negative surprise of 194,000 jobs. Gains were broad-based, led by re-opening sectors like hospitality and leisure, and left the economy around 5m jobs short of pre-pandemic levels. The unemployment rate fell to 4.6%, whilst wage growth accelerated to a strong 4.9% growth. A rebounding jobs market will boost the GDP and earnings growth outlook and validate the Fed’s slow march to hiking interest rates. This is a positive combination for markets. More evidence of the pick-up in the leisure and hospitality sector: Today’s US jobs report is a welcome surprise, says Seema Shah, chief strategist at Principal Global Investors. It “gives credence” to the view that the weaker August and September numbers (revised up today) were due to the impact of Delta outbreaks, she says, adding Leisure and hospitality employment have picked up too, signalling that more normal mobility has started to resume. The one cloud on the horizon was the stubbornly depressed participation rate. At this point, with reduced benefits, a return to in-person schooling and the drop in Covid rates, we should be seeing a recovery in participation. It’s a little mystifying – is it because the massive cushion of savings is still weighing on the incentive to return to work? Or is there a fundamental shift in the psychology of working, in which case the Fed may soon decide that central bank policy alone cannot encourage people back into the labour market. The Great Resignation will be key to central bank policy going forward and what’s more, until workers return, supply chain issues will only linger. This chart from Heather Long of the Washington Post shows the jobs recovery since April 2020: Economist professor Justin Wolfers of University of Michigan points out that the rise in hiring coincided with the fall in Covid infections since mid-September. There is one disappointment in an otherwise strong report: the labor force participation rate didn’t rise last month. That measure, which tracks the number of Americans employed or looking for a job – stuck at 61.6% in October. Mohamed A El-Erian, chief economic adviser at Allianz SE, calls it a ‘notable’ disappointment. Liz Young, head of investment strategy at finance company SoFi, tweets that the report is generally a ‘major improvement’. So far this year, monthly job growth has averaged 582,000 as America’s economy has recovered from the economic shock of Covid-19. Non-farm employment has increased by 18.2m since April 2020, when the economic shutdown saw more than 20 million workers cut from payrolls in a single month. That’s very encouraging progress. But it still leaves total employment down by 4.2m, or 2.8%, from its pre-pandemic level in February 2020. There were “notable job gains in leisure and hospitality, in professional and business services, in manufacturing, and in transportation and warehousing”, says the report. Employment in leisure and hospitality increased by 164,000, as bars and restaurants continued to hire staff. But, this sector is still missing 1.4m jobs since February 2020. Professional and business services added 100,000 jobs in October, including a gain of 41,000 in temporary help services Employment in manufacturing increased by 60,000 in October, led by a gain in motor vehicles and parts (+28,000) – a sector where semiconductor shortages have been hampering firms. Employment in transportation and warehousing increased by 54,000 in October and is 149,000 above its February 2020 level – reflecting the shift in the economy since the pandemic. But employment in public education declined over the month, down 43,000 in local government education and by 22,000 in state government education. Average hourly earnings in the US rose by 0.4% in October, meaning they have risen by 4.9% over the last year. October’s jobs report explains: In October, average hourly earnings for all employees on private non-farm payrolls increased by 11 cents to $30.96, following large increases in the prior six months. Over the past 12 months, average hourly earnings have increased by 4.9%. In October, average hourly earnings of private-sector production and nonsupervisory employees rose by 10 cents to $26.26. Just in: America’s economy created 531,000 jobs in October, more than expected, as hiring picks up. That’s better than the 450,000 jobs that economists forecast, in a welcome sign that the labor market is continuing to recover as Covid-19 cases fall. The US unemployment rate also fallen, to 4.6% from September’s 4.8%. And in further good news, more jobs were created over the summer than previously thought. In what looks like a solid jobs report, September’s non-farm payroll has been revised higher to show 312,00 new gains, up from the 194,000 first reported. And August’s jobs report has also been revised, to 483,000 from 366,000 jobs previously. More details and reaction to follow... Over in the eurozone, retail sales have fallen unexpectedly in a sign that consumer spending could be cooling. Retail sales volumes fell 0.3% in September, statistics body Eurostat reports, weaker than the 0.3% rise which economists expected. Sales of ‘Non-food products’ fell by 1.5% while food, drinks and tobacco rose 0.7% and automotive fuels picked up by 1.1% as people returned to offices and schools as lockdowns lifted this year. Eurozone households are also facing a cost of living squeeze; inflation rose to 3.4% in September, eating into incomes (and then hit 4.1% in October). The Suez Canal is lifting its transit tolls by 6%, after a year of record revenue as demand for the critical waterway has surged as lockdown lifted. The Suez Canal Authority announced the move yesterday. It will begin next February, adding to the costs within already-stretched global supply chains. Cruise ships and LNG ships will be excluded from the increase. The Authority cited ‘global economic conditions’, and forecasts that trade and global growth are expected to keep recovering. That will mean more demand for the shortest maritime route to Asia from Europe. It said: The International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Trade Organization (WTO) are also expecting continued growth in world trade traffic and rise in the demand for maritime transport at rates of 6.7% and 4.7% respectively, in 2022, thereby predicting continued high levels of the freights and good profits for shipping companies. Bloomberg adds: The Suez Canal, which made headlines this spring when the Ever Given container ship got stuck in the waterway, posted record revenue of $5.8 billion for the year ended June thanks to strong demand for goods from consumers hunkered down at home during the pandemic. British Airways’ owner, IAG, is pinning its hopes on the revival of transatlantic travel next week as it warned that pandemic disruption would drive a loss of €3bn for 2021. IAG’s chief executive, Luis Gallego, said the reopening of the US border to foreign nationals from Monday was a “pivotal moment for our industry”. The Financial Times say Andrew Bailey has ‘little wriggle room’ not to lift interest rates in the coming months, after pledging not to ‘bottle’ the issue this morning. Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey insisted on Friday that the UK central bank will not “bottle it” when it comes to raising interest rates in the coming months. The governor said the only reason the BoE surprised financial markets on Thursday by holding rates at the historic low of 0.1% was that it wanted to gather more information about the effects on the labour market of the end of the furlough scheme in October. Bailey did not give an indication when the central bank would start to raise rates for the first time since 2018 but was categorical that they would rise, leaving little wriggle room for him or the bank to change its mind. “We do think interest rates will need to rise and they will rise,” Bailey told the BBC’s Today programme, adding that his clear commitment to higher interest rates was meant to be heard in financial markets and the country. “That was deliberate,” the governor said. More here. As covered earlier, the Bank wants to see the impact of ending the UK furlough scheme, which should be visible in upcoming labour market reports. Yesterday, an Office for National Statistics survey found that two-thirds of workers who were still on the job retention scheme programme when it closed at the end of September returned to their employers on the same hours. Dario Perkins of TS_Lombard has some pithy observations about the Bank of England’s communication challenge: The wild moves in the foreign exchange and bond markets yesterday after the Bank of England’s meeting does not reflect very well on the BoE or its governor. For a contrast, look at America’s central bank chief Jerome Powell. On Wednesday he announced the Federal Reserve will cut the amount of money pumped into the system each month through its bond-purchase programme, due to rising inflation and improvements in the jobs market. This tapering had been well-telegraphed for months, with Powell repeatedly explaining the progress which the Fed was looking for. So rather than a repeat of the ‘taper tantrum’ of 2013, the bond market took Wednesday’s move calmly, the dollar merely dipped, and equities on Wall Street hit fresh record highs. Neil Wilson of Markets.com points out that “a key part of the central banker role is communication”. So there’s no relief for the pound today amid the Bank of England’s ‘mess’, he writes: Loose – in retrospect - remarks over recent weeks led the market to expect an interest rate rise yesterday, only to be confounded by not just a failure to deliver on that but an apparent indifference to the fact that policy was so poorly communicated. Yesterday, Bailey told Bloomberg that it wasn’t the Bank’s job to guide the markets on interest rates - which may leave investors more flummoxed about how to interpret future comments. Wilson adds that it feels that the Bank of England has lost credibility. It seems like the BoE thinks ‘we’ll say something and the market can make of it what it likes, that’s not our business”. To a degree, that’s true. You can’t account for what others make of your statements. But you can be a lot more careful about those statements in the full knowledge that the market will read something into them since you are the governor of the Bank of England and not just anybody. There were several opportunities in recent weeks to lean against the aggressive market pricing, to gently nudge the market in the right direction, but the governor elected not to do that. The feeling is now that the BoE under Bailey has lost credibility and we will not be able to read as much into his remarks as we have done. This is not a good situation for a central banker to be in. I leave you with this, among the listed candidate requirements from the BoE’s job spec for Governor: “The ability to communicate with authority and credibility internally, to Parliament, the media, the markets and the wider public.” Chris Weston of brokers Pepperstone says the BoE pushed back against rate hike expectations in a “far cruder manner” than other central banks such as the European Central Bank and the Reserve Bank of Australia. Instead, it has injected ‘a degree of uncertainty’ into the markets about how future MPC meetings will play out. That could make the pound more volatile in the run-up to December’s meeting, Weston adds. It’s worth noting that many City economists didn’t forecast a hike yesterday -- but a lot of investors in the financial markets clearly thought they’d been guided to expect one. Sterling is continuing to swoon after the Bank of England left rates unchanged yesterday, wrongfooting many investors. The pound has dropped by 0.7 of a cent, or 0.5% today, to $1.343 – adding to Thursday’s heavy losses of almost two cents. It started falling again around 8am, and kept dropping since Andrew Bailey’s Today Programme interview, where the governor stuck to a cautious tone on interest rates. This puts sterling at its lowest level against the dollar since late September (when it hit the weakest levels this year). Jeremy Thomson-Cook, chief economist at international business payments firm Equals Money, says the pound ‘tumbled through a trap door’ on Thursday: Sterling fell across the board yesterday as the Bank of England defied market expectations and stood pat on rates. The press conference that followed up the decision was an object lesson in confirming that the recent pull higher in rates was too much, too soon, and while rates will rise, we now think the earliest opportunity for them to do so would be February. Three policymakers need to change their minds for the decision to hike to be in the majority; we don’t see that happening this year. The delay allows for many things but chiefly data on how the labour market has developed post-furlough and for further insights as to how energy prices develop through the winter. For sterling, the decision was akin to a trap door through which the pound tumbled. We have pointed out for many weeks now that these rate expectations were really the only thing holding the pound up and with them either gone or severely weakened GBP is looking for what else can support it. In a winter of Covid-19, Brexit supply and legal issues, higher energy costs and an uncertain employment outlook there’s not too much to be banging the drum on sterling for. It will still likely outperform the euro in the coming weeks but those looking for strong material gains against the USD may have to reappraise their thinking Homebuyers have been given a few more months to lock into the record low mortgage rates that have helped keep the housing market booming during the pandemic, after the Bank of England held the base rate at 0.1%. Lenders had been repricing their home loans upwards in recent days amid speculation the rate would rise to 0.25%, and many of the cheapest deals have been withdrawn. However, while there are no longer three- and five-year mortgages for sale at interest rates below 1%, borrowers with large deposits still have a large choice of loans priced at less than 2%.... More here. The early reviews of Andrew Bailey’s performance are in... and not too favourable: Claus Vistesen, macroeconomist for Pantheon Macroeconomics, tweets: Economist Timothy Ash says the BoE appears to be dithering - not a good look for a central bank. Bloomberg’s Lisa Abramowicz says we still don’t have much clarity on rates, as the bond markets continue to reel from yesterday’s meeting. Economist Huw Dixon points out that the tumble in sterling yesterday will push up the cost of imports - creating more inflationary pressures... Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey says he’s ‘very sorry’ that households are being hit by rising inflation. Asked whether people won’t feel much better off this winter, he tells the Today programme: Inflation is clearly something that bites on people’s real household income. They will feel that. I’m sure they’re already feeling that, in terms of prices going up. I am very sorry that’s happening. None of us want to see that happen. [Reminder: As flagged here, the Bank predicts real labour incomes (ie, adjusted for inflation) after tax will fall in 2022 and 2023. That means a two-year wage squeeze on households] Having left interest rates on hold at just 0.1% yesterday, Bailey points to the global factors such as supply chain disruption which have pushed up goods prices. We want to see those cause of inflation tackled as soon as possible, so we can return to a world of stable inflation and down at the Bank’s 2% target, he says. Q: We’re not going back to the 70s? Bailey wraps up the interview by insisting we’re not returning to the 1970s, that was a ‘very different era’ (he was still at school). For background: retail price inflation hit around 25% in 1975. UK consumer price inflation is currently expected to hit 5% next year, which would be the highest since 2011. Andrew Bailey then explains that the increased take-up of fixed-rate mortgages has weakened the transmission of monetary policy. When the BoE raises Bank Rate, it percolates through the economy through higher interest rates. With far fewer households on variable rate mortgages, a hike could take longer to filter through. Q: Isn’t that an argument for acting now... Bailey says no, due to the ‘underlying causes of the problem’ (gas prices, global supply chain problems). UK interest rates are not going back to their levels before the financial crisis, governor Andrew Bailey pledges. He won’t say whether the markets are correct to forecast UK rates at around 1% by the end of next year, but it’s correct to think in those terms. Before the financial crisis, we’d have regarded interest rates at 4% or 5% as normal, says Bailey. “We’re not going back there,” he insists, citing global factors such as aging populations and demand for saving that will keep long-term borrowing costs lower. When we talk about interest rates rising, it’s important to put it into that context. It’s still in a framework of low interest rates. Andrew Bailey won’t say how long inflation would have to stay high to no longer be “transitory”. Judging when inflation is transitory is a judgement, he tells the Today Programme. A key measure is whether it is embedded into wage negotiations, he says (people demand higher pay to cover rising prices). Energy prices, particularly gas, are the biggest single cause of the greater inflationary pressure we’re seeing. We think, based on a lot of evidence from the past, that these shocks are temporary. Q: But how sure are you? We now have net zero targets around the world - how will they affect how you think about energy? Bailey say a range of factors are pushing up gas - such as stronger demand in economies in Asia. But he suggests that the energy transition is also pushing up gas prices, as power producers shift away from coal. Bailey says that it is reasonable to think that economies will transition from high-polluting hydrocarbons (such as coal), through greater use of less polluting hydrocarbons, on the path to hopefully a more renewable economy. It is possible that some of what we’re seeing with gas prices at the moment is already climate change starting to have an effect, if there is a switch out of coal, which obviously we want to see. It’s possible it’s part of the story. If so, that could lead to a ‘level change’ in prices (ie, they’d remain permanently higher). Q: Have you bottled this decision because you’re not as independent as you should be? The government wants to run the economy hot - your job is to take the punchbowl away, and you haven’t. Andrew Bailey says the Bank does expect interest rates to rise (and said as much yesterday). But it didn’t hike yesterday, because it doesn’t know the impact of the end of the furlough scheme in September. The labour market looks tight, but the missing piece of evidence is what has happened to unemployment since the furlough scheme finished, Bailey explains. [The Bank will see two labour market reports before its next MPC meeting in mid-December] Bailey says the Bank will be looking at measure of activity (employment and unemployment) as well as earnings for signs of wage pressure. Let me assure you. We won’t bottle this. Q: So if unemployment is higher than you expect, rates won’t go up? It’ll be an important piece of evidence, but not the only one, Bailey says. Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey is on the Today Programme now. He’s asked about whether the Bank’s signals to the markets about interest rate moves had been misleading (many investors expected a rate rise yesterday, after Bailey spoke about ‘having to act’ over inflation last month). Bailey says there was a reassessment by markets - not just due to his comments, but what was going on more generally. We have to occasionally make “quite direct comments about what we think will happen”, but at no point, did he or any other MPC member say rates would rise at the November meeting yesterday. Q: But some cheap mortgages deals were taken off the markets on the expectation that you would act. Bailey says there had been a big expansion of very good, very cheap mortgages in the last six months - but yes, some have been withdrawn as rates have gone up. Mortgage offers come and go, he adds, it’s part of the cycle. Q: So you’re rejecting the ‘unreliable boyfriend’ tag We have to communicate, Bailey replies with a laugh. The return of the international super-rich to London amid the easing of coronavirus pandemic restrictions has fuelled the highest annual growth in property prices in the capital’s most expensive district since 2015. Average home prices in “prime central London” – which stretches from Chelsea to Camden and Notting Hill to Westminster – have risen by almost 7% since the start of the year, according to research by the estate agent Knight Frank. It said prices had risen consecutively each month for the past six months “something last achieved before the Brexit referendum in 2016”. More here: Halifax’s Russell Galley also predicts the market could cool if UK interest rates start to rise: “With the Bank of England expected to react to building inflation risks by raising rates as soon as next month, and further such rises predicted over the next 12 months, we do expect house buying demand to cool in the months ahead as borrowing costs increase. That said, borrowing costs will still be low by historical standards, and raising a deposit is likely to remain the primary obstacle for many. The impact on property prices may also be tempered by the continued limited supply of properties available on the market.” UK house prices have hit a record high, according to lender Halifax. British house prices rose by 0.9% in October, the fourth monthly increase in a row. It takes the average house price on its index to over £270,000, with price up 8.1% in the last year. Russell Galley, managing director at Halifax, said demand for larger homes following the move to homeworking is still driving the market: “One of the key drivers of activity in the housing market over the past 18 months has been the race for space, with buyers seeking larger properties, often further from urban centres. Combined with temporary measures such as the cut to Stamp Duty, this has helped push the average property price up to an all-time high of £270,027. Since April 2020, the first full month of lockdown, the value of the average property has soared by £31,516 (13.2%). “First-time buyers, supported by parental deposits, improved mortgage access and low borrowing costs, have also helped to drive price growth in recent months. First-time buyer annual house price inflation (+9.2%) is now at a five-month high, and has pushed ahead of the equivalent measure for homemovers (+8.1%). Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The UK is facing a painful cost of living squeeze after the Bank of England predicted that inflation will peak at 5% early next year, the highest in a decade. Under the Bank’s new forecasts, released yesterday, wages after tax will not keep pace with inflation over the next two years - a blow to households across the country. Real post-tax labour incomes are expected to fall by 1.25% in 2022, and by another 0.75% in 2023, worse than previously expected -- with the energy crunch and supply chain disruption driving up prices. Bank of England governor Andrew Bailey has warned that people are already feeling the impact of rising prices, telling the BBC. “I’m very sorry that’s happening,” “None of us want to see that happen.” Bailey acknowledged that people are already feeling the impact of recent price rises: Inflation is clearly something that bites on people’s household income. I’m sure they’re already feeling that in terms of prices that are going up.” More here: Bank of England ‘sorry’ for rising cost of living The governor will be discussing the issue on Radio 4’s Today programme this morning. This squeeze undermines the government’s claims to be building a high-wage economy, as the jump in wholesale energy costs and supply chain frictions continue to hit businesses and households. Controlling inflation is the Bank’s job - but Bailey argues that lifting interest rates won’t get more gas into the pipes, or more semiconductor chips to manufacturers, for example. Yesterday the Bank surprised the markets by leaving interest rates on hold - startling some investors, sending the pound plunging by almost two cents yesterday. Bailey was among those voting to leave borrowing costs at 0.1% - despite having previously suggested the Bank would have to act over inflation. The confusion risks undermining the Bank’s credibility - as communicating to the markets is another crucial part of its remit. As Oliver Blackbourn, multi-asset portfolio manager at Janus Henderson Investors, put it: It had seemed in recent weeks that the Governor and Chief Economist were going out of their way to make sure that there was to be no surprise if interest rates rose. Former governor, Mark Carney, was labelled the ‘unreliable boyfriend’ over his confusing communication, and there is a risk that the new governor inherits this moniker following his public statements ahead of today’s announcement. After taking time to seemingly warn markets about potential lift off, it may be particularly perplexing for many that the Bank then chose to push against markets that had priced in a steeper path for interest rates. However, the Bank pointed to its estimates that such a path would take inflation back below target by the end of the forecast period, something that markets seem less convinced of given the inflation outlook being expressed by 10-year breakeven rates. The agenda 7am GMT: Halifax house price index for October 8.10am GMT: BoE governor Andrew Bailey interview on the Today Programme 8.30am GMT: Eurozone construction PMI for 10am GMT: Eurozone retail sales for September 12.30pm GMT: US Non-Farm Payroll jobs report for OctoberNHS staff in England will be expected to be vaccinated against Covid by April next year under plans to make vaccination compulsory. Sajid Javid has already made it mandatory for care home staff in England and from 11 November, care home workers will have to prove they have been double-jabbed or face being dismissed. We would like to hear from managers and staff about their experiences of being vaccinated. Share your experiences How many members of staff are still unvaccinated? How many do you expect to lay off and will you be able to replace them? What impact will this have? What reasons are staff giving for declining the jab? As NHS staff or a care home worker, what are your thoughts? You can get in touch by filling in the form below, anonymously if you wish or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Rugby is a game encompassing multiple scores of varying degrees accrued through various means. Five for a try, three for a drop-goal, a full seven for a penalty try. But more than that, rugby is a game of unsettled scores. Of grudges collected and locked away like some fermenting sourdough starter. Contests won or lost are not simply viewed as the singular event that they are, but are placed within a broader narrative that encompasses sweeping histories. There are more than a few strands of unfinished business hanging in the balance as South Africa take the field at the Principality Stadium in Cardiff on Saturday with both teams eager to balance their respective ledgers. Siya Kolisi’s team arrived in Wales this week having not won in the country since 2013. They’ve lost each of their last four visits to Cardiff and also lost the 2018 friendly in Washington DC which was the first game of the Rassie Erasmus era. “We know where we went wrong,” Kolisi said on Friday, emphasising his commitment to address a blight on his nation’s record. “There have been games where we were totally beaten. We know what we need to do. We’ve researched a whole lot more.” No one has used the word “revenge” in the buildup but it might well have been mentioned. In his conversation with the Guardian this week, Wales’s young winger Louis Rees-Zammit was bullish in his assertion that Warren Gatland’s conservative tactics cost the British and Irish Lions a series victory in South Africa. Had the team’s exciting backline been unleashed, Rees-Zammit argued, things may have worked out differently. Wales’s coach, Wayne Pivac, wouldn’t be dragged into that debate and defended his player, saying: “I don’t know if Louis was asked a question or sort of pushed down that route and he has just commented, because I don’t think he’s a young man who would go out and criticise Warren with the way they played the game.” He did, however, promise to “play a little bit more than certainly the Lions did”. Then there is the matter of recent World Cups. Pivac said that his team are building towards the next one in France in 2023, but Welsh fans will be all too aware that the Boks have their number at the quadrennial showpiece. In 2015 Handré Pollard’s 18 points were the difference in a 23-19 quarter-final win at Twickenham. In 2019’s semi-final, Pollard’s boot again proved decisive in a hard-fought 19-16 win. “When you play against Wales, there are things you know, you know they’ll be physical,” Kolisi said, echoing Erasmus’s comments expressed in the Chasing the Sun documentary in which he singles out the Welsh as “tough fuckers, not softies like Ireland”. Kolisi added: “That is why the bomb squad is so important,” referencing the team’s nickname for their vaunted bench. The Springbok captain also praised his fellow flanker Ellis Jenkins, who returns to Test rugby after a three-year absence following a serious knee injury. His last outing came in Wales’s 20-11 victory over South Africa in 2018 in which he was recognised as the player-of-the-match, but was also forced off in the final minutes with damaged ligaments. “It’s always tough seeing a player getting injured, whether it’s your teammate or the competition,” Kolisi said. “I’m really happy that he’s fit and back. Credit to him and his medical team.” That is where the niceties end. And despite Pivac’s assertions and Rees-Zammit’s desires, the 80 minutes will more than likely resemble previous encounters between two teams who look to dominate up front. “They play a similar type of game,” Kolisi argued when asked to share his views on the perennial conversation around his team’s approach to the game. There is no doubt that the fare served during the Lions series was tedious but the results of the past two years speak for themselves. Two glitches against Australia aside, the Springboks were one late penalty away from beating New Zealand twice in the Rugby Championship. Add a Lions series win and a World Cup trophy at home and it’s easy to see why Kolisi shrugs off criticisms like would-be tacklers. “They’re obviously world class,” Pivac said. “We’re going to have to be on top of our game.” Do that, and Wales may settle a score or two in the process. Wales: McNicholl; Rees-Zammit, J Davies (capt), Tompkins, Adams; Biggar, T Williams; Carré, Elias, Francis, Rowlands, Beard, Jenkins, Basham, Wainwright Replacements: Roberts, Jones, John, Carter, S Davies, G Davies, Anscombe, L Williams South Africa: Willemse; Kriel, Am, De Allende, Mapimpi; Pollard, H Jantjies; Nché, Mbonambi, Nyakane, Etzebeth, De Jager, Kolisi (capt), Smith, Vermeulen Replacements: Marx, Kitshoff, Koch, Mostert, Wiese, Reinach, E Jantjies, SteynParliament’s ethics watchdog has been urged to investigate Boris Johnson’s Downing Street finances after this week’s sleaze scandal, as Kathryn Stone was said to be undeterred by government attempts to undermine her. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, called on Stone, the parliamentary standards commissioner, to open a new investigation into the refurbishment of the prime ministerial flat, which reportedly cost £200,000 and was initially funded by a Tory donor. It comes after the government attempted to overthrow a ruling by Stone in relation to lobbying by the Conservative MP Owen Paterson. Ministers also tried to overhaul the system designed to crack down on sleaze. Rayner accused the prime minister of trying to install a “sham group of Tory stooges who would do his bidding”. On Friday Johnson threw down the gauntlet to Stone by refusing to declare the costs of his Marbella holiday last month, which was funded by the family of the Tory peer and minister Zac Goldsmith. Amid growing anger over the sleaze debacle, a Conservative former member of the standards committee said it was “quite convenient” timing for Johnson to be trying to “trash the existing disciplinary system” in an attempt to escape scrutiny of his own actions. Stone has said she will decide whether to investigate the refurbishment of No 11 Downing Street once the Electoral Commission has completed its own investigation. The commission is understood to have completed its inquiry and has handed a draft of its findings to the Conservative party. Allies of Stone regard this week’s chaotic events in parliament as part of an attempt to undermine her authority, but two sources told the Guardian she was undeterred and would continue to take a robust approach to investigating MPs’ conduct. On Wednesday she released a statement saying she intended to remain in post until the end of her term in December 2022. Rayner said in a letter to Stone on Friday that Johnson’s behaviour this week in trying to shield Paterson by changing the standards system “demonstrates that the prime minister is clearly attempting to disempower the role of the parliamentary commissioner for standards and even remove you from your post at a time when he is facing a potential investigation by you for breaching the rules yet again”. She added: “This situation is deeply concerning for all of us who believe in democracy and basic standards of decency, integrity and honesty in public life. This situation also makes it all the more important that you are able to carry out your investigation into whether the prime minister broke the rules in relation to the financing of the refurbishment of his Downing Street flat, just as he broke the rules on a number of occasions in the past.” Rayner said the government-backed attempt to overhaul the standards system by creating a new committee chaired by a Tory MP was an attempt to “make Conservative MPs judge and jury over allegations of corruption and rule-breaking”, adding it was a “blatant attempt” to prevent the Stone from investigating him. Dominic Grieve, a former Tory member of the standards committee, said Johnson’s intervention “clearly could only be interpreted on the basis that he intended to rubbish the committee and the commissioner and undermine them”. He added: “What this group of ministers – led by this prime minister – have done is to say this is a chum whom we are going to help. And in doing so it doesn’t matter if we trash the existing disciplinary system, which leaves it in tatters for the future. And it just so happens that at the same time, well, that might be quite convenient, because the prime minister himself might be the subject of its scrutiny shortly over his issues of non-declaration.” The question of whether the government is trying to oust Stone was underlined when Conservative headquarters issued guidance to Tory MPs on how to answer the question about whether she should resign. It did not tell them to disagree but only to say changes to the standards system were “about strengthening the process more broadly”. Sir Malcolm Rifkind, a Tory grandee and former chair of the standards and privileges committee, told the Guardian he was “genuinely worried” the Conservatives’ reputation was being “seriously being damaged by events of this kind”. He said Downing Street should confess it “got it wrong” and “show some contrition given the way they’ve used the power they have got has not been in the best public interest”. He added: “They’ve got to show that they’re learning from experience, that this is not the way either to treat the House of Commons or the country as a whole. The reputation of the government will not just be temporarily but potentially permanently damaged, if the public assume that this kind of behaviour was going to continue every so often.” Downing Street declined to rule out the possibility Johnson could nominate Paterson for a peerage despite the former MP being found to have committed an “egregious” breach of parliamentary rules on paid lobbying.‘Our grandfather’s absence hit home’ I have just returned from a holiday in the Algarve, so it was lovely to come home with the diyas (oil lamps) lit in the hallway, and the rangoli (beautiful designs using bright colours) already put out by my mum. Since Tuesday, we’ve been praying together in the evenings. The first day of celebrations begin with Dhanteras, which was marked with Laxmi Pooja to the goddess of health and wealth to usher in prosperity for the year to come. This day always stands out to me as we wash coins and silver collected over the years: the highlight is seeing a British Indian rupee from the 1920s with King George V and inscriptions in Hindi, Urdu and English. It reminds me of how long my family has been holding and washing this little pot of coins – a history that goes across India, Uganda and the UK, and is lovingly looked after every year. On the 4 November, we celebrated Kali Chaudas (which echoes Dia de los Muertos celebrations elsewhere), when we remembered departed souls and the saints who protect our family. It has been sombre this year, though, as we lost our grandfather not too long ago to Covid in March 2020. He would often lead these same prayers with his deep voice every Diwali – so his absence hits home. For Diwali, which marks the end of the year for many Hindus and Jains, my family has lit the way for the good and the strength that we’ve all found in tricky times these past two years. The light of the diya has given us so much to look forward to and learn from, and we hope that this evening we can come together to end the year with some of my grandfather’s favourite food and calls to loved ones. Payal Bhavsar, 28, London ‘I’m off to my friend’s house for food and fireworks’ Earlier this week, I gave out small chocolate and caramel sweets that my parents sent from India to my colleagues at work, and I lit diyas and put up lights in my house. On 4 November, I sent wishes to my parents and to other family and friends. After work, I went over to my Indian friend’s house, who had invited another family over. We had traditional savoury snacks called mixture and murukku, and sweets made with urad dal called jangiri, and had loads of fun bursting firecrackers. Now I’m off to London to celebrate with my cousin, sister and family. She is having a party on 6 November with close friends, no doubt with more food and fireworks. Amuda Agneswaran, 32, psychology lecturer, Manchester ‘We’re eating our way through Ealing road’ We’re celebrating my 10-month-old son’s first Diwali by taking him to a baby sensory class in south Harrow, trying lots of new foods, and enjoying family time. We’re planning on eating our way through Ealing road, starting at Saravanna Bhavan, down to Ashoka Sweet and Farsan for Gujarati treats, and ending up at our family cafe, Maru’s Bhajia House. Plus something sweet from Jalaram Sweet Centre or Ambala – we’ll be having ladoos (sweets), and introducing our son to lots of lovely snacks too. We’ll also be visiting the mandir, and reading lots of Diwali stories. On Sunday we’ll be celebrating with my immediate family (16 of us) as we normally do, with a Diwali party at my mum’s house. She will cook up a feast and we’re all dressing up, and bringing our Diwali books to my mum’s house this year so we can have dramatic readings of our favourite stories. I can’t wait for my son to spend his first Diwali surrounded by his cousins and the rest of our family. The evening will end in my mum and brother law lighting a few fireworks in the garden, before we’re sent home, packed with presents and enough leftovers for the rest of the week. Krishna Maroo, 36, university outreach manager, London • This article was amended on 8 December 2021 to correct some information about Payal Bhavsar.