Just 5% of Windrush victims have received compensation four years after the scandal emerged, according to a damning report by cross-party MPs which called for the scheme to be taken out of Home Office control. The report from the home affairs select committee found that the compensation scheme, for which up to 15,000 people were expected to qualify, had compounded injustices faced by the Windrush generation, with some applicants saying the process has become a source of further trauma rather than redress. Twenty-three eligible applicants have died before getting a payment, the committee found. It recommended transferring the scheme from Priti Patel’s department to an independent organisation in order to “rebuild trust”. In 2017 the Guardian uncovered the Windrush scandal, under which the UK government erroneously classified thousands of legal residents as illegal immigrants after they arrived from Caribbean countries between 1948 and 1971. By the end of September 2021, only about 3,022 had applied for compensation compared with initial estimates of up to 15,000. Just 864 had received a payout, MPs found. Their select committee report is the fourth critical investigation into delays in delivering justice to those affected by the scandal, and follows equally critical publications from the National Audit Office, the Public Accounts Committee and the legal charity Justice. The new report identifies a “litany of flaws in the design and operation” of the compensation scheme including an excessive burden on claimants to provide documentary evidence of the losses they suffered, long delays in processing applications and making payments, inadequate staffing of the scheme and a failure to provide urgent and exceptional payments to those in desperate need. It was “staggering” that the Home Office failed adequately to prepare for, resource and staff the Windrush compensation scheme before its launch, the report notes. The Home Office’s own research has identified lack of trust as a barrier, with 12% of respondents in a survey it carried out saying they believed the Windrush schemes were set up to “send people who are in the UK illegally back to their country of origin”. The report says: “No amount of compensation could ever repay the fear, humiliation, hurt and hardship that was caused to individuals who were affected. That the design and operation of this scheme contained the same bureaucratic insensitivities that led to the Windrush scandal in the first place is a damning indictment of the Home Office, and suggests that the culture change it promised in the wake of the scandal has not yet occurred.” It acknowledges that changes were made to the scheme in December 2020 to accelerate payments and introduce a £10,000 preliminary payment but adds “these changes do not go far enough”. The report criticises the decision not to allocate funding for legal support to help applicants fill in forms for compensation. Currently most applicants are kept waiting for more than a year before receiving a final payment, and 214 claimants have been waiting more than 18 months. Sylvester Marshall arrived in London from Jamaica as a teenager in 1973 to join his mother, an NHS nurse. After 44 years working as a mechanic he was denied free radiotherapy cancer treatment when he could not show proof that he was in the UK legally, and was told he would have to pay £54,000. He was made homeless by the council, and spent several weeks sleeping in a park. He applied for compensation 14 months ago and although he has received a £10,000 preliminary payment, he is waiting for a full settlement. “I’m fed up with the whole matter. If the government took this seriously, they would already have paid it. I don’t think they care, to be honest,” he said, adding that he needed the compensation to pay off debts incurred when he was prevented from working after being classified as an illegal immigrant. “It’s really getting me down. I can’t move forward. I’d like to pay off my bills and give my children some money.” His lawyer Jeremy Bloom, of Duncan Lewis Solicitors, said he was puzzled by the delay. “I don’t think it is a complicated claim, or whatever the complications are, it shouldn’t take over a year.” Alba Kapoor, senior policy officer with the Runnymede Trust race equality thinktank, said: “How many more deaths will there be before the horrors of the Windrush scandal are addressed in a competent, compassionate and supportive manner?” A Home Office spokesperson said moving the operation of the scheme out of the department would “risk significantly delaying vital payments to those affected”, adding: “The home secretary and the department remain steadfast in our commitment to ensure that members of the Windrush generation receive every penny of compensation that they are entitled to. “The home secretary overhauled the scheme in December to ensure more money is paid more quickly – since then the amount of compensation paid has risen from less than £3m to over £31.6m, with a further £5.6m having been offered. There is no cap on the amount of compensation we will pay out.”Offenders whose crimes lead to the death of an emergency service worker in the line of duty will receive mandatory life sentences under a new law brought about after the death of a police officer, Andrew Harper. The ruling, announced by the government, follows a two-year campaign by Lissie Harper, whose husband was killed while answering a late-night burglary call. She previously said she was “outraged” by the sentences handed to the three teenagers responsible for his death. The new legislation, named Harper’s law, will make it on to the statute books through an amendment to the existing police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, and is likely to take effect early next year. Harper said: “It’s been a long journey and a lot of hard work. I know Andrew would be proud to see Harper’s law reach this important milestone.” Henry Long, 19, was sentenced to 16 years and Jessie Cole and Albert Bowers, both 18, were jailed for 13 years for the manslaughter of PC Harper, 28. Long, the leader of the group, admitted manslaughter, while his passengers, Cole and Bowers, were convicted of manslaughter after a trial at the Old Bailey. The jury cleared all three of murder. Harper died from his injuries when he was caught in a strap attached to the back of a car and dragged down a winding country road as the trio fled the scene of a quad bike theft in Sulhamstead, Berkshire, on the night of 15 August 2019. The sentences prompted Lissie Harper to lobby the government to better protect emergency services workers, a definition that includes police officers, National Crime Agency officers, prison officers, custody officers, firefighters and paramedics. Announcing the intended law change, the justice secretary, Dominic Raab, said: “We are going to pass into law mandatory life sentences for those who unlawfully kill an emergency worker in the course of their duty. I pay tribute to Lissie Harper’s remarkable campaign. This government is on the side of victims and their families and we want our emergency services to know that we’ll always have their back.” Priti Patel, the home secretary, said: “PC Andrew Harper’s killing was shocking. As well as a committed police officer, he was a husband and a son. It is with thanks to the dedication of Lissie, and his family, that I am proud to be able to honour Andrew’s life by introducing Harper’s law.” Lissie Harper said that emergency services workers “require extra protection” as they “are put at risk and into the depths of danger” on a regular basis. She hopes Harper’s law will provide that protection and said she was “delighted” at the law change. The courts already have to impose life sentences for murder, although such sentences can also be applied to other violent offences.Environmental campaigners have accused the UK advertising watchdog of bias for overturning a draft ruling that banned adverts for a mud-splattered Land Rover Defender off-roader after previously saying it encouraged “socially irresponsible” driving that could “cause damage to vulnerable habitats”. The national newspaper ad featured a Defender in a forest with the headline “Life is so much better without restrictions”. Text accompanying the ad said the 4x4 had the “capacity to go almost anywhere and do anything. If you take one for an extended test drive … a whole new world of freedom awaits”. The Advertising Standards Authority received 96 complaints, including from several environmental campaigning groups, that the ad was socially irresponsible for encouraging and condoning behaviour that could destroy ecologically sensitive environments, and was detrimental to the environment. Jaguar Land Rover, the Indian-owned carmaker that builds the Defender in Slovakia, said the vehicle was depicted on an established track in a forest and was focused on increased freedom after the relaxation of Covid-19 restrictions, not irresponsible driving behaviour. In the draft recommendation shared with complainants, the ASA, which in September said that it was going to crack down on marketing that encouraged environmentally irresponsible behaviour, ruled the ad should be banned. “The overall impression of the ad suggested that the vehicle could be driven without any restrictions, including in ecologically sensitive and off-road environments such as forests, where in doing so it would be likely to cause damage to vulnerable habitats and vegetation,” the ASA said. “We considered that the ad encouraged and condoned the use of a vehicle in a way that was detrimental to ecologically sensitive environments, and was therefore socially irresponsible.” However, final sign-off on a ruling is given by the 12-member ASA council, eight of whom are deemed “independent” of the media industry. The council decides whether or not ads have broken the advertising rules. Its final ruling, published on Wednesday, reversed the draft recommendation and cleared the ad of breaking any UK advertising rules, saying that advertisers should “take care” when depicting vehicles in ecologically sensitive environments such as forests. It added that untarmacked roads such as the one depicted in the ad were common in many rural areas, and 4x4 vehicles could be “vital in those communities”. “We therefore considered that the vehicle depicted in the ad was not being used irresponsibly … and that the ad was not socially irresponsible,” the ASA concluded. “No further action necessary”. Robbie Gillett, from the Adfree Cities campaign, who lodged a complaint about the ad, said: “The ASA council has made an overly narrow assessment of this Land Rover advert and failed to see it in a wider picture of a worsening climate crisis, rising urban ownership of SUVs and lethal increases in air pollution. The watchdog said that the ASA council determined that the claims in the ad were about Covid-19 restrictions, not the environment. “The council are independent, making sure our rulings are impartial,” a spokesperson said. “They determined that consumers would understand ‘Life is so much better without restrictions’ as a slogan to refer to Covid-19 lockdown restrictions, rather than the environment. They also determined that … it was not clear that the vehicle was definitely driving off-road, illegally or irresponsibly.” In a separate ruling, the ASA banned an in-app ad for a mobile game called Gold and Goblins that “trivialised and condoned the serious and sensitive subject of domestic violence”. The ad included a video of a woman playing a game on her mobile phone, while behind her a man picked up a chair and drew it back over his head as if to strike her with it.Councils in England have identified a “rapid surge” in the number of parents choosing to take their children out of school to teach them at home, with a 34% jump in pupils being electively home educated on last year’s figures. The number of families choosing to home educate has been increasing in recent years, but the pandemic appears to have accelerated the trend, with health fears related to Covid the most common reason given by parents, followed by concerns about their child’s anxiety or mental health problems. A survey by the Association of Directors of Children’s Services (ACDS) estimated that the cumulative number of children and young people being electively home educated (EHE) across 152 local authorities at some point during the 2020-21 academic year was 115,542 – a 34% increase on 2019-20 totals. The ADCS said numbers had fluctuated over the year with significant “churn” as high numbers of children and young people both returned to school and were removed from school amid the pandemic uncertainty. The report warned however that many of the EHE notifications received since September 2021 had been for families with multiple layers of vulnerability where elective home education “does not seem the most appropriate route for the children concerned”. This year’s total marks the biggest year on year increase since the survey began six years ago and according to the ADCS almost half (49.8%) of the 2020-21 EHE cohort made the shift during the 2020-21 academic year. In the five years before the pandemic, the EHE population was growing by about 20% each year. This year the largest reported EHE cohort in a single local authority was 3,121, the mean average across all 126 authorities that took part in the survey was 534 and key stage 3 – for pupils aged 11-14 – was selected most often as having the highest number of EHE children. Gail Tolley, the chair of the ADCS educational achievement policy committee, said local authorities had a duty to ensure that children being educated at home were safe and receiving a good education, but they currently lacked the necessary powers to do so. “We are therefore calling on government to establish a mandatory register of all electively home educated children with a fully funded duty on the local authority to visit the child, at a minimum annually, to assess the suitability of the education provided. We can only support children’s education and safeguard the children who are known to us.” The ADCS is awaiting the outcome of a Department for Education (DfE) consultation in 2019 that proposed new duties on local authorities including a national register of all EHE children and young people and a duty for local authorities to support parents who educated their child at home. A DfE spokesperson said the government remained committed to introducing a register and added: “We support parents who want to educate their children at home. However, now more than ever, it is absolutely vital that any decision to home educate is made with the child’s best interests at the forefront of parents’ minds.” Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of National Association of Head Teachers, echoed calls for an official register of home educated children and said: “The government must find out the reasons behind so many more families choosing home education. The concern is that many appear to have chosen home education because they have lost faith in the government’s approach to school safety during the pandemic.” Anntoinette Bramble, the chair of the Local Government Association’s children and young people board, added: “Disruption to school education due to the pandemic has accelerated already rising numbers of parents and carers choosing to home education their children. The government should bring forward its plans to introduce a register for all home educators to ensure that adequate safeguarding measures are in place.”California’s governor announced there would be greater police presence around “highly trafficked” shopping malls after a series of mass thefts at high-end stores throughout the San Francisco Bay area. The governor’s announcement came after groups of people, some carrying crowbars and hammers, smashed glass cases and window displays at luxury stores in several Bay Area cities over the weekend, stealing jewelry, sunglasses, suitcases and other merchandise before fleeing in cars. The thefts come amid fraught discussions in major American cities over the future of policing. In California, they reinvigorated an already intense political debate over crime rates, prompting an immediate response from local and state leaders. The weekend robberies started in San Francisco on Friday around 8pm, when groups broke into stores such as Louis Vuitton, Burberry and Bloomingdale’s in the downtown area and in Union Square, a posh shopping district popular with tourists that was teeming with holiday shoppers. Videos of the chaotic scene posted on social media by witnesses showed police officers dragging one suspect from a waiting car and people running with merchandise in their arms or dragging suitcases. In nearby Walnut Creek on Saturday, about 80 people, some wearing ski masks and wielding crowbars, targeted a Nordstrom at an outdoor mall, where, police and witnesses said, they assaulted employees and stole merchandise before fleeing in waiting cars. Walnut Creek police called the robberies “clearly a planned event”. Similar scenes were repeated on Sunday in jewelry, sunglasses and clothing stores in the cities of Hayward and San Jose, police said. Retailers lose about $65bn each year to organized theft, the bulk stolen by professional thieves, said Ben Dugan, president of the Coalition of Law Enforcement and Retail, and criminal flash mobs are part of a growing national trend. But in San Francisco, they follow months of division about property and retail crimes. Reports of brazen retail thefts in recent months, including reports of break-ins at tourist hotspots and viral videos of people running out of high-end stores with arms filled with merchandise, have fueled calls from resident groups, conservative lawmakers and the police union for a more aggressive law enforcement response. A campaign to recall Chesa Boudin, the city’s progressive district attorney who was elected on a platform of criminal justice reform, recently secured enough signatures to appear on the ballot in 2022. Racial justice activists meanwhile have expressed concern about growing calls for more police and “tough on crime” policies, arguing that increased law enforcement presence can lead to further criminalization of communities of color while doing little to prevent crime. San Francisco has long recorded higher levels of property crime than other California cities. Recent data suggests that while some categories of crime have increased, others have fallen. Property crimes appear to have decreased in the city from 2019 to 2020, according to data from the San Francisco police department’s crime dashboard. Offenses including rape and robbery also decreased in 2020, a San Francisco Chronicle analysis of recent FBI data indicated. Homicides, motor vehicle thefts and burglaries all increased, according to that same FBI data. Although data for 2021 is still incomplete, the decrease in shoplifting appears to have continuing in 2021, according to data from the San Francisco district attorney’s office. In late September 2021, the San Francisco mayor, London Breed, along with the San Francisco police chief, unveiled the organized retail theft investigation and deterrence strategy, an initiative that will expand the city’s efforts to fight retail crime. Following the thefts this weekend, San Francisco’s police chief, Bill Scott, said car access to the streets in Union Square will soon be limited and the area will be flooded with police officers. Across California, Republicans pointed at the thefts to argue that Governor Gavin Newsom and other Democrats have made the state “a more dangerous place to live, work and raise a family”. California property crimes decreased in 2019, and data suggests that was also the case in 2020, according to the Public Policy Institute of California. Commercial burglaries increased by roughly 20%. Newsom said on Monday his office met with retailers over the weekend who asked for more police patrols. He said the California highway patrol stepped up patrols along nearby highway corridors after the thefts and asked local officials how they could help. The governor signed a law in July allowing prosecutors to charge those who work with others to steal merchandise. He said this year’s state budget included millions of dollars for local officials to address retail theft and his January budget proposal will include an “exponential increase of support to help cities and counties”.After five years of stay-at-home parenting, I returned to paid labour this year. During interviews, my potential employers referred to my half-decade of caring as “time off”. One described it as a “prolonged spell away from the workforce”. As if my brain was extracted in the birthing suite back in 2016 and frozen in a cryogenic vessel until further notice. “And when was the last time you managed a team?” A young graphic designer asked me over Zoom. “This morning,” I replied, my children’s screams still ricocheting around my temporal lobe. “Oh great. Can you tell me more about that?” “Sure. My five-year-old was wailing because we were running late for kinder and my three-year-old was refusing to get down from the top bunk. I injured my back last time and the hose doesn’t reach that far, so I decided to change tack …” “Sorry, I mean a team at work.” “Do you mean paid work?” “Yeah.” “Five years ago.” I inhaled slowly through my nose and readied myself for the next question. I’ve breastfed two babies through the night next to a snoring partner. I’m excellent at metabolising rage. In the first episode of Netflix’s Maid, Alex, played by Margaret Qualley, escapes an abusive relationship with her young daughter and tries to find a job. A support services manager asks her if she has any special skills. The vision cuts to a flashback of Alex and her child on a gentle morning beach. “No,” she replies. Alex learns of her limited career and housing options and takes a job as a cleaner to make ends meet. If employers recognised parenting as a special skill Maid would be a very different show. For starters, it wouldn’t be called Maid but rather Project Manager, Strategy Lead or Warehouse Team Leader. It would still be centred around a woman who leaves an abusive relationship, only she would land a job that pays enough to cover food, housing and childcare. “How would you manage a dissatisfied client?” continued the graphic designer through my computer screen. I’d remind them that they just ate and that dinner was almost ready, but if they were really, really hungry they could have an apple slice. When they started to scream I’d stop what I was doing and crouch to meet their eyes, stare into the abyss of human wanting and blow a raspberry on their neck. I’d serve them a wholesome meal and watch as they pulled it apart and threw it on the floor, only to say an hour later how hungry they were, whimpering softly in bed, apparently weak with starvation. I’d bring them an apple slice and sit them up until they’d finished it to ensure they didn’t choke, before returning to the kitchen to salvage what I could. “I’d pass on their feedback to the account manager,” I answered. There are articles on how parenting skills apply to the workplace. Many refer to them as “mum skills” and are accompanied by images of grinning women scooting children down hallways in laundry baskets. Some list “time management” and “planning” as separate categories, and encourage parents to list “driving children to and from engagements” as an example of each on their CV. Other articles implore businesses to hire more primary carers, and list quotes from CEOs about parents’ impeccable leadership skills, grit and creativity. They position parents as multitasking superheroes who are guaranteed to improve a company’s bottom line. I think the truth lies somewhere in the middle. Primary carers make exceptional employees, but they often require additional support. We’re like the troubled sports stars of the workplace. Only instead of factoring in resources to cover legal fees for violent outbursts, employers should make provisions for school pickups and the occasional sudden absence. I was at the beach recently with a mother of three kids under five. She’d just turned down a part-time job as a receptionist at a psychology centre. After childcare fees she would have ended up $50 out of pocket, but had considered taking the job for her mental health. A heavily pregnant woman walked past us holding hands with a toddler. I shuddered. I’m only just recovering from my own experience with two kids under two. “That’s magic,” said my friend, gazing after them. “Do you want another one?” I asked, bewildered. “No. Definitely not. But at least I know how to do it.” Primary carers have spent the last however-many-years growing humans and forgetting to keep sunshine and water for themselves. They need employers to believe in them. Then they can bring their grit and creativity to a company’s bottom line. “Do you have any special skills?” I caught a toddler before they reached a main road with milk dripping from my naked breast. I think I can learn Google Slides. • Ashe Davenport is a writer and authorA government-led inquiry branded “political interference” by ABC chair Ita Buttrose has been voted down by Labor and the Greens in the Senate. Last week the prime minister, Scott Morrison, backed a Senate inquiry into the public broadcaster’s handling of complaints after extraordinary pushback from Buttrose, and rejected suggestions the ABC had been singled out for special treatment. It had been set up by the environment and communications legislation committee’s Liberal chair Andrew Bragg who announced a snap inquiry into complaints handling by the ABC and SBS, to report by 28 February. But the ABC board had already commissioned an independent review of the public broadcaster’s editorial self-regulatory system and complaints handling, headed by Prof John McMillan, a former commonwealth and New South Wales ombudsman and Jim Carroll, a former head of SBS and Ten news. Last week Greens media and communications spokesperson, Sarah Hanson-Young, said the inquiry was a backdoor process to attack and undermine the independence of the ABC, and foreshadowed a move to suspend it until an external ABC review is finished. On Tuesday a Greens and Labor motion was backed by the cross bench and the inquiry was suspended. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “This inquiry was a partisan attempt to use the legislation committee to undermine the independence of the public broadcaster,” Hanson-Young said. “It was another tactic in a long line of attacks from the Liberals and Nationals who have spent eight years trying to crush the ABC. “An independent review of the ABC’s complaints system is under way. A senate inquiry established outside of normal processes and running in parallel was inappropriate. It is nothing more than political interference by the Morrison government.” Bragg said he was disappointed and the motion was “a backward step for our democracy”. “The parliamentary privilege attached to Senate submissions means people can say what they like without the threat of expensive and protracted legal action,” Bragg said. “It sets a terrible precedent for the Senate to close public access, especially where more than a dozen submissions have already been received as evidence.” Editorial complaints at the ABC are examined by five members of a complaints-handling unit called Audience and Consumer Affairs. ABC editorial director, Craig McMurtrie, has explained the unit is at arm’s length from the editorial division and reports regularly to the ABC board. “Complaints about content represent a fraction of all ABC output, but every one of them is taken seriously,” McMurtrie said. “Where mistakes are made there are written apologies to complainants, on-air and online corrections, revisions to published content with explanatory editors notes, staff are counselled or other disciplinary action taken and further training is provided.” The ABC welcomed the vote of the Senate “to defend the ABC’s independence and suspend the communications legislation committee Inquiry,” an ABC spokesperson said. “The ABC will now continue with the independent review of the complaints system commissioned by the board in October.” The ABC said an issues paper will be released shortly for public comment. On Wednesday morning the government backed away from a last minute request by Liberal senator Gerard Rennick to recommit the vote.We’ll be closing today’s Covid blog but you can follow along with all the latest news here. And you can tune in a little later for when we launch a new live feed in a few hours time. Delays to England’s vaccination rollout may mean some 12- to 15-year-olds may not get their Covid jab until February next year – 15 weeks after the government’s original target for offering the jab to all eligible teenagers, according to Labour. Total Covid-19 deaths across Europe are likely to exceed 2 million by March next year, the World Health Organization (WHO) has said, adding that the pandemic had become the number one cause of death in the region. A third dose is likely needed to be fully vaccinated, Dr Anthony Fauci said, adding that the majority of Americans who have been vaccinated should receive the booster shot. Seven US doctors contracted Covid after attending an anti-vaccine summit in Florida. Justin Trudeau has said that his top priority for his new government is to get Covid-19 in Canada under control and get more people vaccinated as he pledged support to Canadian industries, which he said were still struggling due to the pandemic. According to an analysis of the Covid case rates across the UK, 75% of local authorities experienced a week-on-week rise in the seven days to 19 November. The UK reported a further 42,484 Covid-19 cases and 165 additional deaths, official data shows. The weekly tally was up by 9% to reach 297,658 who have tested positive. France announced that there were more than 30,000 Covid infections in the past 24 hours. On Monday, France reported 5,266 new cases. The Netherlands hit a new weekly record on Tuesday – with Covid cases rising by 39% – and intensive care unit admissions rising sharply. The figures show a 19% rise in hospital admissions over the last week and a 26% rise in intensive care unit admissions. Those in the UK were today urged to take a rapid Covid test before mixing in crowded indoor spaces, marking a change in government and NHS guidance. Previously, the guidance advised the public to use lateral flow tests twice a week. Spanish government researchers have signed a licensing agreement for their coronavirus antibody test to allow other manufacturers to make it. It is hoped that the move, which marks the first time a manufacturer has allowed its Covid test to be included in a World Health Organization technology pool, will boost testing in poor countries. German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s husband blamed the nation’s poor vaccination rate in part on “a certain German laziness and complacency”. The Netherlands has started transporting coronavirus patients to Germany in a bid to ease pressure on hospitals struggling to cope with a surge in cases. Delays to the vaccination rollout mean some 12- to 15-year-olds may not get their Covid jab until February next year – 15 weeks after the government’s original target for offering the jab to all eligible teenagers, according to Labour. Officials originally set October half-term as the target to invite those in the age group to receive the vaccine in schools after criticism that England was slow to approve it for children compared to other countries. New analysis by Labour suggests however that if the vaccination of the 2.8m eligible 12- to 15-year-olds continues at the current rate, it could take until 7 February for some teenagers to be jabbed – a five-month wait for some. Vaccination began in schools in September, but with high infection numbers and low vaccination rates, a growing number of walk-in vaccine sites have since been made available to speed up the process. Read the full story here. Hi I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking over from Streisand Neto for the next short while. First up, some numbers out of Australia for you. The nation’s two most populous states of NSW and Victoria have released their daily Covid numbers. Victoria has recorded 1,196 new cases and three deaths, while NSW reported 248 cases and two deaths. That is it from me this evening. I will pass on to my colleague Samantha Lock. Thank you. Dr Antony Fauci said an additional boost could become the standard in determining which American is fully vaccinated. A majority of Americans who have been vaccinated should receive the booster shot, he said. Reuters reported Fauci and other disease experts are expecting Covid-19 will transition this spring from a pandemic in the United States to an endemic disease. An endemic disease means smaller, less significant, outbreaks of covid in the coming years. Seven doctors contract Covid after attending Florida anti-vaccine summit After attending anti-vaccine summit, seven anti-vaccine doctors contracted covid-19. Littell told the Daily Beast that six other doctors among 800 to 900 participants at the event tested positive or developed Covid-19 symptoms “within days of the conference”. Littell, an Ocala family physician, raised the suggestion that the conference was therefore a supers-spreader event but rejected it, vehemently saying: “No.” Professor Tim Spector has told Sky News that covid cases should stay “fairly flat”. But expects cases will get “worse again” post-Christmas. The head of the ZOE covid study app added that any significant rise would be driven by children infecting unvaccinated people. “I think it’s going to be story of areas of the country that have these pockets of unvaccinated people that are going to suffer the most,” said Professor Spector. Interesting data by the EU Commission. Despite nearly 200 million Americans fully vaccinated, this upcoming Thanksgiving will still be celebrated with caution. The Associated Press reported regions in America are experiencing surges of Covid-19. It brings attention to hospitals in Michigan which has reported about 3,800 covid patients in the beginning of the week. According to the latest covid data tracker by CDC, Michigan is ranked the highest with 616 in a 7-day case rate per 100,000. Good evening, it is Streisand here. I will bring you the latest covid headlines for the next couple of hours. The Washington Post reported the Biden administration wants “as soon as possible” the federal appeals court to bring back its covid vaccination or testing requirement for private businesses. The Justice Department said that the federal government should be allowed to address “the grave danger of Covid-19 in the workplace.” Justin Trudeau has said that his top priority for his new government is to get Covid-19 in Canada under control and get more people vaccinated. In a speech outlining his legislative agenda for a new session of parliament after September’s election, the Canadian prime minster pledged support to Canadian industries, which he said were still struggling due to the pandemic. According to an analysis of the Covid case rates across the UK, 75% of local authorities experienced a week-on-week rise in the seven days to 19 November. The figures, calculated by PA Media, found that Torridge in Devon had the highest rate in the UK, followed by Mid Ulster in Northern Ireland and Gwynedd in Wales. Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary has warned that European airlines face a slump in Christmas and early summer travel, claiming lockdown fears are putting people off booking holidays. There were a further 42,484 Covid-19 cases confirmed by labs in the UK and 165 additional deaths, official data shows. The weekly tally was up by 9% to reach 297,658 who have tested positive. France has announced that there were more than 30,000 Covid infections in the past 24 hours. On Monday, France reported 5,266 new cases. Coronavirus cases in the Netherlands hit a new weekly record on Tuesday – rising by 39% – and intensive care unit admissions rose sharply. The figures show a 19% rise in hospital admissions over the last week and a 26% rise in intensive care unit admissions. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has urged people to get a Covid test before all social occasions as she called for an “extra effort” in the leadup to Christmas. People in the UK were today urged to take a rapid Covid test before mixing in crowded indoor spaces, marking a change in government and NHS guidance. Previously, the guidance advised the public to use lateral flow tests twice a week. Spanish government researchers have signed a licensing agreement for their coronavirus antibody test that means other manufacturers will be able to make it. It is hoped that the move, which marks the first time a manufacturer has allowed its Covid test to be included in a World Health Organization technology pool, will boost testing in poor countries. German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s husband has told of his astonishment that around a third of Germans are not vaccinated, blaming it in part on “a certain German laziness and complacency”. Joachim Sauer, who until his retirement four years ago was a professor of quantum chemistry, told Italian newspaper La Repubblica, as reported by its German partner Die Welt: “It’s astonishing that a third of the population is not following scientific evidence.” The Netherlands has started transporting coronavirus patients to Germany in a bid to ease pressure on hospitals struggling to cope with a surge in cases. Health authorities said that one patient was transferred by ambulance from Rotterdam to Bochum, a city 150 miles away in western Germany, this morning and that another would be transported to the same hospital later today. Europe’s coronavirus death toll is likely to exceed 2 million by March, the World Health Organization (WHO) has warned. The global health agency said that Europe remains “in the firm grip” of the pandemic. Daily deaths have risen to nearly 4,200 a day – double the figure for the end of September. Stormont ministers have agreed a series of new Covid measures for Northern Ireland. Ministers met this morning to continue discussions on proposals recommended by health minister Robin Swann. That’s it from me for today. Handing over to my colleague Streisand Neto. Thanks for reading. More detail from Reuters on Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau’s speech opening the new parliamentary session: The best thing we can do for the economy remains ending the pandemic for good. Justin Trudeau has said that his top priority for his new government is to get Covid-19 in Canada under control and get more people vaccinated. In a speech outlining his legislative agenda for a new session of parliament after September’s election, the Canadian prime minster pledged support to Canadian industries, which he said are still struggling due to the pandemic. According to an analysis of the Covid case rates across the UK, 75% of local authorities underwent a week-on-week rise in the seven days to 19 November. The figures, calculated by PA Media, found that Torridge in Devon had the highest rate in the UK, with 697 new cases during the period (equivalent to 1,014 per 100,000 people), followed by Mid Ulster in Northern Ireland, with 1,277 new cases (857 per 100,000), and Gwynedd in Wales, which had 1,059 cases (846 per 100,000). Moray had Scotland’s highest rate with 542 cases per 100,000 people. The five areas in the UK with the biggest week-on-week rises were: East Hampshire, Richmondshire, Elmbridge, the Shetland Islands and Mid Ulster. Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary has warned that European airlines face a slump in Christmas and early summer travel, claiming lockdown fears are putting people off booking holidays. He said: I think we’re in for a fraught period between now and Christmas where it looks like Europe is going to get very nervous again at the worst time of the year when people are making their Christmas travel plans. I think it’s inevitable we will undermine confidence between now and Christmas, and that will disrupt Christmas and New Year when they would normally start booking their summer holidays. Mark Sweney reports: Scientists have reacted with scepticism to claims by AstraZeneca’s CEO that low uptake of the Oxford/AstraZeneca jab among elderly Europeans could explain the current surge in Covid-19 infections in mainland Europe. Guardian science correspondent Linda Geddes reports: Philip Oltermann reports from Berlin: A German football coach who resigned over allegations that he forged his vaccine certificate has drawn condemnation and derision after it emerged that he attended a carnival party this month that was exclusive to people who had received the jab or recovered from the virus. Markus Anfang announced his resignation as the head coach of German second division club Werder Bremen on Saturday morning after the state prosecutor in the northern city revealed there were doubts about the authenticity of the document supposedly proving the 47-year-old had received two doses of the BioNTech/Pfizer vaccine. The Catalonia region of Spain is to demand proof of Covid vaccination or a negative test for entry to bars, restaurants and stadiums amid rising infection rates. Although 79% of Spain’s population is vaccinated and infection levels remain far below those in Austria and the Netherlands, authorities in Catalonia want to reduce risk of infection and “avoid overloading the health system”. Catalonia, which already requires a Covid pass for nightclub entry, has a 14-day infection rate of 183 cases per 100,000 people, above the Spanish average of 132. Above 150 is viewed as “high risk”. There were a further 42,484 Covid-19 cases confirmed by labs in the UK, official data shows. The weekly tally was up by 9% to reach 297,658 who have tested positive. Government figures showed a further 165 people had died within 28 days of testing positive for Covid-19 as of Tuesday, bringing the UK total to 144,137. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics show there have been 169,000 deaths registered in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate. Protesters in French overseas territories in the Caribbean opposing measures to limit the spread of Covid-19 have clashed again with security forces. AFP reports: Hardline opponents of measures that include compulsory vaccination for healthworkers on the island of Guadeloupe manned barricades of burning tyres while on Martinique police were targeted by gunfire. Anger over the Covid measures imposed by Paris has fanned longstanding grievances in the territories that are popular with moneyed tourists but where poverty levels are far higher than in mainland France. As a result residents have long felt marginalised by the central government. France has announced that there were more than 30,000 Covid infections in the past 24 hours, Reuters reports. On Monday, France reported 5,266 new cases. The World Health Organization (WHO) said on Tuesday there could be a further 700,000 deaths from Covid-19 in Europe by March, taking the total to above 2.2 million, as the world body urged people to get vaccinated. Reuters reported that the total cumulative deaths from the respiratory disease in the 53 countries of the WHO’s European region have already surpassed 1.5 million, it said, with the daily rate doubling from late September to 4,200 a day. Following a meeting of the Northern Ireland executive (see also 13:02), first minister Paul Givan said they were “very much united” in asking the public to help try to minimise the spread of coronavirus and that they had considered a number of papers from health minister Robin Swann. He said: We are all very much united in asking the public to play its part along with us as politicians, that we can take every effort to try and minimise the transmission rate of the coronavirus. So we appeal again to redouble our efforts when it comes to trying to minimise some of those contacts, whenever it comes to having good ventilation, where you are meeting indoors try to meet outdoors more often. And we are emphasising that need to work from home where you can and for employers to support that. We recognise that in some circumstances that isn’t possible and practically people do need to be in their workplace. He added: There is hope that we can come through this period over the next number of weeks by making that collective effort and taking personal responsibility seriously. The deputy first minister, Michelle O’Neill, said “now is the time for action to avoid further restrictions at a later date”. She said: These are uncertain times, but now is the time for action and if we want to achieve the best possible outcome right now, then now is the time to act. This is our best chance of avoiding further restrictions down the line. That is why we are asking people to comply. We are reinforcing measures around the work from home messaging if you can. Swann said the agreed measures were about “keeping our society open and safe, but also delivering that message of hope in regards of where we can be.” He added: We are seeing what is happening in other countries across Europe, and we think, in regards to these early interactions now, that we can prevent those escalations in cases, also in hospitalisations and the additional pressures coming on our health service as well. The time is now to take these actions so that in future we don’t have to take any further action and that is what the executive has agreed collectively. Coronavirus cases in the Netherlands hit a new weekly record on Tuesday – rising by 39% – and intensive care unit admissions rose sharply. The figures show a 19% rise in hospital admissions over the last week and a 26% rise in intensive care unit admissions. The Dutch health institute said 265 people had died of Covid in the last week, bringing the Netherlands’ overall death toll to more than 19,000. It comes after the government introduced new parliament legislation that would allow them to restrict access for unvaccinated people to bars, restaurants and museums if cases keep rising. Here’s more from PA Media on the updates to Scotland’s vaccine passport scheme (see also 14:50): Scotland’s vaccine passport scheme will not be extended to cover more venues, Nicola Sturgeon has confirmed. The first minister said her cabinet considered widening the scheme to cover theatres, cinemas and and hospitality venues but decided this would not be “proportionate”, given its impact on businesses. Vaccine passports came into effect in Scotland in October and require nightclubs and large venues to only allow entry to people who can show they have been double jabbed. Sturgeon told MSPs this will remain the case for at least the next three weeks but that, from Monday, a negative lateral flow test will also allow entry. She said: “This was a very finely balanced decision. However, I can confirm that at this stage we have decided not to extend the scope of the scheme. “We have taken account of the fact that – although our situation is precarious – cases are currently stable and indeed slightly declining, and we have considered the inevitable impact vaccine certification has on the operation of businesses and concluded that, at this stage, extension would not be proportionate. “We were also mindful of the need over the coming weeks of getting across the message that it is important to be vaccinated and tested ahead of socialising in any setting – including in homes and shopping centres, for example – not just in those that might be covered by a certification scheme.” Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has urged people to get a Covid test before all social occasions as she called for an “extra effort” in the leadup to Christmas. In a statement to MSPs about Covid, Sturgeon urged the public to get a lateral flow test before any social occasion and before going shopping in order to minimise the risk of transmission and to avoid a “new year hangover” of more cases, pressure on the NHS and further restrictions. She also called on people to continue wearing face masks in shops and hospitality settings, open windows while socialising to ensure good ventilation and to work from home when possible. She said Scotland’s Covid certification scheme would remain in place for at least a further three weeks and that from 6 December it will also allow people to show a negative test (currently only proof of vaccination can be shown). By sticking to Covid restrictions, Sturgeon said she hopes it will allow people to have a “much more normal Christmas”. France’s prime minister, Jean Castex, has been criticised as an example of how not to behave in a pandemic after testing positive for Covid-19. Videos of the prime minster vigorously shaking hands with officials in an enclosed space in Paris on 16 November have been circulating online, with many pointing out that his actions went against French official guidance. They also criticised him for calling the French Caribbean territory of Guadeloupe’s enforcement of Covid measures “irresponsible” while not following rules himself, reports the Associated Press. Gabriel Attal, a government spokesman, defended the videos, saying: “We are all only human.” Castex’s office said the 52-year-old contracted Covid from his 11-year-old daughter and is self-isolating for 10 days. AP reports that it is unclear whether Castex, who was vaccinated in the spring, has symptoms and that his office was not immediately available for comment. People in the UK were today urged to take a rapid Covid test before mixing in crowded indoor spaces, marking a change in government and NHS guidance. Previously, the guidance advised the public to use lateral flow tests twice a week. The new advice, released just over a month before Christmas, also advises people to take a rapid test before visiting a person who is at higher risk of getting seriously ill from Covid. People who develop coronavirus symptoms continue to be encouraged to self-isolate and to get a PCR test. According to the government website, around one in three people who have Covid do not have symptoms. The advice says: You are at higher risk of catching or passing on Covid-19 in crowded and enclosed spaces, where there are more people who might be infectious and where there is limited fresh air. You may wish to take a rapid lateral flow test if it is expected that there will be a period of high risk that day. This includes spending time in crowded and enclosed spaces, or before visiting people who are at higher risk of severe illness if they get Covid-19. The guidance also urges people to let fresh air in for indoor meetings and to wear face masks in “crowded and enclosed areas where you come into contact with people you do not usually meet”. Spanish government researchers have signed a licensing agreement for their coronavirus antibody test that means other manufacturers will be able to make it. It is hoped that the move, which marks the first time a manufacturer has allowed its Covid test to be included in a World Health Organization technology pool, will boost testing in poor countries. The UN agency started the pool last year in a bid to encourage test, treatment and vaccine manufacturers to share their licences. But until this week, no manufacturers had signed up. WHO director-general, Dr Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, said: “I urge developers of Covid-19 vaccines, treatments and diagnostics to follow this example and turn the tide on the pandemic and on the devastating global inequity this pandemic has spotlighted.” Less than 1% of the world’s coronavirus vaccines have gone to poor countries. More from the Northern Ireland executive (see also 12:12), which said it is vital that people make safer choices - especially in the run up to Christmas. It urged people to limit social contacts, meet outdoors where possible, ensure indoor meeting places are well ventilated and wear face masks in crowded places indoors. The statement said: We understand how difficult this situation is for everyone and we will be stepping up our public information campaign to encourage everyone to keep following the advice. None of us wanted to be in this position, but this pandemic is unpredictable and it continues to pose a threat. We have an opportunity to make a difference by working together to keep our society open and protect the health service. Let’s do everything we can to ensure we halt the spread of Covid as we approach Christmas. German chancellor Angela Merkel’s husband has told of his astonishment that around a third of Germans are not vaccinated, blaming it in part on “a certain German laziness and complacency”. Joachim Sauer, who until his retirement four years ago was a professor of quantum chemistry, told Italian newspaper La Repubblica, as reported by its German partner Die Welt: “It’s astonishing that a third of the population is not following scientific evidence.” He added: “Partly that’s down to a certain German laziness and complacency. The other group is people ... who are reacting ideologically to what they think of as a vaccine dictatorship.” Around 68% of Germans have been vaccinated, putting the country behind countries including the UK, France, Portugal and Singapore. Total deaths across Europe from Covid-19 are likely to exceed two million by March next year, the World Health Organization (WHO) has said, adding that the pandemic had become the number one cause of death in the region. Reported deaths have surged to nearly 4,200 a day, doubling the number being recorded in September, the agency said, while cumulative reported deaths in the region - which includes the UK – have already surpassed 1.5 million. Describing the situation as “very serious”, the WHO said it expected “high or extreme stress” on hospital beds in 25 of the region’s 53 countries, with intensive care units (ICUs) in 49 countries set to come under similar strain. On current trends, the region’s cumulative death toll would surpass 2.2 million by 1 March, it said. With Europe again the centre of the pandemic, triggering tighter controls mainly on the unvaccinated and sparking heated debate in several countries about making vaccination obligatory, Austria this week became the first west European country to re-enter lockdown since inoculation began earlier this year. The surge was being driven by the highly transmissible Delta variant which is now dominant across the region, the WHO said, fuelled by widespread relaxation of preventive measures, such as mask wearing and physical distancing, since summer. With more and more people gathering indoors in the colder autumn weather, a large number still not vaccinated, and vaccine efficacy against severe forms of the disease waning, “many people are left vulnerable to the virus”. Dr Hans Kluge, the WHO’s regional director for Europe, said it was essential that countries adopt a “vaccine plus” approach. “This means getting the standard doses of vaccine and taking a booster if offered,” he said, “but also incorporating preventive measures into our normal routines.” In combination with the vaccines, Kluge said, wearing a mask, washing your hands, ventilating indoor spaces, keeping physical distance, and sneezing into your elbow were “simple, effective ways of gaining control over the virus”. He added: “All of us have the opportunity and responsibility to help avert unnecessary tragedy and loss of life and limit further disruption to society and businesses over this winter season,” by avoiding “the last resort of lockdowns and school closures”. The WHO said more than one billion vaccine doses had been administered in the WHO European Region and 53.5% of people had completed their inoculation programme, but added that the figure “hides wide differences between countries”, with some populations less than 10% vaccinated and others more than 80%. The vaccines were “are a vital tool to prevent severe disease and death” and had saved hundreds of thousands of lives, it said, calling for governments to do more to increase coverage, including by working with behavioural and cultural scientists to understand individual and community reluctance. But with the evidence growing that vaccines’ protection against infection and mild disease was declining, it urged that booster doses “should be given to protect the most vulnerable, including the immunocompromised, as a priority”, as well as to the over 60s and heath care workers as a precaution. Data showed only 48% of people across the region wear a mask when they leave home, it said, estimating that 95% mask usage could prevent more than 160,000 deaths could that could otherwise occur before 1 March. “Today, the Covid-19 situation across Europe and central Asia is very serious,” Kluge said. “We face a challenging winter ahead, but … all of us – governments, health authorities, individuals – can take decisive action to stabilise the pandemic.” The Netherlands has started transporting coronavirus patients to Germany in a bid to ease pressure on hospitals struggling to cope with a surge in cases. Health authorities said that one patient was transferred by ambulance from Rotterdam to Bochum, a city 150 miles away in western Germany, this morning and that another would be transported to the same hospital later today, reports Reuters. Covid patients in Dutch hospitals are at their highest level since May and are predicted to rise further as infections hit record levels. German hospitals have offered 20 beds to the Netherlands. The Dutch government has announced plans to bring in further restrictions, leading to three nights of rioting (see also 09:36). On Monday, 470 of 1,050 intensive care beds in the country were being used for Covid patients and hospitals are reducing normal care, including cancer treatments and heart operations. The Northern Ireland executive has released a statement in which it says that it is clear from public health experts that “an intervention is now required” on Covid: Covid-19 has once again taken a firm grip across our society. Community transmission of the virus is increasing. Hospital admissions are rising and modelling indicates that admissions will increase further in the coming weeks. The clear advice from public health experts is that an intervention is now required. Our people - individuals, families, communities and businesses - have been through so much during this pandemic. Our collective aim is to reduce pressure on our hospitals while allowing our society and the economy to remain open as fully and safely as possible. That means we all need to take action to prevent a worsening of the situation that would potentially require more severe measures. Here’s more from PA Media on Northern Ireland’s new Covid measures, including working from home recommendations: People will be urged to work from home where possible as part of reinforced Covid measures agreed by the Northern Ireland executive. Current Stormont advice for businesses to prepare for a return to office working is to be changed to encourage employers to support those staff who can work from home to do so. Ministers met on Tuesday morning to sign off on a range of recommendations made by health minister Robin Swann. They had adjourned discussions on the proposals on Monday evening and Mr Swann made some revisions to the plan overnight. It is understood an initial proposal that would have seen ministers urge people who worked from home at the outset of the pandemic in March 2020 to do so again has been dropped. The PA news agency understands that some ministers had expressed concern that advice could cause confusion as many sectors that were closed in March 2020 are now open and many workers do not have the option of remaining at home. Much of the plan agreed by ministers focuses on reinforcing messaging around public health measures, such as face masking wearing, hand hygiene and limiting social contacts. The agency also reports that first minister Paul Givan, deputy first minister Michelle O’Neill and health minister Robin Swann will give a rare joint press conference at Stormont this afternoon. Europe’s coronavirus death toll is likely to exceed two million by March, the World Health Organization (WHO) has warned. The global health agency said that Europe remains “in the firm grip” of the pandemic. Daily deaths have risen to nearly 4,200 a day – double the figure for the end of September. Reported Covid deaths have already exceeded 1.5m for the region’s 53 countries and the virus is the number one cause of death across Europe and central Asia. The WHO said it expects there to be “high or extreme stress on hospital beds in 25 countries, and high or extreme stress in intensive care units (ICUs) in 49 out of 53 countries between now and March 2022”. It predicted that under current trends cumulative reported deaths will reach over 2.2 million by spring. Dr Hans Kluge, WHO regional director for Europe, said: In order to live with this virus and continue our daily lives, we need to take a ‘vaccine plus’ approach. This means getting the standard doses of vaccine, taking a booster if offered, as well as incorporating preventive measures into our normal routines. Taken together, wearing a mask, washing hands, ventilating indoor spaces, keeping physical distance and sneezing into your elbow are simple, effective ways of gaining control over the virus and keeping societies going. All of us have the opportunity and responsibility to help avert unnecessary tragedy and loss of life, and limit further disruption to society and businesses over this winter season. The WHO said the three main factors driving Europe’s high case rate are the highly transmissible Delta variant, the unvaccinated and waning immunity and the way some governments have indicated to people that the pandemic “no longer represents an emergency threat” and have eased restrictions. Kluge added: Today, the Covid-19 situation across Europe and central Asia is very serious. We face a challenging winter ahead but we should not be without hope, because all of us – governments, health authorities, individuals – can take decisive action to stabilise the pandemic. Stormont ministers have agreed a series of new Covid measures for Northern Ireland. Ministers met this morning to continue discussions on proposals recommended by health minister Robin Swann. People will be encouraged to work from home where possible and the executive has instructed its Covid taskforce to look at issues around enforcing mask wearing and a system of rating businesses on their compliance to Covid measures, reports PA Media. Yesterday there were three new Covid deaths reported in Northern Ireland and an additional 1,469 cases. First minister, Paul Givan, tweeted: Hi, I’ll be looking after the blog for the next few hours. Please get in touch with any tips or suggestions: miranda.bryant@guardian.co.uk Germany’s acting health minister Jens Spahn called for more public spaces to be restricted to those who were vaccinated or recently recovered from Covid-19 and also had a negative test, in a bid to contain the spread. Spahn did not rule out lockdowns, although he said this would be decided region by region. “The situation is not only serious, in some regions in Germany it is now dramatic,” Spahn told German Radio. “We are having to move patients around as the intensive care units are full and that doesn’t just affect Covid-19 patients.” Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, will be giving a statement to MSPs later today which is expected to confirm whether Scotland’s Covid passport scheme will be expanded from 6 December to additionally cover bars, restaurants, cinemas and theatres. Business leaders have warned it could wreck Christmas party bookings, citing the Scottish government’s own research suggesting almost a third of 18 to 29-year-olds could be denied entry. The Northern Ireland Executive is meeting again today to discuss the possibility of further Covid restrictions in the country. The uncertainty surrounding plans for Covid passports has been criticised by Hospitality Ulster, a trade group representing the sector. A spokesperson said “Those statements say to our workers: ‘You might not have a job before Christmas’ and it says to customers, ‘Stay away’”. UK Labour MP Sarah Owen has criticised anti-vaccine protests outside schools, saying “Children should just be able to go to school. I think they’ve had a horrible last two years. The last thing they should be doing is being confronted with people who are being aggressive, or who are looking to threaten them, or threaten teaching staff or their parents. It’s completely unacceptable.” Prof Sir Andrew Pollard has said that Covid-19 is no longer a disease of the vaccinated. Pollard, one of those behind the Oxford/AstraZeneca vaccine, said “Among the general public, the pandemic is still regarded as a silent pestilence, made visible in the images of patients fighting for their next breath … This ongoing horror, which is taking place across ICUs in Britain, is now largely restricted to unvaccinated people.” Former UK “vaccine tsar” Kate Bingham, who stepped down from her role last year, has been highly critical of civil service and government preparedness for the pandemic, telling the Times newspaper: “The machinery of government is dominated by process, rather than outcome, causing delay and inertia. There is an obsessive fear of personal error and criticism, a culture of groupthink and risk aversion that stifles initiative and encourages foot-dragging. Currently, there is too much emphasis on ‘How will this play with the media or the select committee?’ rather than ‘What are we trying to achieve and how will we do it?’ Police in the Netherlands said on Tuesday they had arrested at least 21 people during a fourth night of unrest over coronavirus measures, although the situation had calmed down. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, has lambasted protesters as “idiots”. Israel has begun administering the coronavirus vaccine to children age five to 11. Media have reported low demand for the jabs, with prime minister Naftali Bennett expected to accompany his nine year old son David later today to get his shot in a bid to encourage parents to have their children vaccinated. India, a country of 1.35 billion which has struggled to curb the virus’ spread throughout much of its densely populated urban areas, reported the smallest rise in Covid infections for 18 months on Tuesday. Another 7,579 new cases were recorded - despite fears that huge festival gatherings in recent weeks would spark a new surge. France’s prime minister Jean Castex tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday, hours after returning from a visit to neighbouring Belgium. Greece has imposed strict new Covid curbs, aimed at reducing Covid-19 infections that have pushed death rates to almost twice the EU average. The new restrictions went into effect as authorities struggled to convince older Greeks in particular to have the jab. Pascal Soriot, chief executive of AstraZeneca, has said that the company’s plan to move to making profit on Covid vaccines will not hit the world’s poorest countries, and will not come into effect for some time. He said “We will of course adapt to every circumstance and countries that have low purchasing power will be supplied at no profit or very low price and others will be a bit more.” Slovakia’s prime minister Eduard Heger is “intensively” considering a possible three-week lockdown amid a jump in Covid-19 cases, his office has said. This is it from me, Martin Belam, today. Miranda Bryant will be here shortly. The Northern Ireland Executive is meeting again today to discuss the possibility of further Covid restrictions in the country. After yesterday’s meeting Deputy First Minister Michelle O’Neill said: “The Health Minister presented a paper to Ministers who met this morning to consider it. While the meeting was constructive and progress was made, it was agreed more work was needed. The Executive will meet again in the morning to finalise the approach.” The uncertainty surrounding plans has been criticised by Hospitality Ulster, a trade group representing the sector. Speaking on BBC Radio Ulster this morning, Colin Neill from the body said: “Those statements say to our workers: ‘You might not have a job before Christmas’ and it says to customers, ‘Stay away’. We have seen abuse [over Covid restrictions] and the abuse levels are escalating. The vast majority of hospitality venues do not have doormen and we can’t ask our staff to take abuse.” As mentioned earlier, Scotland’s first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, will be giving a statement to MSPs later today which is expected to confirm whether Scotland’s Covid passport scheme will be expanded. Business opens in the Scottish parliament at 2pm, and Sturgeon will speak shortly after that. PA Media is carrying a range of quotes from her opponents this morning who are very against the proposal. The Scottish Conservative leader, Douglas Ross, said there is “no evidence to suggest vaccine passports do anything to stop the spread of Covid-19”. The Scottish Liberal Democrats leader, Alex Cole-Hamilton, said vaccine passports should be abolished and demanded a full parliamentary vote before any changes to coronavirus restrictions come into force. He said the SNP and Greens have not provided any factual evidence to show the current scheme is keeping Scotland safer, adding “no wonder it has been attacked by everyone from health experts to civil liberties groups.” Ahead of Tuesday’s announcement, a Scottish government spokesperson said: “The situation around the pandemic is serious so we are being open about all of the options available to us that may be required to protect the public.” Talking of Covid data in the UK, the Office of National Statistics has released the deaths in England and Wales bulletin for the week ending 12 November 2021. The ONS said: 12,050 deaths were registered in England and Wales; this was 500 more deaths than the previous week and 16.6% above the five-year average. Of the deaths registered in England and Wales, 1,020 mentioned “novel coronavirus (Covid-19)”, accounting for 8.5% of all deaths; this was an increase in the number of deaths on the previous week, though a drop in the proportion (995 deaths, 8.6% of all deaths). From the week ending 13 March 2020 to the week ending 12 November 2021, the number of excess deaths above the five-year average in England and Wales was 125,909. Andrew Sparrow has the UK politics live blog for today. I’ll be continuing here with UK Covid updates, as well as coronavirus developments from around the world. Here are the latest UK figures for Covid, by the way. Week-on-week, the caseload is up by 8.4%. Deaths are down by 5.2%, and hospital admissions are down by 4.5%. There are 8,024 patients in UK hospitals, with 911 requiring ventilation. Dutch police said on Tuesday they had arrested at least 21 people during a fourth night of unrest over coronavirus measures, although the situation had calmed down. Agence France-Presse reports that small groups caused trouble in Zwolle, Groningen and Roosendaal on Monday night, though not on the scale of violence that rocked major cities at the weekend. Police in the northern city of Zwolle arrested 13 people after declaring an emergency situation. The suspects were detained for offences including possession of fireworks, disobeying police orders and having no ID, broadcaster RTL said. More than 150 people have now been arrested across the country during protests against coronavirus measures that came into force on 13 November. The Dutch prime minister, Mark Rutte, has lambasted protesters as “idiots” who turned to “pure violence”. Rutte told Dutch media that their actions had “nothing to do with demonstrating” but were “a pure explosion of violence directed against our police, against our firefighters, against ambulance drivers”. When the UK’s jab programme began, expectant mothers were told to steer clear – so Samantha Willis decided to wait until she had had her baby. Two weeks after giving birth, she died in hospital: It never crossed either of their minds that Samantha would fall seriously ill with Covid. She was only 35 and in good health, with no underlying conditions. Samantha was unvaccinated – she had received advice against getting jabbed at an antenatal appointment. “They gave her a flyer telling her there wasn’t enough research on the Covid vaccine in pregnant women,” says husband Josh. He found the flyer among her things recently. It read: “The vaccines have not yet been tested in pregnancy, so until more information is available, those who are pregnant should not routinely have this vaccine.” Later, when the guidance changed to advocate vaccination in pregnant women, Samantha was nearer her due date. “We thought: people are off school, she’s on maternity leave, it’s pretty safe now,” says Josh. “We decided she would get it after her pregnancy.” They had been careful; they had come so far. Samantha was due to give birth in less than a month. Their positive Covid tests, while a mild inconvenience, were nothing to be unduly concerned about. “It didn’t even cross our minds that we would get sick,” says Josh. Read more of Sirin Kale’s latest piece in our Lost to the virus series: Samantha Willis was a beloved young pregnant mother. Did bad vaccine advice cost her her life? As my colleague Samantha Lock mentioned earlier, Israel has begun administering the coronavirus vaccine to children age five to 11. Associated Press have a quick snap saying that Israeli media reported low demand for the shots on the first day they were available to this age group. The Israeli prime minister, Naftali Bennett, was expected to accompany his son David, nine, later today to get his jab in a bid to encourage parents to have their children vaccinated. Children age five to 11 make up nearly half of active cases in Israel. Officials hope the new inoculation campaign will help bring down the numbers and perhaps stave off a new wave. In Scotland we are expecting to hear from first minister Nicola Sturgeon whether there will be an extension to the Covid passport scheme. It currently covers nightclubs and large venues. The suggestion is that from 6 December it would also include smaller venues including bars, restaurants, cinemas and theatres. The Herald is leading this morning with a warning over the potential impact to the Christmas economy. Their Scottish political editor Tom Gordon writes: Business leaders have warned it could wreck Christmas party bookings, citing the Government’s own research suggesting almost a third of 18 to 29-year-olds could be denied entry. Dr Liz Cameron, chief executive of the Scottish Chambers of Commerce, said: “This is a critical time for Scotland’s businesses as we enter the Golden Quarter over the festive period where many businesses make most of their earnings for the year, and our members remain concerned about the impact that an expansion of Covid-19 restrictions and vaccine certification will have on them financially. “The suggestions of a return to table service in hospitality, caps on venue capacity and the reintroduction of curfews would in reality mean a return to an economic, if not social, lockdown which would cause severe economic harm to Scotland’s businesses at a critical point in their recovery.” Here’s the latest from Reuters on the situation in Germany, where the acting health minister called on Tuesday for further restrictions to contain a “dramatic” surge in coronavirus cases as the country’s infection rate hit a record high and the United States advised against travel there. The seven-day incidence rate - the number of people per 100,000 to be infected over the last week - hit 399.8 on Tuesday, up from 386.5 on Monday, data from the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) for infectious diseases showed. Acting health minister Jens Spahn called for more public spaces to be restricted to those who were vaccinated or recently recovered from Covid-19 and also had a negative test, in a bid to contain the spread. Spahn did not rule out lockdowns, although he said this would be decided region by region. Some regions such as the hard-hit Saxony and Bavaria are already taking measures such as cancelling Christmas markets. “The situation is not only serious, in some regions in Germany it is now dramatic,” Spahn told German Radio. “We are having to move patients around as the intensive care units are full and that doesn’t just affect Covid-19 patients.” The surge in cases in Germany, and in neighbouring Denmark, prompted the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) on Monday to advise against travel to the two countries, raising its travel recommendation to “Level Four: Very High”. We’ve got a fascinating piece today from Ami Vitale and Wanjiku Kinuthia about an initiative to bring healthcare to remote areas of Kenya via camel. Access to healthcare is expensive and, in an emergency, villagers are forced to walk for hours to the nearest health facility. For women, the lack of facilities, combined with patriarchal attitudes, means they have had no control over their reproductive health. But Communities Health Africa Trust (Chat) organises mobile healthcare outreach to poorly served communities such as Lekiji. Chat identifies vulnerable communities with limited access to health facilities and significant family planning needs, and brings health provision and education to their door. Lack of roads is no barrier to their work. If they cannot reach the communities by car, they switch to an older form of transport: camel. In the past three years Chat has reached more than 100,000 people with behaviour-changing messages that focus on family planning but include TB, HIV and Covid prevention services across 14 counties in Kenya. It’s a (mostly) uplifting piece – and has some great photos. Read more here: Camels bearing healthcare deliver hope in Kenya – photo essay Ukraine’s ministry of health have provided their latest Covid update, stating that 12,729 new confirmed cases of Covid (including 1,058 cases in children and 231 cases in healthcare workers) were recorded on 22 November. The seven-day average for daily news cases is running at 17,202. That is trending down from 21,174 a week ago. Here’s an updated map showing the latest caseload incidence across Europe. Pascal Soriot, the chief executive of AstraZeneca, has spoken to Sky News this morning, and said that the company’s plan to move to making profit on Covid vaccines will not hit the world’s poorest countries, and will not come into effect for some time. He said: You have to remember that the orders we are taking today will be delivered next year. We still have a lot of orders at no profit to deliver. So they will be delivered next year. But you know, we will of course adapt to every circumstance and countries that have low purchasing power will be supplied at no profit or very low price and others will be a bit more. We always knew that some vaccines would be sold at a profit and we made the decision from day one that we would partner with Oxford and deliver this vaccine around the world at no profit so everybody could access it much as possible. Our Long Read today is part of a new series called Reconstruction after Covid, and it comes from Kwame Anthony Appiah, the British-born, Ghanaian-American philosopher and cultural theorist who is professor of philosophy and law at New York University. He writes: Public-health experts predict that, as an indirect consequence of the Covid pandemic, twice as many people around the world could be at risk of dying from malaria. There could be 400,000 extra deaths from TB in the next few years, and half a million extra deaths from HIV. Across much of the world, in short, the response to the coronavirus has ushered in a shadow pandemic. The coronavirus’s real death toll, then, has to be calculated not just in deaths from Covid, but also in deaths that would otherwise have been prevented, from malaria, TB, HIV, diabetes and more. This shadow pandemic isn’t simply a story about disease – it’s about poverty, hunger, truncated education and stunted lives. A suggestive comparison can be made with the climate crisis. In the affluent world, some people think of climate breakdown as a matter of how long the air conditioning stays on, but for many in the developing world, it’s already a matter of floods, droughts and famine. These disparities between the global north and south are likely to be a feature of crises to come. The tale of two pandemics, then, is a tale of two international orders. The post-pandemic challenge, in turn, is to take seriously the rhetoric of an “international community”, and integrate the two into one. Read more here: Kwame Anthony Appiah – A tale of two pandemics: the true cost of Covid in the global south In the UK, Labour MP and member of the health select committee at parliament Sarah Owen has been on Sky News. She was asked about three things. Firstly on AstraZeneca suggesting they would offer tiered pricing and still offer vaccines not-for-profit to developing nations, and the risk of new variants developing due to vaccine inequality, she said: We are in a global pandemic, the clue is in the title and we need an international response. So moves from AstraZeneca that you’re talking about just now are very welcome because we need to ensure that everyone across the world has access to a vaccination. On the worsening situation in Europe, and whether it posed a risk to the UK, she said: We’ve always got to be scanning the horizon. For new variants. For changes. And possible solutions, new solutions for dealing with this pandemic. And we can’t take our eye off the ball particularly as we’re staring down the barrel of winter again. Finally on anti-vaccine demonstrations outside of schools in the UK, and the education secretary Nadhim Zahawi not backing calls for exclusion zones, she told Sky News: Children should just be able to go to school. I think they’ve had a horrible last two years. The last thing they should be doing is being confronted with people who are being aggressive, or who are looking to threaten them, or threaten teaching staff or their parents. It’s completely unacceptable. Children should just be able to go to school. Covid-19 is no longer a disease of the vaccinated, the head of the Oxford jab programme has said. The “ongoing horror” of patients gasping for breath in hospital is now “largely restricted” to people who are unvaccinated, according to Prof Sir Andrew Pollard. Even though the more transmissible Delta variant continues to infect thousands, most of those who are fully vaccinated will experience only “mild infections” that are “little more than an unpleasant inconvenience”. Writing for the Guardian, Pollard said: “Among the general public, the pandemic is still regarded as a silent pestilence, made visible in the images of patients fighting for their next breath … This ongoing horror, which is taking place across ICUs in Britain, is now largely restricted to unvaccinated people. “Generally, Covid-19 is no longer a disease of the vaccinated; vaccines tend to limit its suffocating affliction, with a few exceptions.” Read more of our health editor Andrew Gregory’s report: Covid patients in ICU now almost all unvaccinated, says Oxford scientist Hello, it is Martin Belam here. The Times in London is leading today with criticism of the civil service in the UK by former “vaccine tsar” Kate Bingham, who stepped down from her role last year. She writes: Across government there is a devastating lack of skills and experience in science, industry, and manufacturing – the very skills needed to work with innovators to bring an unproven medicine from the laboratory safely and effectively into people’s arms. The Vaccine Taskforce was created to fill this void. We rapidly assembled a team with the knowledge and relationships with the pharmaceutical industry vital to developing and manufacturing vaccines. With a “wartime” mandate from the prime minister, we could cut through the normal obstacles of decision-making. But these obstacles remain firmly embedded, and they must be urgently overcome. We need to build a peacetime capability for dealing with major healthcare threats. The machinery of government is dominated by process, rather than outcome, causing delay and inertia. There is an obsessive fear of personal error and criticism, a culture of groupthink and risk aversion that stifles initiative and encourages foot-dragging. Currently, there is too much emphasis on “How will this play with the media or the select committee?” rather than “What are we trying to achieve and how will we do it?” Slovakia’s prime minister Eduard Heger is “intensively” considering a possible three-week lockdown amid a jump in Covid-19 cases, his office said on Monday. The idea has been put forward by the Health Ministry, and Heger said expert opinion would be key in any decision. The European nation is seeing some of the biggest rises in new cases in the world on per capita basis, his office said in emailed statement to Bloomberg on Monday. Slovakia’s inoculation rate is also below the EU average. It’s former premier Robert Fico has publicly decried the use of face masks and participated in protests against coronavirus-related measures. The move would mirror steps taken by neighbouring Austria to curb the rise of coronavirus-related deaths and new infections. Hi. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be with you for the next hour or so to run through all the latest Covid developments you might have missed. India, a country of 1.35 billion which has struggled to curb the virus’ spread throughout much of its densely populated urban areas, reported the smallest rise in Covid infections on Tuesday. Another 7,579 new cases were recorded - the smallest rise in 18 months despite huge festival gatherings in recent weeks, government data reports. Authorities credit rising vaccinations and antibodies from prior infections. However, the situation in Europe is not showing signs of improvement. Slovakia is considering a possible three-week lockdown, prime minister Eduard Heger said. US health officials are not currently recommending lockdowns or economic restrictions to curb rising Covid-19 cases, White House press secretary Jen Psaki said on Monday. France’s prime minister Jean Castex tested positive for Covid-19 on Monday, hours after returning from a visit to neighbouring Belgium. France reported 5,266 daily new Covid-19 infections on Monday, pushing the seven-day moving average of new cases to an almost three-month high. France also sent police to Guadeloupe to quell violent Covid protests. Germany and the Netherlands are set to face tougher Covid restrictions. Germany issues stark warning. “Probably by the end of winter, more or less everyone in Germany will be vaccinated, cured or dead,” German health minister, Jens Spahn, said. The UK reported an additional 44,917 new Covid cases and 45 new deaths. Young people and women have taken the hardest psychological and financial hit from the pandemic, a YouGov survey has found. Greece imposes strict new Covid curbs, aimed at reducing Covid-19 infections that have pushed death rates to almost twice the EU average. The new restrictions went into effect as authorities struggled to convince older Greeks in particular to have the jab. Israel started rolling out vaccinations for five- to 11-year-olds in a bid to bring down rising Covid infections. Italy’s health minister announced that Italians will be able to get a Covid booster five months after their first vaccination cycle. The Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response accused the UK of throwing unused vaccines “down the drain”. Boris Johnson says the UK government is “concerned” about Covid, but that there is nothing to suggest that the country should bring back restrictions, despite rising cases across Europe. India’s total Covid-19 cases reached 34.53m, death toll reaches 466,147, the health ministry said. Syrian test shortage: Officials in the Kurdish-controlled part of northeast Syria say they ran out of Covid tests two weeks ago and they are struggling to monitor the spread of the virus, Reuters reports. Experimental chewing gum may reduce virus spread, researchers from the University of Pennsylvania say. Canada to end Covid policy of turning back asylum-seekers.The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection issued five subpoenas to far-right groups and leaders, including the Proud Boys and the Oath Keepers. The extremist groups are believed to have been involved in planning the Capitol attack on 6 January. Biden delivered a speech on the steps his administration is taking to address rising prices in the US, including mitigating bottlenecks at ports and ensuring store shelves remain stocked for Thanksgiving. Biden’s speech came as inflation has hit a 31-year high, with prices increasing by 6.2% over the past 12 months. That’s the most rapid acceleration since December 1990. Biden announced he will release 50m barrels of oil from the strategic petroleum reserve, in an effort to lower gas prices. The price of gas has increased by 49.6% over the past year, bringing the national average for a gallon of gas to $3.40, per AAA. “It will take time, but before long, you should see the price of gas fall where you fill up your tank,” Biden said in his speech this afternoon. The Biden administration has asked a federal court to lift the stay on a coronavirus vaccination rule for large businesses. The rule, which was set to go into effect on 4 January, would require those working for companies with at least 100 employees to get vaccinated or receive weekly coronavirus tests to mitigate the spread of the virus. Audra Jane Heidrichs reports: In May of this year, six city council members in Lebanon, Ohio, a city located just north of Cincinnati, voted on an ordinance that would effectively outlaw abortion for the 21,000 people that call it home. As in countless council meetings in small cities across the country where mask mandates, teaching about race in schools and access to reproductive healthcare have become politically charged in America’s current climate, the night unfolded in a series of near-Shakespearean acts. On the morning the meeting was scheduled, Krista Wyatt, a former firefighter elected to city council in 2018 and the only member expected to vote against the ordinance, formally resigned. In an accompanying statement, Wyatt wrote: “There is a core group of people who have hijacked the council to force their personal, political and religious views on the entire citizenship of Lebanon. It is not fair to the citizens and is not the role of a City Council member to be a moral compass.” Dozens of people spoke at the meeting later that evening. Some sang, many shared deeply personal experiences of rape or miscarriages and a few even led prayers. Just outside the doors of city hall, pro-choice and anti-abortion groups similarly squared off, shouting at each other and urging passersby to honk in support of one side or the other. Ultimately though, the vote was a resolute 6-0, making Lebanon the 29th city in the nation, and the first city in Ohio, to pass an enforceable ordinance outlawing abortion within their city limits. As the nation waits for a supreme court ruling on abortion rights, pro-choice advocates and activists across the US know first-hand that any upcoming national ruling might be almost irrelevant given what’s already taken place in Ohio and beyond. For the last few months, small municipalities – many without any standing abortion clinics – like Lebanon, Mason and soon maybe others, have outlawed abortion. Though women in those cities can still travel to get an abortion, the bans send an intimidating message. Bypassing statehouses and targeting smaller towns and cities governed by council has emerged as a successful strategy for anti-abortion advocates in recent years. In July, a report from the Guttmacher Institute revealed that at least 30 towns in six states – Arkansas, Indiana, New Mexico, New York, Ohio and Texas – have approved municipal abortion bans in the last three years. Some of these ordinances also target specific abortion funds and organizations providing other types of practical support to abortion patients. Read more: The Associated Press reports: A jury has awarded more than $25m in damages against white nationalist leaders for violence that erupted during the deadly 2017 far-right rally in Charlottesville. The defendants were accused of promoting and then carrying out racially motivated violence during the “Unite the Right” rally. After a nearly monthlong civil trial, a jury in US district court in Charlottesville deadlocked on two claims but found the white nationalists liable on four other counts in the lawsuit that was filed by nine people who suffered physical or emotional injuries during the two days of demonstrations. Attorney Roberta Kaplan said the plaintiffs’ lawyers plan to refile the suit so a new jury can decide the two claims this jury could not reach a verdict on. She called the amount of damages awarded from the other counts “eye opening”. “That sends a loud message,” Kaplan said. The verdict, though mixed, is a rebuke to the white nationalist movement, particularly for the two dozen individuals and organizations who were accused in a federal lawsuit of orchestrating violence against African Americans, Jews and others in a meticulously planned conspiracy. White nationalist leader Richard Spencer vowed to appeal. He said plaintiffs’ attorneys made it clear before the trial that they wanted to use the case to bankrupt him and other defendants. Lawyers for the plaintiffs invoked a 150-year-old law passed after the civil war to shield freed slaves from violence and protect their civil rights. Commonly known as the Ku Klux Klan Act, the law contains a rarely used provision that allows private citizens to sue other citizens for civil rights violations. Read more: A statue of Thomas Jefferson has been removed from city hall in New York, because the founder and third president enslaved people. A work crew spent several hours freeing the 884lb, 7ft statue from its pedestal in the council chambers and carefully maneuvering it into a padded wooden crate, for the short journey to the New York Historical Society. The city public design commission, appointed by the mayor, Bill de Blasio, voted earlier in the day to exile the statue, sculpted in 1833, on a 10-year loan. Opinions are mixed about the removal. Charles Barron, a member of the New York assembly and a former council member, told the New York Times: “It should be destroyed. A statue should be for those who we honor for their exemplary service and duty to all of this country, not just the white race.” But Michele Bogart, professor emeritus of art history at Stony Brook University, said the statue’s removal “deflects attention” from the actions of such controversial figures. “I have a philosophical problem with removing it from city hall,” she said. “If you can remove the Thomas Jefferson statue, then you can remove works from other city buildings.” That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection issued five subpoenas to far-right groups and leaders, including the Proud Boys and the Oath Keepers. The extremist groups are believed to have been involved in planning the Capitol attack on 6 January. Biden delivered a speech on the steps his administration is taking to address rising prices in the US, including mitigating bottlenecks at ports and ensuring store shelves remain stocked for Thanksgiving. Biden’s speech came as inflation has hit a 31-year high, with prices increasing by 6.2% over the past 12 months. That’s the most rapid acceleration since December 1990. Biden announced he will release 50m barrels of oil from the strategic petroleum reserve, in an effort to lower gas prices. The price of gas has increased by 49.6% over the past year, bringing the national average for a gallon of gas to $3.40, per AAA. “It will take time, but before long, you should see the price of gas fall where you fill up your tank,” Biden said in his speech this afternoon. The Biden administration has asked a federal court to lift the stay on a coronavirus vaccination rule for large businesses. The rule, which was set to go into effect on 4 January, would require those working for companies with at least 100 employees to get vaccinated or receive weekly coronavirus tests to mitigate the spread of the virus. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Ahead of the Thanksgiving holiday on Thursday, Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are participating in a service event at the non-profit DC Central Kitchen. The president and the vice-president -- joined by their spouses, first lady Jill Biden and second gentleman Doug Emhoff -- are helping prepare meals for DC Central Kitchen’s clients. According to the White House, the non-profit prepares roughly 5,000 meals a day for homeless shelters, rehabilitation clinics and after-school programs in the DC area. After the event, the Bidens will head to Nantucket, where they will spend Thanksgiving with their family. Centrist senator Joe Manchin questioned Joe Biden’s energy policies after the president announced he would release 50m barrels of oil from the strategic petroleum reserve. Manchin, the Democratic chair of the Senate energy and natural resources committee, argued Biden should be undergoing a broader review of his approach to oil supply in the face of rising gas prices. “Today’s release from the strategic petroleum reserve is an important policy Band-Aid for rising gas prices but does not solve for the self-inflicted wound that shortsighted energy policy is having on our nation,” Manchin said in a statement. “I continue to call on President Biden to responsibly increase energy production here at home and to reverse course to allow the Keystone XL pipeline to be built which would have provided our country with up to 900,000 barrels of oil per day from Canada, one of our closest allies.” Of course, that position is extremely unpopular with environmentalists, who say the US is already not doing enough to combat the climate crisis. Meanwhile, at the daily White House press briefing, energy secretary Jennifer Granholm spoke to reporters about the Biden administration’s plans to address high gas prices. Granholm touted Joe Biden’s decision to release 50m barrels of oil from the strategic petroleum reserve, while acknowledging it will take time to see lower prices at the pump. “I’m not going to make a prediction about how much and how long,” Granholm said. “It won’t happen tomorrow, but it’ll happen over the next few weeks that people will hopefully start to see the difference.” The energy secretary added that the administration is focused on ensuring gas prices are “not being held artificially high” because of oil and gas companies’ profit-driven strategies. Biden sent a letter to the Federal Trade Commission last week asking the agency to investigate “mounting evidence of anti-consumer behavior by oil and gas companies”. The latest round of subpoenas from the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection comes one day after the panel subpoenaed a group of far-right political activists, including Roger Stone and Alex Jones. Hugo Lowell reported yesterday: The subpoenas demanding documents and testimony expand the select committee’s inquiry focused on the planning and financing of the rally at the Ellipse, by targeting operatives who appear to have had contacts with the Trump White House. House investigators issued subpoenas to the veteran operatives Stone and Jones, Trump’s spokesperson Taylor Budowich, and the pro-Trump activists Dustin Stockton and his wife, Jennifer Lawrence. The chairman of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, said the subpoenas aimed to uncover ‘who organized, planned, paid for, and received funds related to those events, as well as what communications organizers had with officials in the White House and Congress’. The Proud Boys leader Enrique Tarrio, who was just subpoenaed by the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, is currently sitting in a DC jail. Tarrio is about halfway through a five-month sentence for his illegal activity at a pro-Trump rally last December, during which he set fire to a stolen Black Lives Matter banner. Although Tarrio did not actually participate in the insurrection, the Proud Boys leader is believed to have been involved in the preparation for the Capitol attack, according to the select committee’s latest statement. (On a related note, Tarrio’s request for an early release from jail due to unsanitary conditions was just denied by a judge.) Bennie Thompson, the chair of the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection, said the subpoenaed far-right groups and leaders would be able to shed light on the days leading up to the attack. “We believe the individuals and organizations we subpoenaed today have relevant information about how violence erupted at the Capitol and the preparation leading up to this violent attack,” Thompson said in a statement announcing the latest round of subpoenas. “The Select Committee is moving swiftly to uncover the facts of what happened on that day and we expect every witness to comply with the law and cooperate so we can get answers to the American people.” The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has subpoenaed far-right groups believed to have been involved in planning the attack. The five new subpoenas were sent to the far-right groups Proud Boys, Oath Keepers and 1st Amendment Praetorian. Leaders of those groups -- Enrique Tarrio of Proud Boys, Elmer Stewart Rhodes of Oath Keepers and Robert Patrick Lewis of 1st Amendment Praetorian -- were also subpoenaed by the committee. Joe Biden also promised that grocery stores will be “well-stocked” for the Thanksgiving holiday on Thursday, amid concerns about shortages caused by supply-chain issues. Biden noted his administration is working to mitigate bottlenecks at ports by working to increase hours of operation at those sites, thus allowing more products to be delivered. The president said the number of containers sitting on docks has decreased in recent weeks, as shipping prices have also fallen. “More goods are moving more quickly and more cheaply out of our ports -- onto your doorsteps and onto store shelves,” Biden said. Noting that he recently met with the CEOs of companies like Walmart and Target, Biden added, “Families can rest easy: grocery stores are well-stocked with turkey and everything else you need for Thanksgiving. And the major retailers I mentioned have confirmed that their shelves will be well-stocked in stores this holiday season.” The president concluded his prepared remarks and did not answer any of the questions that reporters shouted at him as he departed. Joe Biden pushed back against the “myth” that efforts to combat the climate crisis, like investing in the production of electric vehicles, is raising gas prices. “My effort to combat climate change is not raising the price of gas,” the president said. “What it’s doing, it’s increasing the availability of jobs -- jobs building electric cars like the one I drove at the GM factory in Detroit last week.” Biden noted those who buy electric vehicles will save $800 to $1,000 in fuel costs this year, and he expressed hope that those savings will soon be made available to more Americans through his economic policies. Joe Biden acknowledged many Americans are struggling with the rising price of gas, which has increased by 49.6% over the past year. “The fact is, we always get through those spikes. We’re going to get through this one and hopefully faster,” Biden said. “But it doesn’t mean we should just stand by idly and wait for prices to drop on their own. Instead, we’re taking action.” The president touted his administration’s decision to release 50m barrels of oil from the strategic petroleum reserve to help lower gas prices as the country enters the holiday season. “It will take time, but before long, you should see the price of gas fall where you fill up your tank,” Biden said. Joe Biden is now delivering remarks on the state of the US economy and the need to lower prices for American families. The president’s speech comes as the country grapples with the highest rate of inflation in 31 years, with prices rising by 6.2% over the past 12 months. “We’ve made historic progress over the last 10 months,” Biden said, pointing to the 5.6m jobs added to the economy since he took office in January. But the president acknowledged the economy is still struggling in certain sectors, saying, “Disruptions related to the pandemic have caused challenges in our supply chain, which have sparked concern about shortages and contributed to higher prices.” Joe Biden announced today that he will release 50m barrels of oil from the strategic petroleum reserve to help address high gas prices. The move is being done in coordination with other major energy consumers like China, India, Japan, South Korea and the UK. But it remains unclear whether the move will actually lower gas prices, which have increased by 49.6% over the past year. Bloomberg News explains: Everyone’s been talking about this possibility for so long that many traders say the plan for the release was already baked into oil prices. That would explain why oil prices are up following the announcement. There’s also a fear OPEC+ officials, who don’t like being bossed around, could respond by canceling plans to boost their own production, negating the addition of stockpiled oil onto the market. The standoff sets up a fight for control of the global energy market. In short, consumers looking for relief at the pump may not see lower gasoline prices for months yet, if at all. The rightwing Texas congressman Louie Gohmert, a prominent climate change denier and Covid anti-masker, has joined an already rambunctious pursuit for the state’s attorney general office involving George P Bush, nephew of the former president George W Bush, and the embattled incumbent Ken Paxton. The entry of the fierce Donald Trump loyalist into the race is seen by some in Republican circles as part of the former president’s push to install allies in powerful state positions ahead of the 2024 election. Efforts by Trump to overturn Joe Biden’s 2020 victory in the courts and several state legislatures fell flat, and analysts say he is determined to secure a friendlier playing field if he runs again. He could not ask for a more supportive candidate than the allegedly QAnon-aligned Gohmert, a proponent of extreme conspiracy theories including one that terrorists were sending pregnant women to the US to raise America-hating offspring. In December 2020, Gohmert filed a federal lawsuit against Trump’s vice-president, Mike Pence, swiftly rejected by courts up to and including the US supreme court, seeking to allow him to replace certified state electors with those chosen by Republicans. One problem for Gohmert is that Trump has already endorsed Paxton, who is battling a long-running securities fraud indictment and is under separate investigations by the FBI and the Texas state bar. George P Bush, the current Texas land commissioner and son of the former Florida governor Jeb Bush, had hoped Trump would back him, despite his apparent loathing of the Bush family. His efforts to ingratiate himself ended in humiliation. A jury in Georgia has begun deliberations in the trial of the three white men accused of murdering Ahmaud Arbery, after 10 days of evidence and lengthy closing arguments in the closely watched case, which like that of Kyle Rittenhouse in Wisconsin has become part of the ongoing movement for, and debate over, racial justice in the US. On Tuesday morning, prosecutors ended closing arguments before Judge Timothy Walmsley, who briefed the jury on the multiple counts of murder, false imprisonment and other charges faced by the three defendants. Travis McMichael, his father Greg McMichael and their neighbour William “Roddie” Bryan pursued Arbery, a Black 25 year-old, for five minutes in February 2020 in the neighborhood of Satilla Shores, south Georgia. Travis McMichael, armed with a pump action shotgun, fire three times at Arbery, who was unarmed. Prosecutors say the three men had no legal justification to chase Arbery and box him in with their trucks. The shooting was captured on video by Bryan who, prosecutors say, repeatedly attempted to ram Arbery during the pursuit. The three men have pleaded not guilty to all charges, claiming they attempted to enact a citizen’s arrest. The McMichaels have claimed they believed Arbery was involved in a spate of break-ins and burglaries in the neighborhood, and that Travis McMichael opened fire in self-defense. On Tuesday, lead prosecutor Linda Dunikoski repeatedly ripped into the claim of self-defense. “You can’t claim self-defense if you are the unjustified aggressor,” Dunikoski said. “Who started this? It wasn’t Ahmaud Arbery.” Donald Trump’s pollster thinks he will run for the White House again in 2024, with a clear path to victory through five states he lost to Joe Biden in 2020: Arizona, Georgia, Pennsylvania, Michigan and Wisconsin. But Michael Cohen, Trump’s former attorney and fixer who is fresh out of house arrest, thinks he will not. “His fragile ego cannot stand to be considered a two-time loser,” Cohen said on Monday. Trump lost the five states in question by narrow margins – defeats he refuses to accept, continuing to promote the lie that Biden won thanks to electoral fraud, which led to deadly violence at the US Capitol on 6 January. Politico obtained a memo from Trump’s pollster, Tony Fabrizio, which said a poll carried out for the former president’s fundraising committee put him up over Biden in all five states, by margins ranging from three points in Georgia to 12 in Michigan. In recent books about the Trump administration, Fabrizio is depicted as willing to give Trump polling news he did not want. But he told Politico: “Poll after poll clearly demonstrates that … Trump is still the 800lb gorilla in the [Republican party] and would be its 2024 nominee should he run.” “This new data clearly shows that today the voters in these five key states would be happy to return Trump to the White House and send Biden packing.” Amid speculation, the White House said on Monday Biden, 79, intends to run for re-election. The same day, Cohen told CNN: “Donald will not run. Why? Because first of all, he has an incredibly fragile ego. He lost by 9m votes the first time [actually a little more than 7m]. He will lose by more than 9m the second and his fragile ego cannot stand to be considered a two-time loser.” Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden will deliver a speech this afternoon on the US economy and the need to lower prices for American families. The speech comes as inflation has hit a 31-year high, with prices increasing by 6.2% over the past 12 months. That’s the most rapid acceleration since December 1990. Biden announced he will release 50m barrels of oil from the strategic petroleum reserve, in an effort to lower gas prices. The price of gas has increased by 49.6% over the past year, bringing the national average for a gallon of gas to $3.40, per AAA. The Biden administration has asked a federal court to lift the stay on a coronavirus vaccination rule for large businesses. The rule, which was set to go into effect on January 4, would require those working for companies with at least 100 employees to get vaccinated or receive weekly coronavirus tests to mitigate the spread of the virus. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Meanwhile, Enrique Tarrio, a leader of the far-right group Proud Boys, was denied early release from a DC jail after complaining of unsanitary conditions there. Tarrio has served about half of a five-month sentence for illegal acts during a pro-Trump rally in DC last December, during which the Proud Boys leader set fire to a stolen Black Lives Matter banner. The Washington Post reports: In a written ruling Friday night, D.C. Superior Court Judge Jonathan H. Pittman said he largely believed Tarrio’s allegations, made at a Nov. 15 hearing, about experiencing unsanitary conditions and mistreatment at the jail. The judge noted that the D.C. Department of Corrections ‘admits that much of what the defendant has claimed did in fact occur.’ But after reviewing Tarrio’s three legal arguments for being let out of jail, Pittman said each argument fell short. Conspiracy theorist Alex Jones said he will likely invoke his Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination after being subpoenaed by the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection. On his far-right show, Jones said he would invoke the Fifth Amendment not because of his own potentially illegal deeds but because the committee members are “political criminals that have an axe to grind,” per Politico. According to the statement released by the committee yesterday, investigators are seeking Jones’ testimony about his alleged involvement in the planning of the January 6 rally that culminated in the Capitol attack. In case you missed it yesterday: the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection issued five more subpoenas to right-wing political operatives, including former Trump associate Roger Stone and conspiracy theorist Alex Jones. Hugo Lowell reports: The subpoenas demanding documents and testimony expand the select committee’s inquiry focused on the planning and financing of the rally at the Ellipse, by targeting operatives who appear to have had contacts with the Trump White House. House investigators issued subpoenas to the veteran operatives Stone and Jones, Trump’s spokesperson Taylor Budowich, and the pro-Trump activists Dustin Stockton and his wife, Jennifer Lawrence. The chairman of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, said the subpoenas aimed to uncover ‘who organized, planned, paid for, and received funds related to those events, as well as what communications organizers had with officials in the White House and Congress’. Eric Berger reports for the Guardian: While people are expected to again travel at levels similar to a pre-pandemic Thanksgiving, airlines are still contending with staffing shortages, which could lead to additional flight cancelations. “It doesn’t really matter if a travel disruption is coming from a lack of staffing or shortage of routes or weather, it’s still something that is very frustrating for customers,” said Lindsey Roeschke, travel and hospitality analyst for the Morning Consult, a market research firm. In spite of the Covid-19 pandemic, Thanksgiving flight bookings in the United States are up 78% from 2020 and 3.2% from 2019, according to a Adobe Digital Economy Index report published earlier this month. “When it is busy, it’s very possible that [flights] will be over capacity – and that means the possibility of things going wrong is very high,” said Narendra Khatri, principal of Insubuy, a travel insurance company. Over the Halloween weekend, American Airlines canceled more than 2,000 flights because of weather and staffing issues. In letters to employees, David Seymour, chief operating officer of the airline, described the weekend as a “brief irregular ops period” and said that “on the schedule front, we’ve ensured that November and December are built to meet customer demand and that they are fully supportable by our staffing”. The Biden administration has asked a court to immediately lift a stay on a rule requiring employees of large businesses to get vaccinated against coronavirus. Reuters reports: Delaying the rule by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) that requires employees to be vaccinated or tested weekly would lead to thousands of hospitalizations and deaths, the government said in a Tuesday filing with the 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals. ... The rule was challenged by Republican-led states, businesses and trade groups and the U.S. 5th Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans quickly blocked it, calling it ‘staggeringly overbroad’ and a ‘one-size-fits-all sledgehammer.’ After the stay was imposed by the 5th Circuit, lawsuits from around the country were transferred to the 6th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in Cincinnati. The rule requires those working at companies with 100 or more employees to get vaccinated or receive weekly coronavirus tests to mitigate the spread of the virus. It was set to go into effect on January 4. Energy secretary Jennifer Granholm will join the daily White House briefing this afternoon, giving her an opportunity to offer more details on the release of oil from the strategic reserve. Speaking at yesterday’s briefing, press secretary Jen Psaki noted the Biden administration is using a variety of tools to address high gas prices. Last week, Joe Biden sent a letter to the Federal Trade Commission asking the agency to investigate “mounting evidence of anti- consumer behavior by oil and gas companies”. “We will continue to press oil companies who have made record profits and are overseeing what we consider to be price gouging out there,” Psaki said aboard Air Force One yesterday. “When there’s a supply of oil or the price of oil is coming down and the price of gas is not coming down, it does not take an economic expert to know that’s a problem.” Senate Republicans’ campaign arm is using high gas prices to attack Democrats as Americans travel for Thanksgiving, which the country will celebrate on Thursday. NBC News reports: Americans on the road for Thanksgiving will be reminded of high gas and grocery prices with an ad push from the Republican Senate campaign arm airing at gas stations across the country this week. ‘You like high gas prices?’ the ad intones, with cartoonish graphics and sound effects. ‘If so, introducing: Joe Biden and Democrats.’ The National Republican Senatorial Committee’s five-figure, multi-day buy — first reported by NBC News — goes across ten battleground states where Republicans hope to flip or keep Senate seats in the upcoming 2022 midterms. The advertisements are intended to hit travelers on the road for the Thanksgiving holiday who are filling up their gas tanks. The Senate is currently split 50-50, but Democrats control the chamber because of Vice-President Kamala Harris’ tie-breaking vote. So Republicans only need to flip one Senate seat in next year’s midterm elections to regain control of the upper chamber. Republicans, who have been attacking Joe Biden over the rising prices of gas and groceries, criticized the release of oil from the strategic reserve as a political ploy. House minority leader Kevin McCarthy said in a statement, “Today’s announcement – which will release just three days’ worth of oil onto the market – is not about a real solution to our energy crisis. It is a crass political ploy just ahead of Thanksgiving.” Former president Donald Trump similarly criticized Biden’s decision, saying, “Those reserves are meant to be used for serious emergencies, like war, and nothing else.” Joe Biden announced this morning that his administration will release 50m barrels of oil from the strategic petroleum reserve to help address high gas prices. The president said on Twitter that the action “will be taken in parallel with other major energy consuming nations including China, India, Japan, Republic of Korea and the United Kingdom”. The news comes as gas prices have increased by 49.6% over the past year, bringing the national average for a gallon of gas to $3.40, per AAA. “As we come out of an unprecedented global economic shutdown, oil supply has not kept up with demand, forcing working families and businesses to pay the price,” energy secretary Jennifer Granholm said in a statement. “This action underscores the President’s commitment to using the tools available to bring down costs for working families and to continue our economic recovery.” Read more about the announcement here: Joe Biden has argued that Democrats’ $1.75tn social spending package, which passed the House on Friday, will help families struggling with higher prices by lowering the costs of healthcare and childcare. However, there are lingering concerns about how the high rate of inflation may impact the negotiations over the bill in the evenly divided Senate. Senator Joe Manchin, one of the key holdouts in Democrats’ negotiations over the bill, has said he is hearing more from constituents who are concerned about their gas and grocery bills. “By all accounts, the threat posed by record inflation to the American people is not ‘transitory’ and is instead getting worse,” Manchin said earlier this month. “From the grocery store to the gas pump, Americans know the inflation tax is real and DC can no longer ignore the economic pain Americans feel every day.” Manchin has previously expressed concern that Democrats’ spending package, known as the Build Back Better Act, could negatively contribute to inflation. In a September op-ed for the Wall Street Journal, Manchin warned against approving more government spending, saying, “An overheating economy has imposed a costly ‘inflation tax’ on every middle- and working-class American.” However, since that op-ed was written, the cost of the package has been cut in half -- from $3.5tn to $1.75tn. And a number of economists have said the bill will not add to inflationary pressure. Biden is hoping those arguments will be enough to make Manchin a “yes” vote, as he will need all 50 Democratic senators’ support to get the bill through the upper chamber. Joe Biden’s nominees for the Federal Reserve board have also pledged to tackle inflation aggressively if they are confirmed by the Senate. Jerome Powell, who has been nominated to a second term as the chair of the Fed board, said yesterday, “We know that high inflation takes a toll on families, especially those less able to meet the higher costs of essentials, like food, housing and transportation.” Powell, who was first nominated by Donald Trump, said he would use the tools of the central bank “to prevent higher inflation from becoming entrenched”. Dr Lael Brainard, Biden’s nominee for vice-chair of the board, echoed that message, saying, “I’m committed to putting working Americans at the center of my work at the Federal Reserve. This means getting inflation down at a time when people are focused on their jobs and how far their paychecks will go.” Greetings, live blog readers. Joe Biden will deliver a speech this afternoon on the state of the US economy and the need to lower prices for American families. The president’s speech comes as inflation has hit a 31-year high, with prices increasing by 6.2% over the past 12 months. That’s the fastest acceleration since December 1990. And Americans are growing more concerned about high prices as they continue to rise. According to a poll conducted by the progressive firm Navigator Research earlier this month, 54% of Americans now say the cost of groceries and gas is a “major crisis”. Biden has pledged to tackle the issue, arguing that Democrats’ $1.75tn social spending package will lower families’ costs for healthcare and childcare. Speaking at an event yesterday to announce his nominations for the Federal Reserve board, Biden said, “Because so much of the rest of our economy is doing well, because we have created so many new jobs as fast as we have, we’re in a position to attack inflation from a position of strength, not weakness.” But if Americans don’t start to see prices come down soon, it could make it all the more difficult to enact Biden’s agenda. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.Explosive engineers have demolished two giant chimney stacks and a boiler at a defunct coal-fired power station west of Sydney as part of efforts to transform the site. The 175-metre chimneys at Wallerawang have loomed large for residents of Lithgow, a town on the western edge of the Blue Mountains that is home to two coal-fired plants and coalmines. “It’s a really big event up here actually,” said Brett Hawkins, chief executive of Greenspot, the company that has taken over the 620-hectare Wallerawang site. “These iconic pieces of infrastructure have dominated the skyline here for decades.” Site managers set up a 500-metre exclusion zone and nearby traffic, including on the Castlereagh Highway, was halted during the morning’s explosions. The chimneys and boiler facility collapsed within a matter of seconds. The plant ceased to operate in 2014 with the loss of 220 jobs, a year after EnergyAustralia bought Wallerawang and the nearby Mt Piper power stations from the NSW government for $160m. The energy company later sold the site to Greenspot, a private company that hopes to find new uses for Wallerawang’s strong grid connections, rail links and proximity to a skilled workforce. The success of such efforts may form a template for similar power plants elsewhere. For instance, all of NSW’s five operating coal-fired power stations are due to close by 2042, with AGL’s Liddell plant in the Hunter the first slated for shuttering in 2023. “We’ve got our primary focus right now here,” Hawkins said before the blast. “But we’re certainly believers that there’ll be other sites like this.” “They’re kind of the fabric of communities as well,” he said. “So the challenge is going to be having a whole heap of people working together to tackle the problems that are coming down the line.” Greenspot has been talking to local and state governments about potential support to help transform the site into a mixed industrial, residential and tourism development. The area includes nearby Lake Wallace, a popular area for campers. It is also close to a site where pioneering scientist Charles Darwin spotted his first platypus during a visit in 1836, apparently contributing to his conception of evolution. There are significant challenges to deal with. The chimneys and other buildings to be demolished amount to about 25,000 tonnes of concrete alone, that will be crushed and reused. The two boilers – including one to be demolished early next year – both contain about 18,000 tonnes of scrap metal. All up, the site will produce at least 40,000 tonnes of scrap metal that will be removed and processed for use elsewhere, such as for railway wheels. Greenspot’s Hawkins said the company was close to filing an environment impact statement on plans to develop a giant battery on the site to make use of its strong grid connections. “We’re very close, we believe, to making a pretty significant announcement about who we’re going to partner with on that battery,” he said, adding the project would require capital investment of $400m. The cooling tower, with its incredible acoustic properties due to its parabolic shape, will be retained as a possible tourist attraction or for other uses. Hawkins said the company was confident the Glasgow climate summit this month will add momentum to the transition away from fossil fuels. Greenspot plans to release a “broad-based concept plan” for the Wallerawang site in the first half of 2022. “We’d like to think we’re doing something pretty exciting here to be honest with you,” he said. “That we’re actually going to make some change, you know, positive change.”Nasa is preparing to launch its $330m Double Asteroid Redirection Test (Dart) probe, testing the space agency’s ability to alter an asteroid’s trajectory with kinetic force. The plan is to crash a robot spacecraft into the moonlet Dimorphos at 15,000 mph and change its path just a fraction. If the mission is successful, it will mean that Nasa and other space agencies could deflect an asteroid heading towards Earth and avert an Armageddon-style impact. What is happening? At 1.20am Eastern time the Dart spacecraft is scheduled to lift off atop a SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket from a launchpad in California. If liftoff is postponed Nasa has an 84-day launch window in which to try again. It will take 10 months to travel the 6.8m miles to Dimorphos and the collision will not take place until September-October 2022. Dimorphos is a football-field-sized asteroid that closely orbits a bigger asteroid, called Didymos. Neither pose a threat to Earth. Nasa is simply undertaking some target practice with the Didymos system because its relative proximity to Earth makes it ideal to observe the results of the impact. Before the crash, an Italian-made satellite called LICIACube will sensibly bail out from Dart and position itself nearby to send pictures and data back to Earth. Will it work? LICIACube’s pictures and telescope observations from Earth should give some indication of whether Dimorphos’s orbit has been altered. The goal is only to move it a fraction of a percentage point. Observations from ground-based telescopes and radar will then measure how much the moonlet’s orbit around Didymos changes. Why can’t they just blow it up? Disappointingly – or perhaps reassuringly – Nasa will not anytime soon be lowering Bruce Willis and Ben Affleck to the surface of asteroid to (spoilers ahead if you’re joining us from 1997) drill a hole, drop in a nuclear bomb and then try to get away quick enough. If an asteroid were to actually threaten Earth, it would be a good idea to identify it early on and knock it off course, because the earlier that alteration to its trajectory can be made, the further away from Earth it will hopefully end up. The key to avoiding a killer asteroid is to detect it well in advance and be ready with the means of changing its course, Nasa planetary defence officer Lindley Johnson told a media briefing this month. “We don’t want to be in a situation where an asteroid is headed toward Earth and then have to be testing this kind of capability,” he said. There are lots of other ideas including running a spaceship alongside and using a laser, ion engine jet or other kind of beam device to exert a slight but significant-over-time effect. Or a robotic lander could mine and then eject material from the surface (mass-driver effect), using Newton’s third law of action and reaction to change the course. Solar sails could be hoisted nearby to reflect enough sunlight on to the object to have an effect.New Zealand has announced it will reopen its borders to vaccinated visitors in the opening months of 2022, for the first time since prime minister Jacinda Ardern announced their snap closure in the first month of the Covid-19 pandemic. The country’s borders have been closed for more than a year and a half. The border will initially open to New Zealand citizens and visa holders coming from Australia, then from the rest of the world, and finally to all other vaccinated visitors from the end of April. They will still have to self-isolate at home for a week, but will no longer have to pass through the country’s expensive and highly-space limited managed isolation facilities. “Closing our border was one of the first steps we took to keep our country safe from Covid-19 and it will be one of the last things we do in terms of opening up,” Covid response minister Chris Hipkins said. “We do know that the international restrictions we have had around our border have been tough for many people.” While that timeline is still some time off, news of a border reopening will come as a huge relief for many overseas New Zealanders who have been stranded for most of the last year, competing for a small number of spots in managed isolation. For many, being locked out of the country has taken a substantial financial, emotional and psychological toll. Matt Hipkins, a New Zealander in Hong Kong and member of the Grounded Kiwis advocacy group, said he was overwhelmed by the announcement. “Being apart from family, with no end in sight, this announcement has me in tears,” he said. “I wasn’t ready for the emotional release, the stress that has been built up over the past year. I’m not given to being overly emotional but this has taken me by surprise the depth of feeling of being ‘allowed’ back to my home and my family.” Others took to social media to celebrate. “People in our office literally crying with tears of joy. Reuniting with family! I’ll see my mama again!” Pollyanne Peña tweeted. Peña said her mother had been based in Melbourne, and over the past year had missed milestones of her grandson growing up. Others said the announcement was bittersweet. Mrid Narayan, an Aucklander based in Hong Kong, said she felt “a mixture of relief and betrayal”. “As a proud overseas New Zealander I never thought I would be subjected to a lottery to win the ‘privilege’… to return to my home,” she said. Speaking to reporters, Chris Hipkins defended the government’s decision not to reopen the borders before Christmas. “There continues to be a global pandemic with cases surging in Europe and other parts of the world, so we do need to be very careful when reopening the border.” “Some people and businesses want us to start to open up before Christmas, and that’s understandable, but others want us to be more cautious. We acknowledge it’s been tough but the end of heavily restricted travel is now in sight,” Hipkins said. The border will open in stages. Hipkins said that fully vaccinated New Zealanders can travel to New Zealand from Australia without staying in managed isolation from Monday 17 January. They can come from all other countries from Monday 14 February 2022. After that, fully vaccinated people, including international tourists, will be able to travel to New Zealand from the end of April. Countries classed as “very high risk” will be excepted from that – at this stage, only Papua New Guinea sits under that designation. Hipkins said that managed isolation would still be present for the foreseeable future. “We will eventually reach a point where people will be able to move much more freely across the border and those periods of self isolation won’t be required. We’re not at that point yet.”Peter Dutton has won his defamation claim against the refugee activist Shane Bazzi over a tweet labelling him a “rape apologist”. On Wednesday the federal court ruled in favour of the defence minister over the tweet he said had “deeply offended” him because it went beyond the “rough and tumble” of politics. Justice Richard White said he intended to order damages of $35,000 for Dutton but would refuse Dutton’s bid for an injunction to prevent Bazzi tweeting about him. Although the decision vindicates Dutton’s reputation, the payout is relatively small and will allow Bazzi’s lawyers to argue for reduced costs. Bazzi’s tweet, since deleted, said “Peter Dutton is a rape apologist”. It included a link to a 2019 Guardian Australia article reporting comments by Dutton that some female refugees were “trying it on” by making claims they had been raped, and needed to travel to Australia from offshore detention to receive abortions. The tweet was published on the same day Dutton had said he didn’t know the “she said he said” details of Brittany Higgins’ allegation of rape. White found the tweet was defamatory and did convey the imputation that Dutton “excuses rape” although he found it did not convey that he “condones” rape. The judge accepted “in a general way” that Dutton’s comments about the Higgins allegation may have prompted Bazzi’s tweet but said it was not part of his job to say whether the criticisms of Dutton were justified. The judge rejected Bazzi’s submission the tweet should be understood to mean that Dutton “lacks empathy … towards women on Nauru who reported that they had been raped”, because the ordinary reasonable reader would not imbue the word “apologist … with some special meaning to be gleaned from the words in the link”. Bazzi’s defence, filed in June, denied he had defamed Dutton but pleaded that, if he did, defences of fair comment and honest opinion should apply. The judge held that Bazzi had not established either defence. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The judge accepted the statement was an expression of an opinion but said there was a “significant difference” between a court finding about Dutton’s duty of care to rape victims and the imputation that he excuses the act of rape itself. Dutton had questioned the truth of women in refugee centre’s claims they had been raped – “a different subject matter than diminishing the significance of rape”, he said. Nor did the “she said, he said” remark reveal “anything at all about [Dutton’s] attitude to rape”. The judge found it was likely Bazzi “did not appreciate the effect of his words” and concluded he did not hold the opinion that Dutton is a rape apologist because he excuses rape. On damages, the judge said the tweet did not have a wide readership and his impression was that Dutton experienced an “initial affront” but had not expressed “continuing distress”. “There is no suggestion that the tweet has affected Mr Dutton in his day-to-day political or ministerial activities, or in his relationships with other people.” Dutton had sought aggravated damages citing more recent tweets and statements from Bazzi and his lawyers including that the “wealthy and powerful cabinet minister” should focus on his defence portfolio, not the defamation case. White rejected Dutton’s claim that statements soliciting funds for Bazzi’s defence justified extra compensation. “There is nothing wrong in persons seeking forms of crowd funding for a defence to defamation proceedings. “It was not inappropriate for him to bring to public attention the issues concerning freedom of speech raised by Mr Dutton’s proceedings,” he said, as this was “a legitimate matter to be raised”. The court will now consider submissions from the parties on the issue of costs at a further hearing on 8 December before formally making orders. At the hearing in October, White had warned both sides about the failure to settle what he said was not “one of the largest or larger defamation cases the federal court has had”. The judge noted even if Dutton won, Bazzi could seek reduced costs if Dutton were awarded damages of less than $100,000, or the proceeding could more suitably have been brought in another court or tribunal.Major sexual consent reforms have passed through the New South Wales parliament this week and have also been proposed in Victoria. The affirmative consent reforms will change the laws around sexual consent to better deliver justice to victims and survivors of sexual assault. The changes come after law reform commission reviews and a campaign by advocates such as Saxon Mullins from Rape and Sexual Assault Research and Advocacy. What will change in Victoria? The Victorian government will introduce a requirement for affirmative consent. This means a person must take active steps to confirm they have received consent for sexual activity or risk committing a crime. The government will also amend laws to make “stealthing” – the act of removing a condom during sex without the other person’s knowledge or consent – explicitly illegal. Previously, Victoria required communicative consent between parties, but the office of public prosecutions was concerned about how it had been applied. Attorney-general Jaclyn Symes said the changes to the Crimes Act 1958 (Vic) would “flip” the system which had previously placed too much focus on the behaviour of victims. “This means the questions will be on the perpetrator: What did you do to ensure that you knew the person was consenting to sexual activity?” Symes said. As part of the initial response, the government will develop a 10-year strategy to address sexual offending following an 18-month examination from the Victorian Law Reform Commission. The commission’s report tabled 91 recommendations and found sexual violence was widespread, caused serious harm and was under-reported. Symes said all of the commission’s recommendations would be considered and $5.2m will be provided to sexual assault services in response to increased reporting and demand. The legislation will be introduced in 2022. What about in NSW? The NSW government’s Affirmative Consent Bill passed the Upper House on Tuesday, 23 November. Under the legislation, the NSW Crimes Act will be changed to specify consent to sexual activity must be communicated by words or actions, not simply assumed. This has particular significance for the justice process as some victim-survivors present the “freeze” response in a fearful situation where they may be unable to verbally stop the perpetrator from continuing. It means: (a) a person does not consent to sexual activity unless they said or did something to communicate consent; and (b) an accused person’s belief in consent will not be reasonable in the circumstances unless they said or did something to ascertain consent. They will also retain the current meaning of consent as a free and voluntary agreement, while adding that it must be present when sex occurs. They will also affirm a person’s right to withdraw consent at any point; make clear that if someone consents to one sexual act, it doesn’t mean they’ve consented to other sexual acts; clarify the definitions of “sexual intercourse”, “sexual touching” and “sexual act”; and clarify that a defendant cannot rely on self-induced intoxication to show they were mistaken about consent. Five new jury directions for judges to give at trial will also be provided to address common misconceptions about consent and ensure a victim’s evidence is assessed fairly and impartially. It will also provide education programs for judges, legal practitioners and police on how to best navigate victims of sexual assault through the judicial process. The affirmative consent model is generally designed to overcome a common hurdle in rape and sexual assault trials in some jurisdictions – that an alleged offender had “reasonable grounds” for believing the complainant had consented. Greens spokesperson for women Jenny Leong said the “vital” reform would help deliver justice for sexual assault survivors. How are these laws different from previous laws? Under previous NSW law, a person commits sexual assault if they know the other person is not consenting, if they are “reckless as to whether” they consent, or there are no reasonable grounds for believing there was consent. This was a key point in the case of Luke Lazarus, who was accused of raping Mullins. He was found guilty at his first trial, overturned the matter on appeal, and was then found not guilty during a retrial when judge Robyn Tupman found he had a “genuine belief” that Mullins consented. That ruling was later overturned but the court of criminal appeal did not order another trial. How are these reforms being received? The proposed NSW laws were hailed by Dr Rachael Burgin, director at Rape and Sexual Assault Research and Advocacy, as “leading the country”. Mullins celebrated the announcement, and thanked survivors who had worked to change the law, saying that “I can never go back and change the outcome of my case, but we have changed how some stories will end”. When similar laws were passed in Victoria, Mullins welcomed the commonsense approach to sexual assault cases, and said the court process could often be a “real re-traumatisation” for victims. “Not only are you sharing such a horrible story, a really awful moment, again and again … but you’re also being subjected to really horrible ways of going about it, questioning your character and your truth,” she said. Sexual assault survivor Brittany Higgins hailed the Victorian reforms as an “incredible step forward” and said she was “overwhelmed with emotion”. Leong said the NSW reforms were a significant step forward but Australia still had a long way to go. “We still need proper consent education across the board,” she said. “Only then can we begin to prevent these assaults from happening in the first place, and ensure that all survivors are given the best chance at receiving justice.” What is the situation in other states? Experts have previously said Tasmania had the “gold standard” in Australia (though that is contested). Queensland strengthened consent laws in March, but advocates believed the changes did not go far enough. The changes included principles such as silence doesn’t amount to consent, consent once given can be withdrawn, and the self-intoxication of a defendant cannot be relied upon to show that they were mistaken about whether or not consent was given. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Western Australia has similar laws to those in Queensland prior to the recent amendments, meaning a “mistake of fact” defence remains open. This is seen as problematic as it allows those accused of rape to argue they had an honest and reasonable belief of consent but were mistaken. South Australia and the Northern Territory law both refer to a “free and voluntary agreement”. The ACT government is reviewing its laws, after it was previously found it was the only state or territory without a statutory definition of consent. How does the law in Australia compare with laws internationally? Pretty well, according to this piece published in March. It found that Australia is one of the world’s most progressive jurisdictions, on par with countries such as England, Wales, New Zealand and Canada. In Europe, a recent Amnesty International analysis found only 12 out of 31 countries had consent-based definitions of rape. This includes the UK, Ireland, Sweden, Denmark, Iceland, Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg, Malta, Greece, Croatia and Cyprus. Sweden lists no exceptions, removing all defences like the “reasonable steps” rule that still exists in some Australian jurisdictions.The corporate regulator has taken the unprecedented step of imposing conditions on the licence of the Australian Stock Exchange as the market operator moves to a new technology system that uses blockchain technology. It comes after confidence in the ability of the ASX, which is a key piece of Australia’s financial infrastructure, to process an average of about 1.5m share trades a day was shaken by a botched technology upgrade last November that stopped trade for a day. The Australian Securities and Investments Commission’s action against the ASX, one of the top 20 exchanges in the world, is likely to be closely watched by overseas regulators that oversee markets that also need regular technology upgrades. “The Australian economy, economies in general, are very reliant on markets being liquid and being open when they’re supposed to be open,” the Asic chairman, Joe Longo, told Guardian Australia. “From the international perspective of the Australian market, people expected it to be open and it wasn’t, so for people who were managing superannuation funds, managing people’s wealth and assets, it’s really a critical part of the Australian economy to have a fully functioning robust stock exchange.” Longo said that the ASX failed to follow its own risk management procedures when upgrading the system at the centre of the November outage, ASX Trade, “so things went wrong”. “They just weren’t careful enough,” he said. Asic has not decided to pursue allegations against ASX that it breached its market licence. Instead, ASX has agreed to changes to its licence. Longo said taking ASX to court would mean it could only deal with the November outage but striking a deal with the exchange meant the new licence conditions could also take in its planned upgrade to the crucially important system that records ownership of shares, Chess. The Chess project, which has been repeatedly delayed, uses the blockchain or “distributed ledger” technology that is behind cryptocurrencies including bitcoin – something that has never before been attempted by a stock exchange. “I think the short answer is yes we do have confidence that ASX is going to deliver this system,” Longo said. “The way we have confidence is by the kind of licence conditions we impose today and ensuring there’s an assurance framework that gives us confidence they are going to deliver.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning He said the shift to using blockchain, or “distributed ledger”, to record share ownership was “in everybody’s interest because that technology is more resilient, it’s more robust, and it’ll be able to handle more trades”. In a report into the November outage released on Wednesday, Asic said it showed “the serious deficiencies in ASX’s and market participants’ ability to limit the impact on overall liquidity highlighted by the outage despite some of these deficiencies having been raised by Asic” in 2016. Asic said the testing ASX did of the system it was upgrading, ASX Trade, was not comprehensive enough to meet the exchange’s “near zero appetite for service disruption”. Under the new licence conditions, the ASX must appoint an independent expert to oversee technology programs, including the Chess upgrade. The project was championed by the previous ASX chief executive Elmer Funke Kupper, who first floated the idea of a blockchain-based system in 2015. However, the project has been repeatedly delayed, in part due to the Covid-19 pandemic, and is now set to go live in April 2023. Asic also requires the ASX to provide it with attestations, board and senior management and assuring the regulator that proposed technology changes are ready to go, a fortnight before new systems including the Chess replacement go live. And the ASX is also required to provide Asic with quarterly updates on its progress in implementing recommendations made by IBM in a report commissioned by the regulator after the November outage. Dominic Stevens, the ASX chief executive officer, said: “The new licence conditions are practical and are aligned with the action ASX is taking to improve the way we operate our business. “We are pleased that Asic’s investigation into the market outage is closed and that no breach of ASX’s licence conditions was found,” he said. “However, we will continue to invest to strengthen the quality of our infrastructure and reduce operational risk.”New Zealand’s central bank has lifted interest rates for the second time in as many months to 0.75%, with many forecasters expecting borrowing costs to rise to at least 2% by next year and possibly higher. In a warning signal for central banks around the world as they struggle to contain inflationary pressures, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) raised the official cash rate by 25 basis points to 0.75% as expected in its final policy meeting of the year on Wednesday. The RBNZ’s forecasts signalled a more aggressive tightening cycle, reaching 2.5% by 2023 and going higher by December 2024. Its governor, Adrian Orr, warned that homeowners in New Zealand’s red-hot housing market had to prepare for tougher times ahead. “Homeowners who have just entered the market with extremely high leverage levels have to be incredibly wary and have to understand they have to weather the higher interest rates,” Orr said. Independent economists agreed that borrowing costs are going to go up quite quickly in the coming months. “Given the heat in the economy we think the RBNZ is far from done,” said Ben Udy, economist at Capital Economics. “We expect the bank to continue to hike rates next year to about 2.0% by the middle of next year.” Michael Gordon, acting chief economist at Westpac bank in Australia, said he thought the RBNZ could raise rates by 0.5% when it meets in February and that rates could go further than 2.5%. “We continue to expect a series of hikes over the coming policy meetings, and we’re forecasting the cash rate to reach a peak of 3% in the third quarter of 2023.” The decision by the RBNZ, which began its so-called tightening cycle by raising rates by 0.25% in October, came hours after the former governor of the Bank of England, Mervyn King, said central bankers had been caught unawares by rising prices that have exposed their “King Canute” theory of inflation. Lord King used a speech in London to accuse banks across the world of relying too heavily on models that showed inflation returning to low levels even without adjusting interest rates upwards. Theories of inflation had to explain changes wrought in the financial system by banks’ money printing schemes, which King said had become “unsustainable”. Pressure on the US Federal Reserve to raise rates increased earlier this month when the October inflation figure hit a 30-year high of 6.2%, driven by rising energy costs and shortages across the whole economy in the wake of post-pandemic dislocation of supply chains. Although the Fed believes inflation is “transitory” and has guided markets that it is not expecting to hike rates until the end of the next year, there is growing expectation that it might acknowledge investor concerns by withdrawing the massive post-pandemic monetary stimulus more quickly than planned when it meets on 14-15 December. Inflation is a global problem and Britain is not far behind the US with an inflation rate of 4.2% in October. The Bank of England came close to raising rates earlier in November. That near miss has left most forecasters certain that the monetary policy committee will act when it meets on 16 December. The European Central Bank’s policy-setting committee meets on the same day. In common with larger economies, New Zealand has used huge amounts of fiscal and monetary stimulus to alleviate pandemic pain and help the economy recover strongly. This has in turn pushed inflation to its highest and the jobless rate to its lowest in over a decade. Annual inflation hit 4.9% in the third quarter, the fastest pace in more than a decade while the jobless rate fell to 3.4%, matching its lowest on record from December 2007. Meanwhile, house prices have doubled over the past seven years and are the least affordable among OECD nations. These pressures prompted the RBNZ to raise rates in October and flag more tightening. The country is set to end lockdowns and move into a system of living with the virus from 3 December, allowing all businesses to resume operations.Albatrosses, some of the world’s most loyally monogamous creatures, are “divorcing” more often – and researchers say global heating may be to blame. In a new Royal Society study, researchers say climate change and warming waters are pushing black-browed albatross break-up rates higher. Typically after choosing a partner, only 1-3% would separate in search of greener romantic pastures. But in the years with unusually warm water temperatures, that average consistently rose, with up to 8% of couples splitting up. The study looked at a wild population of 15,500 breeding pairs in the Falkland Islands over 15 years. For seabirds, warmer waters mean less fish, less food and a harsher environment. Fewer chicks survive. The birds’ stress hormones increase. They are forced farther afield to hunt. As some of the most loyal partners of the animal kingdom, the love lives of albatrosses have long been a subject of scientific study. “There are all these things we think of as being super-duper human,” says Dr Graeme Elliot, principal science adviser at New Zealand’s department of conservation, who has been studying albatrosses in the country’s waters for three decades. The birds lend themselves to anthropomorphism: living for 50-60 years, they have a long, awkward teen phase as they learn how to seduce a mate through dance, and take years-long trips away from home as they mature. They usually to mate for life, and loudly celebrate when greeting a partner after a long absence. But now, they increasingly share another rite of passage that may sound familiar to young humans: under stress from the climate crisis, working longer hours to eat, and faced with the logistical difficulties of a traveling partner, some are struggling to maintain relationships. Francesco Ventura, researcher at University of Lisbon and co-author of the Royal Society study, said the researchers were surprised to learn that warmer waters were associated with unusually high rates of albatross couples splitting up, even when the lack of fish were accounted for. Albatross divorce was usually predicted by a reproductive failure, Ventura said. If a pair failed to produce a chick, they had a higher chance of splitting up. Less food for birds could lead to more failures. But the researchers were surprised to find that even when they accounted for that, higher water temperatures were having an extra effect – pushing up divorce rates even when reproduction was successful. Ventura floated two possible reasons – one that warming waters were forcing the birds to hunt for longer and fly further. If birds then failed return for a breeding season, their partners may move on with someone new. Added to that, when waters are warmer and in harsher environments, albatross stress hormones go up. Ventura said the birds may feel that, and blame their partner. “We propose this partner-blaming hypothesis – with which a stressed female might feel this physiological stress, and attribute these higher stress levels to a poor performance of the male,” he says. The research comes as many international albatross populations are in trouble. “Their numbers are plummeting,” Elliot. The populations of wandering albatrosses that he studies were now declining at rates of 5-10% every year, and had been dropping since around 2005. Those dropping numbers come as a result of less prey, warming seas, and increasing encounters with tuna line-fishing boats, which accidentally catch and kill the birds. Dropping population numbers were changing the birds’ mating patterns in other ways, Elliot said, with more homosexual couplings appearing. “We’re getting male-male pairs amongst the birds on Antipodes Island, which we haven’t had before,” he said. “A few percent of the boys are pairing up with another boy because they can’t find a female partner.” The Royal Society study had looked at a population of black-browed albatrosses in the Falkland Islands, where numbers were still strong, and where divorce was not catastrophic, Ventura said – birds could find other partners. But he said the same dynamics could apply to other albatross populations, and have a more damaging effect where bird numbers were more fragile. “If we’re talking about a population with a much lower number of breeding pairs, that disruption of a bond might definitely induce some disturbance in the regular breeding processes,” he said. Now, Elliot hopes that some of the sympathies people have for albatrosses could motivate changes in behaviour, to address the environmental threats the birds are facing – particularly climate change, and tuna fishing. “We kind of need an international campaign to save these birds,” Elliot says. “If we don’t turn it around, they’ll go extinct.”The Australian government will list the neo-Nazi group The Base as a terrorist organisation, together with the entirety of the Lebanese Shia political party and militant group Hezbollah. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, announced the plan to designate the two groups under Australia’s criminal code, which outlaws being a member, providing support to or associating with listed terrorist organisations. Andrews described The Base – which has already been proscribed as a terrorist group by Canada and the UK – as “a violent, racist, neo-Nazi group known by security agencies to be planning and preparing terrorist attacks”. It was, she said, known to have organised paramilitary training camps overseas. The government also moved on Wednesday to expand the listing of Hezbollah, which claims to represent the Lebanese Shia community and has military, political and social components. Hezbollah’s External Security Organisation has been designated as a terror organisation in Australia since 2003, but broadening it to cover the entire group follows the lead of the US, Canada and the UK. Police have previously raised concern that the existing listing requires prosecutors to prove an individual supports Hezbollah’s external security organisation specifically. Andrews said Hezbollah “continues to threaten terrorist attacks and provides support to terrorist organisations such as Palestinian Islamic Jihad and Hamas’ Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades”. The minister was unable to specify on Wednesday how many members each of the groups had in Australia, saying the numbers were “fluid”. But she said the listings were based on advice about “real” and “credible” threats posed to Australia. The move follows long-standing calls for the government to list far-right groups, after warnings from intelligence agency Asio about the growing threat they pose. Some within the government have previously raised concern about the use of the phrase right-wing extremism, and Asio now classes them under the umbrella category of ideologically motivated violent extremists. Asio says this “ideologically motivated” category now accounts for about 50% of its priority onshore counter-terrorism caseload, with the remainder being religiously motivated violent extremism. Asked why it had taken so long to list The Base, Andrews said she did not take such designations lightly and wanted to make sure the groups met the legislative tests. She said authorities were concerned about The Base’s activities in Australia and would “closely look at their membership and we will take action once they are fully listed under the criminal code”. Door open to more far-right listings Andrews, who replaced Peter Dutton as home affairs minister in a reshuffle in late March, kept the door open to listing other far-right groups in future. “I will continue to take advice from Asio in particular but also the Department of Home Affairs, and also from other agencies here in Australia,” she told reporters in Canberra. “I am very open to the prospect of looking at any of the organisation that threaten to do Australians harm and where they meet the threshold, I will not hesitate to list.” The Proud Boys, a neo-fascist group listed as a terrorist organisation in Canada, has not been designated as such in Australia. Sonnenkrieg Division was listed in Australia in August, with the government describing it as a “UK-based extreme right-wing organisation which adheres to a violent white-supremacist ideology”. Andrews said the views of violent extremist groups were “a stain” on Australia’s “rich cultural fabric”, adding: “There is no place in Australia for their hateful ideologies.” She denied there was any political calculation in revealing the listing of both The Base and Hezbollah at the same time, saying she looked at each recommendation that came to her “independently”. James Paterson, the Liberal senator who chairs parliament’s intelligence and security committee, welcomed both listings. Designating Hezbollah in its entirety is in line with a bipartisan recommendation his committee made earlier this year. “I thank the minister for home affairs for acting on the committee’s recommendation and recognising the overwhelming evidence that all of Hezbollah is responsible for its decades-long global campaign of violent terror against innocent civilians,” Paterson said on Wednesday. After the head of Asio, Mike Burgess, mentioned the extreme rightwing threat in his first annual threat assessment speech in February last year, Dutton raised concerns about extremism of the “far left” and “far right”, saying the authorities would tackle any threats posed by either “rightwing lunatics or leftwing lunatics”. Labor’s home affairs spokesperson, Kristina Keneally, welcomed the move to list The Base, saying it would be only the second right-wing terrorist group proscribed by the Australian government. “However, both of these groups are overseas groups, with limited activity in Australia,” Keneally said. “Labor urges the government to look closely at the far-right groups known to be active within Australia, such as the National Socialist Network.” Keneally urged the government to act on Asio’s warnings about right-wing extremism: “As the violent threats at recent protests demonstrate, we can’t dismiss or ignore this growing threat to our community safety.” She also noted the Hezbollah listing was in line with a bipartisan committee recommendation. Before Wednesday’s announcement, there were 26 terrorist organisations listed under Australia’s criminal code. The federal government has begun the process of consulting state and territory governments about the proposed new listings. The federal election is due by May and the Coalition has been seeking to emphasise it is “strong” on national security, despite generally bipartisan agreement on major security challenges.The Weeknd’s hit single Blinding Lights has officially been crowned the all-time No 1 song on the Billboard single charts, ousting Chubby Checker’s 1960s hit the Twist. The song, an instant synth-pop classic, debuted in late November 2019 and topped the weekly Billboard Hot 100 for four weeks in April and May 2020, going on to spend a record-shattering 90 consecutive weeks on the chart. That stint has now earned Blinding Lights the title of No 1 song on its Greatest Songs of All Time Hot 100 Chart, Billboard announced on Tuesday. From the After Hours album, the single dethrones Checker’s classic the Twist, which was awarded the title in 2008 after separate chart runs in 1960 and 1962. “I don’t think [it] has hit me yet,” Abel Tesfaye, 31, otherwise known as The Weeknd, told Billboard upon learning of the song’s new status. “I try not to dwell on it too much. I just count my blessings, and I’m just grateful.” Blinding Lights was 2020’s biggest song both in terms of sales and size, cementing the Canadian singer’s status as a global pop star a decade after first surfacing with introspective R&amp;B and moody ballads. “By the time Blinding Lights happened, I was 10 years into my career and established as a music figure in the industry,” Tesfaye said. “So I’m glad Blinding Lights happened when it happened as opposed to it being the first single I’ve ever dropped. That’d be scary for me.” Billboard’s rankings are based on total weeks on the chart as well as exact chart positions, with adjustments made to account for chart turnover rates during various periods. American pop favourite the Twist was written and originally released in 1958 by Hank Ballard and the Midnighters as a B-side to Teardrops on Your Letter. It was a moderate hit but did not receive cult success until Chubby Checker released a cover version in July 1960. The song went on to become the only single to top the Billboard Hot 100 twice, in two separate chart runs. The singer, now 80, still performs around the US. Meanwhile, the Beatles continue to defend their No 1 ranking on Billboard‘s Greatest of All-Time Hot 100 Artists chart with a record 20 No 1 singles on the weekly Hot 100, among their 34 top 10s. Madonna ranks second with 38 Hot 100 top 10s.Getting behind First Nations businesses and communities is a meaningful way to spend your money this Black Friday and beyond – and there are plenty to buy from online. Between 2006 and 2016, the number of Indigenous-identifying businesses grew by 72%, to 11,587 (although even after this rise, First Nations people still owned only about 0.8% of Australian businesses, despite making up 3.3% of the population). Ninety-nine percent of First Nations businesses are small to medium enterprises. When you support them, your dollar does so much more than provide revenue. Investing in an Indigenous-owned business creates jobs for the First Nations people, who are employed in higher proportions in First Nations businesses than in others. Spending money on these businesses has positive consequences for the health, social and emotional wellbeing, and living standards of families and communities. The annual AIATSIS Indigenous Art Market moved online in 2020. Photograph: AIATSIS. However, it’s important to note that not all Indigenous products come from First Nations-owned businesses, and sometimes artwork may have been used without permission or may have not been credited correctly to the owner. If you want to support First Nations-owned businesses, here are a few tips to help you make an informed decision. Find out who they are Checking if a business is First Nations-owned can be tricky, as you won’t find a First Nations equivalent of the Made in Australia kangaroo or a star rating system to guide you. But it’s worth taking the time to do your own research. Ask yourself these questions: Does the About Us section of the website say who the founders and business owners are? Do other First Nations people promote the brand or products on social media? Does the brand support other Blak businesses (in the products it sells or the businesses with which it partners)? If you’re not happy with the answers, take a look at some of the many other reputable businesses out there instead. Seek out Indigenous businesses – in your backyard and online Trading Blak is an Aboriginal-run platform for 100% First Nations-owned businesses. Co-founder Kiya Watt says shopping through marketplaces such as this is one way you can buy from an Aboriginal business with confidence. “We as a nation need to come together and commit to investing in authentic Aboriginal-owned businesses,” Watt says. “We’ve done the work for you so you can shop with confidence knowing all Trading Blak businesses are First Nations owned and led.” About half of Australia’s First Nations businesses are registered with Supply Nation – an organisation working towards its vision of a prosperous and sustainable Indigenous business sector. If a brand is listed on Supply Nation’s Indigenous Business Direct, it has gone through a verification process. This process takes place every year to ensure businesses meet strict eligibility criteria, including that Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander people own at least 50% of the business. Designs by Andrew Snelgar (Ngemba), Burrgal-Woganurra, 2021, featured in the online South-East Aboriginal Arts Markets. Welcome to Country is a social enterprise that offers products and experiences with the purpose of addressing employment and economic development outcomes in First Nations communities. The majority Aboriginal-owned board and shareholders don’t take profits from sales, but pass them on to support their purpose. Offline, if you’re lucky enough to have a First Nations market nearby, that can be an ideal place to build in-person relationships with business owners. Blak Markets, for example, takes place in La Perouse, Sydney, on 5 December. A couple of markets that usually take place in the real world have gone online only this year, including AIATSIS Indigenous Arts Market (26 November to 5 December) and South-East Aboriginal Arts Markets (25-28 November). Follow #BuyBlak In time for Black Friday, Meta is encouraging people to use the #BuyBlak hashtag to discover Blak business and to shop thoughtfully this gifting season – an initiative that Black Coffee founder and Facebook trainer Leesa Watego can get behind. “#BuyBlak is a wonderful initiative started from Aboriginal led businesses and supported by Meta, as it inspires those who have never considered Indigenous-owned business before to firstly recognise that Indigenous business is alive and thriving and to showcase the amazing range of products and services out there,” she says. “There are Indigenous businesses of every shape, across every industry, in every region of Australia.” Searching #BuyBlak is a good way to find brands to get behind – but be sure to still do your due diligence. Buy products that mean something to you What you choose to buy is an expression of your commitment to reconciliation and continuing the world’s oldest living cultures. If you’re a non-Indigenous person Watt recommends using good sense to ensure the purchase is appropriate, giving the example of slogan T-shirts and jewellery on which taglines may specifically apply to Indigenous communities. “I’ve found that most Aboriginal-owned brands will state if a product is either ‘Ally’, for non-Aboriginal buyers, or ‘For Mob’, for Aboriginal buyers,” she says. Buying mindfully is always an important consideration. Watego says: “In this world of reducing our footprint, purchase products you really love and will use. This particularly relates to art – buy the art you love and will enjoy.” It comes down to positive impact. “The thing that I look for is legacy,” Watego says. “A commitment to leaving something behind that benefits the community.” #BuyBlak Friday is coming to Australia – an opportunity to discover and shop with First Nations-owned businesses. To discover more First Nations-owned businesses, search #BuyBlak on Facebook or Instagram.Authorities may never know exactly what caused an outbreak that has made at least a hundred people ill and shuttered the Coffin Bay oyster industry. Most states and territories have reported gastro cases from Vibrio parahaemolyticus, an infection that has been pinpointed in Pacific oysters from the famous South Australian area. A total recall of the oysters has been issued, and Coffin Bay farms will stay closed at least until next week. Found in raw and undercooked shellfish, Vibrio can cause diarrhoea, vomiting, abdominal pain, fever and headache, and is riskier for the elderly and people with compromised immune systems. It is common in oysters, which are filter feeders that pick it up from the surrounding water. Highly pathogenic strains of the bacteria have emerged in the last decade, and they are spreading further around the world because of climate change. SA’s primary industries and regions department is working with the industry to assess the full extent and impact of the closures and is testing the oysters and environment while the farms are closed. PIRSA’s executive director of biosecurity, Nathan Rhodes, said the department was also working with a program to require growers to rapidly reduce the temperature of oysters after harvest, to reduce the likelihood of Vibrio bacteria being present. While investigations are ongoing, he said, PIRSA may not be able to pinpoint the exact cause of the outbreak. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Food Standards Australia New Zealand said the food-borne illness has been detected in SA, New South Wales, the Australian Capital Territory, Queensland, Victoria, the Northern Territory and Western Australia, with people ill from eating raw oysters that were either fresh or had been frozen. While it had confirmed Coffin Bay as the source, the cause was still being investigated, it said in a statement. “Consumers are advised not to eat raw Pacific oysters from Coffin Bay, including fresh and frozen products,” it said. “Any consumers concerned about their health should seek medical advice. Consumers should dispose of the oysters or return the oysters to the place of purchase for a full refund.” There had been at least 36 cases of Vibrio in SA, 17 in WA, 31 in Victoria, 15 in NSW, and two in the ACT. SA authorities were investigating whether climate change was a factor in the outbreak. The SA Oyster Growers Association executive officer, Lynlee Lowe, said last week they were examining “highly unusual environmental conditions … not been seen before in SA, which have coincided with this outbreak”. “[There have been] strange weather patterns, unusual ocean currents, ocean water [temperatures] for this time of year,” she said. The World Health Organization has already warned that Vibrio has spread in response to climate change. In August it reported that in the past decade a highly pathogenic strain of Vibrio had “caused infections in new areas and in regions where these diseases have not been observed before”. “(And), in response to climate change, there has been a significant geographical spread …” Infections were now being observed in parts of the US, Spain and South America where they had not been before, it reported. In the US, where there are about a hundred deaths from Vibrio every year (including other strains), the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention warns that neither alcohol, nor hot sauce, not lemon juice will make infected oysters safe. It says cooking them properly kills the bacteria – but the advice in Australia for Coffin Bay oysters, for now, is not to eat them at all. While the SA oyster market is suffering, Australia’s biggest market says it will have plenty of oysters available for Christmas. The NSW Farmers oyster committee chair, Todd Graham, said after sales lulls during Covid, NSW growers had plenty of mature stock on hand. “NSW oyster growers have had a few very challenging years with impacts (from) bushfires, floods and Covid, but our oysters are safe, delicious and readily available, so support your local growers especially this Christmas,” he said. While most Vibrio cases are from oysters, it can be caught from other shellfish and can even infect open wounds in water where the bacteria is present.Ash Barty is a Wimbledon champ, one of only a handful of female tennis players to close their year as world number one three years in a row. She’s just announced her engagement and it’s a major news story. Why? Her being famous is only half of it. The other half is that Ash Barty is nice, her fiance is nice – and for two nice and famous people, the whole announcement comes across as refreshingly unpretentious. It’s now been the coronavirus year 2020 for two years and as we close out our own 2021s on a wary, wise but almost optimistic note, signs are the folks at home are seizing at the unpretentious more than ever. Sure, Barty’s engagement to trainee golf professional Garry Kissick was announced on Instagram – she is only 25 (only 25!) and that’s how the young people do it now, whether they’re super nice sporting folk or monstrous pop-culture ego-creatures smeared in photo filters and goo. What is uncommon – especially on Instagram – are images of the famous and aspirational that don’t look aggressively glamorised, posed and inert, captioned with trite cliches pretending to be great philosophy, selling stuff. Barty and her feller just look like two young people in love, unafraid to smile like their real selves because they’re just into one another. Friends, I love it. I’m into it. I’ve been in since my mother demanded I watch the rerun highlights of Barty’s now-fiance embracing her in the wake of her Wimbledon win. “He’s just so proud of her, like nothing else exists in the world,” said Mum. And Mum smiled, and because she smiled, I smiled, and a good feeling suffused the room that maybe a generational change has crept up among the young people in which partnership really does mean partnership, and modern men aren’t intimidated by high-achieving women in their lives. What Mum and I saw in that image was – finally – a man showing up to a woman’s triumph and not making it all about him. This gendered context to the new I’ve-spent-the-past-two-years-in-tracksuit-pants unpretentiousness theme that’s bubbling through other parts of the culture, goes far beyond the sporting couple’s happy snaps. I’ve written before about how the enforced proximity of lockdowns has led to the phenomenon of pandemic divorces, but the relationship evaluations going on aren’t only retrospective. One of the most popular streaming titles on Netflix right now is Lovehard – a cliched Christmas romcom that some of the world’s best critics hated and yet may indeed mark a radical turning point in the culture. The male romantic hero in this film is no less than actor and comedian Jimmy O Yang from Space Force, whose shy and lovelorn character is a soft-spoken nerd who competes for the heroine’s love with a buff, outdoorsy type. Yang’s character is not the first nerd to find himself in such a contest, but for said nerd to win the girl without a makeover or proving he can out-thump the other guy says much about the evolving expectations of women regarding what makes their best heterosexual match. Amid the threadbare tropes of the romantic catfish premise, the film asks the important contemporary question; what’s more useful to you in a partner – a rare beauty with the good judgment to discern when to console and when to urge on … or the Instagram-ready cut lump of junk whose key skill is bobsledding? A debate in the film about the superiority of Love, Actually or Die Hard as a Christmas movie makes a sly offer to the audience that it’s when we’re ready to outgrow the aggressively confected masculine/feminine stereotypes of culture we stand our best chance of creating love stories with genuinely happy endings. To my mind, it’s this complementary couple energy that radiates through the Barty engagement photos, and why their image has such purchase on the popular romantic mind. Congratulations on your engagement, Ash and Garry. I wish you crazy kids the best of luck. Van Badham is a columnist for Guardian AustraliaAn 11-year-old Aboriginal boy died when he was electrocuted in a home that had not been properly maintained or inspected for more than 25 years by the Northern Territory government-owned corporation responsible, a coroner has found. Rory Wauchope-Dirdi was found dead by his family in October 2020 after he tried to climb into his uncle’s house through a gap between a metal mesh wall and the roof which was live with 240 volts caused by a faulty connection and no earthing. His aunty had dropped him off to collect his mobile phone which he’d left behind after playing video games with his uncle the night before, the coroner heard. Investigators were initially unable to say what caused Rory’s death. But when his older brother tried to climb the mesh and received a strong shock, police organised for an electrician to inspect the house. The electrician found the metal roof had 240 volts running through it. NT coroner Greg Cavanagh was scathing of the Power and Water Corporation’s maintenance regime for the house and other homes in the boy’s small community of Gunbalanya, 300km east of Darwin. “It has no records of connecting the premises,” he found on Wednesday. “The corporation does not have a certificate of compliance they say would have been provided to them before connecting the premises. They are unable to say when the electricity was connected or who connected it. They are unable to say whether anyone from their organisation or otherwise has returned to properly inspect the cables and the connection to the premises in the last 25 years. “The Power and Water Corporation had no systems to check that the connection was completed to Australian standards or for the inspection and maintenance of the cables and connections to properties in remote communities.” The coroner said such an inspection and maintenance regime would “likely” have prevented Rory’s death. Cavanagh noted the Demed Aboriginal corporation was responsible for maintaining the house, including the electrical installation, and that the riser pole and roof weren’t earthed. The Wauchope-Dirdi family told the court they believed Demed had accepted responsibility for its part in the death. “Its staff and management team are also no doubt highly affected by this death,” they told the coroner. Rory’s uncle, who lived in the home, was working for Demed delivering supplies to an outstation community when the 11-year-old died. Cavanagh said it was not an isolated incident and electrical hazards had been identified in other remote communities the corporation was responsible for. He cited the case of a home in Alice Springs where a dog was killed after it walked onto the concrete pad of a power pole. Its owners received electric shocks trying to save the dog. During the inquest, Cavanagh received an anonymous letter from a person claiming to be a corporation employee, who provided photos and described four other incidents caused by a lack of inspection or maintenance. The coroner recommended the corporation ensure regular inspection and maintenance and that it be recorded and audited. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Power and Water corporation on Wednesday said it extended its heartfelt condolences to Rory’s family, friends and community. It said it was working through the detail of the coroner’s report and would “make further improvements in line with his recommendations”. “Safety is an absolute fundamental of the service we provide customers across the Northern Territory and the entire Power and Water team has been devastated by this incident,” a spokesperson said. The boy’s family said through their lawyer they were taking time to consider the coroner’s findings. In statements to the court, they said Rory was the much-loved fifth child of Darlene Wauchope and Kingswood Dirdi. “He was a much-loved member of his extended family and popular among his friends. As a young man, he was protective of his sisters and cared for his mother. “He was a happy-go-lucky boy who was a very fast runner and good at sports. He loved basketball, football and bike riding and was a good hunter. He attended school every day and was said to be very bright.” The family said Rory understood his kinship and cultural obligations and respected his elders. “At the age of 11 he had already shown his prowess in hunting by spearing a Queenfish off the beach on Croker Island. His skin name was Bulany and he was buried with full ceremonial honours in accordance with his people’s ancient traditions.” Lawyer Sean Bowden told the court the family wanted to see real change so such a tragedy did not happen again. “One death of a child in circumstances such as this is enough. Darlene and her family are dealing with grief that will never leave them and their wish is that no other family ever loses a child in the terrible circumstances that they lost Rory,” Bowden said.Former Sydney nanny Adriana Rivas has lost another appeal against her extradition to Chile to face charges of aggravated kidnapping, allegedly committed during the reign of military dictator Augusto Pinochet. Rivas is facing seven counts of aggravated kidnapping relating to the disappearance, and presumed murder, of seven members of Chile’s communist party, including its leader, Victor Diaz, who disappeared in 1976. Chilean authorities allege Rivas was a member of the shadowy Lautaro Brigade and involved in the torture and disappearance of political opponents of the Pinochet dictatorship. Rivas’s legal team has fought her extradition for more than two years, arguing the allegations against her were “political” and therefore not extraditable. The 68-year-old, in prison in Sydney since her arrest in 2019, has now lost three court decisions in resisting her extradition. In October 2020, a Sydney magistrate ruled Rivas was eligible for extradition, a decision affirmed by a federal court judge in June 2021. Rivas appealed to the full bench of the federal court which, on Wednesday, also ruled she was eligible to be extradited. Justices Debra Mortimer, Robert Bromwich and Stewart Anderson said many of Rivas’s 17 grounds of appeal were irrelevant, in arguing the merits of the offences alleged against her. “Guilt or innocence forms no part of the international extradition process”, the justices said, “that will be a matter for the Chilean courts”. The Australian courts were required only to assess the validity of the extradition request. “The appellant is eligible for surrender.” Rivas’s lawyer Frank Santisi had argued Australian magistrates had failed to consider Chile’s 1978 Amnesty Law, enacted by decree by Pinochet to shield those suspected of committing human rights abuses. He argued the law “exists in Chile and there has been no act of parliament to remove it”. “What is happening in Chile is legally incorrect and Australia has the right not to act in the extradition request,” Santisi said. The argument was rejected by the bench. In 1998 Chile’s Supreme Court ruled the Amnesty Law should not apply to cases of human rights violations. Members of Pinochet’s administration, including members in the Lautaro Brigade, have been prosecuted, convicted and jailed, and Chilean prosecutors have used evidence from those matters to seek Rivas’s extradition. Rivas can still appeal to Australia’s high court, but must be granted leave by the court to do so. Rivas can also make submissions against her extradition to the commonwealth attorney-general, who will make the final decision on whether she should be surrendered to Chile. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Rivas has been living in Australia since 1978. She was living in the Sydney beachside suburb of Bondi, working as a nanny and a cleaner, before her arrest in February 2019. She had previously been arrested during a return visit to Chile but escaped and fled back to Australia. The families of the seven victims of Rivas’s alleged offences said her escape from Chile while on bail should be considered an aggravating factor if she is found guilty. “We demand that once she is extradited to Chile, Rivas remains in custody while the trial takes place and we hope the outcome will be an exemplary sentence given her conduct.” In Sydney, supporters of the families and members of Chile’s diaspora staged a vigil on the steps of the federal court. Rivas has consistently denied the allegations and maintained her duties within the National Intelligence Directorate, known by its Spanish acronym Dina, were purely administrative. But court documents from Chile’s appeal court provided to Australian courts as part of the extradition proceedings allege Rivas worked as an agent of Dina’s Lautaro Brigade after taking a course in intelligence. A minute from Chile’s interior ministry, cited in a 2020 magistrates court decision in the case, says the brigade was established to target members of the communist party which opposed Pinochet’s military regime. A Chilean police report, cited in the same judgement, alleges Rivas was a brigade member involved in the commission of “forced entries, detention, interrogations and application of torture”, all of which she denies. The report states the brigade used metal bunk beds rigged with electrical current and detainees were repeatedly shocked all over their bodies. Chile’s interior ministry wrote in court documents: “The premises were even used to develop advanced killing techniques such as the preparation of sarin gas. “They had a team of medical doctors checking the health condition of prisoners to decide if they could still stand torture. Dead bodies were burnt [on] their fingerprints and face with a welding torch; this was done inside the empty swimming pool. Then, the bodies were put inside sacks, tied-up with cables to a piece of railway beam and then thrown into the ocean by air force helicopters.” In 2013, as part of a documentary series marking 40 years since Pinochet’s ascension to power in a coup, Rivas granted an interview to SBS television. She said she had worked at the brigade’s headquarters but was not involved in interrogating detainees. “Not guilty. Not guilty. If I ... look, I never had the opportunity to be where the detainees were. Never, understand? All my work was as a secretary or security. Nothing more.” In the same interview, she confirmed the use of torture against opponents of the regime. “Everyone knew they had to do that to the people in order to break them because communists would not talk. It was necessary,” Rivas said.A Perrotet government proposal to allow management work in New South Wales national parks to generate biodiversity credits to compensate for habitat destruction caused by development elsewhere has been dropped amid a broader overhaul of the state’s national parks. That change, which the National Parks Association labelled an attempt at “statewide greenwashing”, was stripped out of the bill after negotiations between the government, opposition and crossbench. The NSW parliament has now passed the bill on laws governing the state’s national parks, which also introduced improvements to ecological monitoring and protection of environmentally sensitive areas across the parks system. Also removed was a proposal that would have given the environment minister greater powers to approve activities within parks – such as new visitor infrastructure – that were otherwise inconsistent with park management plans. The passage of the bill on Tuesday night means necessary changes to legislation to expand the Gardens of Stone national park can occur. Labor’s environment spokesperson, Penny Sharpe, said the decision to remove some of the more substantial proposed changes was a welcome one. She said stripping out the proposal to allow national parks to supply biodiversity offsets was appropriate at a time when the offsets scheme was subject to multiple inquiries as a result of a Guardian Australia investigation. “In its original form the national parks bill was a Trojan horse for far-reaching changes to the National Parks &amp; Wildlife Act that would give the minister unfettered power to allow development in national parks &amp; undermine biodiversity conservation across NSW,” she said. Changes to allow the minister to sell carbon credits in parks and reserves were passed but with amendments to make them subject to a review in two years. A plan to establish a fund to accept private donations for parks was also agreed, but with limitations on where the money can go. This ensures the fund does not become a means for funding day-to-day government work to run the conservation system. Cate Faehrmann, environment spokesperson for the NSW Greens, said the expansion of the Gardens of Stone national park was the result of decades of work by dedicated environmental campaigners. “Thankfully, the bill that passed the upper house removed the worst elements of the bill and finally saw the Gardens of Stone protected,” she said. “The bill in its original form revealed the Liberal party’s true agenda to commercialise our national parks. Thankfully, that agenda was stopped in its tracks.” The independent MP Justin Field said the government had listened to concerns about the initial bill. “We’ll end up with a far better outcome, securing the Gardens of Stone reservation, ensuring the integrity of national parks planning and creating a philanthropic fund with appropriate controls to garner public financial support for expanding and improving the parks network,” he said. Comment has been sought from the NSW environment minister Matt Kean.Yesterday it was “Please stay on the path”, a polite request on a charity nature reserve, duly obeyed. Twenty-four hours on, 10 miles away and a world apart, the inscription reads “Shut &amp; fasten gate”. Private estates do not ask; they demand. For at least 800 years, villagers have walked through the back entrance to Croxton Park in supplication. They have bowed, not to the landowner of the day, but to a higher authority, for the parish church of St James is located at the very heart of the estate. There is but one path to God here – every tempting offshoot from the drive is barred with “Keep out”, “Private” and “No entry” signs. It feels like old-style National Trust, with visitors expected to know their place. Today, a welcoming committee has assembled on the other side of the gate, peering at us from a short distance. Duly shut and fastened, we leave the gate behind and the curious sheep inch forward towards us over odd bumps and earthworks of grassy antiquity, until their high heels click-clack on the drive. Their dense, curly coats give these dark-coloured ryelands a koala-ish look. Cattle graze behind; beef shorthorns, with light brown flanks flaking like old paint to reveal creamy undercoats, and black-nosed English whites. No run-of-the mill Holstein Friesian milk machines here. Further along the cowpat-splatted, sheep-dunged drive, the grand Georgian house becomes visible over the fields, a Pride and Prejudice Pemberley, always out of reach. A cattle grid marks the transition to classic parkland. In the pasture, well-spaced veteran trees spread their branches down to cow muzzle height. The oldest oaks, however, have succumbed to age and their whalebone carcasses are strewn where they fell. Their prostrate trunks and limbs are a reminder that the preservation of continuity requires constant change. Where are the young and maturing oaks, the ancient trees for the 23rd century? The drive ends at the lychgate, a portal to the churchyard. A metal plaque bears the inscription “Please keep the gate shut”. And it is open. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryThe former New South Wales Liberal MP Michael Yabsley has spent his entire life since university touting for donations for the Liberal party. As a former federal treasurer of the Liberal party he knows a thing or two about the corroding influence of money on politics. Now he’s on a crusade to curtail the flow of money into Australian politics, and has devised a 10-point plan that he believes will bring greater transparency and integrity into politics. Yabsley’s plan is radical: a cap on donations of $200, only Australian citizens on the electoral roll permitted to donate and scrapping public funding combined with tight caps on election expenditure. He agrees the parties won’t like it but who better to design a new one than “a poacher turned gamekeeper” as he termed himself at the launch of his plan, Dark Money, which he is turning into a book. “It’s a bad culture, a flawed culture, and I have been part of it,” he said. But over the past few years he’s had time to reflect. “We can redefine the debate, explain the truth and with enough goodwill we can win the debate.” As an example of the corrupting influence of money on politics Yabsley singled out the business observer programs, which both major parties run at their national and state conferences. These were nothing more than “government for rent”, he said, “an unedifying exchange” where businesses were encouraged to pay for access to politicians and the politicians advertise themselves. For $20,000, businesses get to spend time with ministers who overlap with their interests in a kind of “speed dating”, he said. Yabsley was joined by another politician with personal expertise in political fundraising, the former NSW state secretary of the Labor party and former senator Stephen Loosley. While the two men do not agree on the detail of the solution, Loosley said he fully supported a debate on reform and “a retrieval of trust” in the parliamentary system. While Yabsley is in favour of scrapping public funding altogether, Loosley said he would prefer to take the private money out of politics and keep public funding. “Democracy doesn’t run on thin air and candidates are faced with temptation at all times,” he said. They also disagreed on the need for $200 donations to be reported publicly. Yabsley argued it was too small an amount to influence any politicians, but Loosley was concerned it would give rise to the US phenomenon of bundlers – political operatives who rounded up smaller donors in the name of a particular interest group. He also warned that with donation reform in the US had come the development of political action committees, or Pacs, which have become more important than parties themselves in funding campaigns. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Similarly, bans on foreign donations in the US had led to foreign money washing through thinktanks, which play an important role in shaping political debate, Loosley said. “There’s no point in focusing on parties. We need to be broader,” he said. Loosley warned that trying to sever ties between the ALP and trade unions as part of political donations reform would not be acceptable to the Labor party. “That dog won’t hunt,” he said. “Organised labour was deeply entwined with the party and no one would support trying to undo those ties.” The former NSW supreme court judge and the chair of the Centre for Public Integrity, Anthony Whealy, also did not support allowing $200 donations to be anonymous. “Our political masters have been captured by a flood of money coming from industry,” he said, pointing to the resources sector, which contains major donors, had appeared to have lobbied on the Coalition’s plans for a gas-led recovery as the partial solution to Australia’s climate crisis. He said the federal system of donations, with its extraordinarily high disclosure threshold of $14,500, was the worst but disclosure and transparency were important in any system. Given the serious consequences of mistrust in the political system, Yabsley said he supported strong penalties including jail terms for people who breached electoral laws. Both Loosley and Yabsley agreed that laws needed to be uniform across the states and commonwealth to avoid exploiting of loopholes between systems.China’s government has accused Joe Biden of “a mistake” in inviting Taiwan to participate in a democracy summit alongside 109 other democratic governments. Taiwan was included in a list of participants for next month’s Summit for Democracy, published by the state department on Tuesday. Taiwan is a democracy and self-governing, but Beijing claims it is a province of China and has accused its government of separatism. The inaugural gathering is considered a test of Biden’s pledge that he would return the US to a position asserting global leadership to challenge authoritarian forces led by China and Russia. Neither is included in the virtual summit, scheduled for 9 and 10 December. On Wednesday, Zhu Fenglian, spokeswoman for China’s Taiwan Affairs Office, said the inclusion of Taiwan was a “mistake” and Beijing opposed “any official interaction between the US and China’s Taiwan region”. “This stance is clear and consistent. We urge the US to stick to the ‘one China’ principle and the three joint communiques,” she said. The US’s ‘one China’ policy acknowledges that Beijing claims Taiwan as a province but does not say it recognises the claim. Since taking office, Biden and the White House have reiterated long-standing US support for its “one China” policy, which officially recognises Beijing rather than Taipei, but also said the US “strongly opposes unilateral efforts to change the status quo or undermine peace and stability across the Taiwan Strait”. A spokesman for Taiwan’s presidential office thanked Biden for the summit invitation, and said they would be “a force for good in international society”. “Taiwan will cooperate firmly with like-minded countries to protect universal values such as freedom, democracy and human rights; and also safeguard regional peace, stability and development,” said the spokesman, Xavier Chang. During a virtual summit with Biden last week, China’s leader, Xi Jinping, said Beijing would have “no alternative but to take drastic measures” if their “red lines” were crossed. In August China’s state media tabloid the Global Times warned against inviting Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, to the summit, and said the US should use the Apec model, presumably in referring to Taiwan as “Chinese Taipei”. The editorial said failure to do so would be a “severe escalation” which would not be tolerated by Beijing. Bonnie Glaser, director of the Asia Program at the German Marshall Fund of the United States, said Chinese experts had been told Taiwan would be invited, and the main question was who would represent Taiwan. “I’m really not sure if Beijing’s bottom line is simply that Tsai not be allowed to participate,” said Glaser. “But she won’t be invited, so maybe they can tell their domestic audience that the US backed down in the face of Chinese pressure.” The event will bring together democracies such as France and Sweden but also countries such as the Philippines, India and Poland, where activists say democracy is under threat. The announcement came shortly after the Stockholm-based International Institute for Democracy and Electoral Assistance released a report saying the US also “fell victim to authoritarian tendencies itself, and was knocked down a significant number of steps on the democratic scale”, Bloomberg reported.The rate of Australian couples getting married suffered a historic fall last year amid the Covid pandemic, while the country also recorded fewer deaths than expected from medical conditions in the first half of 2020. In the first glimpse into how Covid affected couples across the country, new data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics revealed 2020 saw the largest annual decrease in marriages ever recorded. Just 78,989 marriages were registered in Australia in 2020, which is a 30.6% decrease from 2019. While the total number of marriages was well down, nearly 80,000 couples still managed to make it official. Melbourne marriage celebrant Zena Lythgo and three of her friends started I Do Weddings in March 2020. They specialised in Covid-safe micro weddings, which included drive-through nuptials where the couple stayed in the car, when restrictions were really strict. “Our whole business model started on the back of the lockdowns, at that stage you could get married with just two witnesses. Within two months we had sites in every state,” Lythgo said. “There was a demand for a simple, safe way to get married.” She said she wasn’t surprised by the low numbers, but that people were certainly making up for it now. “I’ve done 19 weddings in three weeks. “It’s very nice to be really focused and busy again after such a slow time. The vibe is so high, everyone is happy to be there.” While marriages dropped, the rate of divorce remained relatively the same – with 49,510 couples finalising their separation, a small increase of 1.9% from 2019. Because couples have to generally separate for 12 months before they divorce, any notable impact on the divorce rate will probably not be reflected for some years, the ABS said. ABS director of Health and Vital Statistics, James Eynstone-Hinkins, said on top of a dramatic drop in nuptials, 2020 also had the lowest number of marriage registrations reported since 1961. “Marriage numbers fell in late March as lockdowns, restrictions on gatherings and travel bans impacted marriage plans, with numbers then remaining low throughout winter and spring,” Eynstone-Hinkins said. “The largest decrease was for Victoria at 41.9% with the state also experiencing the longest period of Covid-19 restrictions, while marriage numbers in the Australian Capital Territory decreased the least, at just 12.7%.” The data also revealed the number of “excess deaths” has continued to sit below the 2015-19 average, as public health measures stopped the spread of other deadly diseases such as influenza. Last year researchers said they believed Australia had eliminated more than four types of influenza because of public health measures such as lockdowns, social distancing and mask-wearing. The latest mortality data shows that there were 1,437 deaths due to influenza and pneumonia recorded between January and August 2021, which is 682 deaths (32.2%) lower than the 2015-19 average. Director of health and vital statistics at ABS Lauren Moran said the number of “excess deaths” in Australia dropped in 2020 because of public health measures, and the data showed that trend has continued into the first half of 2021. “It was very low in 2020, because we didn’t have influenza, and respiratory disease, they all went down, so that has continued this year,” Moran said. “Australia has maintained a low mortality rate since the start of the pandemic.”Little expense has been spared at the giant glass and steel structure that sprouts from a once-vacant plot of land on the outskirts of Cambridge. AstraZeneca’s £1bn new research and development centre houses 16 labs and 2,200 scientists, making it the biggest science lab in Britain along with the Francis Crick Institute in London, and the pharmaceutical company’s biggest single site investment to date. Designed by the Swiss architects Herzog &amp; de Meuron, the Discovery Centre (Disc) covers an area the size of eight football pitches, and is part of Europe’s biggest biomedical cluster. Cambridge University, two hospitals and hundreds of research institutions and biotech firms are nearby. The building is flooded with natural light, captures its heat from the ground beneath, and its toilets are flushed with rain water. In one of the labs, a blob the size of a pinhead is on display – a beating mini-heart used to test all new medicines for their safety and impact on the heart. On the next bench, scientists Kainat Khan and Mark Anderton have developed “bone marrow on a chip” that assesses the toxicity and side-effects of cancer drugs, to help clinicians mitigate the impact by modifying the dose, for example. It is just the sort of investment that politicians are desperate to attract to Britain. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, used his Conservative party conference speech last month to paint a vision of Britain as a “science superpower”. AstraZeneca became a household name during the pandemic when it teamed up with the University of Oxford to develop a Covid-19 vaccine and supplied it at cost around the world, although it has recently begun signing commercial contracts to supply the jab next year as the virus enters its “endemic” stage. Kwasi Kwarteng, the business secretary, attended the Cambridge centre’s opening on Tuesday, together with Prince Charles and AstraZeneca’s chief executive, Pascal Soriot, and chairman, Leif Johansson. Yet it could all have been so different. Almost exactly eight years ago to the day, Johansson received a phone call from Ian Read, chief executive of US rival Pfizer, who told him he wanted to discuss a merger between the two companies. Only intense political pressure – and Pfizer’s miscalculation of the fallout – allowed the Anglo-Swedish company to fend off the unwanted £69bn approach and in May 2014 Pfizer walked away. AstraZeneca had the backing of the government, the public and Britain’s scientific community, but then had to prove to everyone that it could stand on its own feet. Soriot, who has run the company since 2012, said during the takeover battle that a deal would jeopardise lives by delaying the development of life-saving cancer drugs. Read dismissed this a “red herring” but admitted the acquisition would lead to job cuts and reduced research spending. Susan Galbraith, who leads oncology R&amp;D at AstraZeneca, is blunt about the benefits of being an independent company. “This is about our commitment to not just the next two to three to four years but about the next 20 to 30 to 40 years of science and R&amp;D as the heart of the company,” she says. “I’m very happy that we remain an independent company, able to deliver against that vision and that mission.” Disc is one of AstraZeneca’s three main R&amp;D centres, alongside those in Gaithersburg in Maryland in the US and Gothenburg in Sweden. Soriot had already picked the plot himself and the site was acquired in 2013, but few think Pfizer would have gone ahead with the investment if it had bought the UK drugmaker. “We’ve moved a long way since those days but you have to earn your independence and that’s what we’re in the business of doing,” says Galbraith. Susannah Streeter, senior investment and markets analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, says: “It seems unlikely that if Pfizer had been successful in its bid to take over AstraZeneca in 2014 that plans of this magnitude would have even been put forward let alone carried through. “Its likely expansion would have centred not in Cambridge, England but in Cambridge, Massachusetts, where Pfizer’s global therapeutic centre is based, with a focus on rare diseases and immunology, an increasingly important part of the portfolio. The aim is to create the densest biomedical community in the world – so it’s likely the two Cambridge sites will continue to be rivals in the pharmaceutical race, with Moderna also based in the city just outside Boston.” After fighting off Pfizer, Soriot, a scientist who previously worked at the Swiss drugmaker Roche and at Genentech in San Francisco, set about rebuilding AstraZeneca’s threadbare drug portfolio, to replace blockbuster medicines where patents were expiring, including the cholesterol drug Crestor. The company is pumping £7bn into R&amp;D every year, equivalent to 22% of sales, one of the highest proportions among pharmaceutical firms. “There is a core belief that science and R&amp;D is the future of the company,” says Galbraith. Over in west London, where AstraZeneca’s big UK rival GlaxoSmithKline is based, they have belatedly learned that lesson. After years of cutting research spending, GSK’s chief executive Emma Walmsley has boosted R&amp;D spending, but GSK is still lagging AstraZeneca and other rivals. AstraZeneca at one point, in April 2020, became the biggest FTSE 100 firm, and is now worth £132bn versus GSK’s £77bn. Soriot’s motto is “we follow the science,” and Galbraith echoes this when she talks about “understanding the science that’s driving the disease”. “We’re focused on the quality, the right patient selection is a core part of that.” She recalls how Lynparza for ovarian cancer, which has contributed to AstraZeneca’s turnaround, was almost discontinued. “Now it’s a really big drug for us because identified the right patients to treat.” Similarly, Tagrisso, for non-small cell lung cancer, targets a specific mutation and has become one of its top sellers, and is the fastest medicine it ever developed. Overall, since 2005 the company has achieved an almost six-fold improvement in the proportion of molecules that make it from pre-clinical investigation to completion of late-stage clinical trials, from 4% to 23%, well above the industry success rate of 14%. This has led to a better financial performance, and the company is on track to achieve its $40bn (£30bn) sales target, set out in 2014 at the height of the takeover battle, by 2022 – a year earlier than expected.Earlier this year, Manchester city council declared ambitions to become a pedestrian paradise. “We want walking to be the main way people get around the city centre,” proclaimed the town hall’s transport plan. “Pavements and public spaces will be high quality, well-maintained, green and accessible – catering for everyone, no matter what their age or mobility.” Yet this autumn, 86 mysterious grey boxes were plonked on pavements across the city which did pretty much the opposite. Measuring more than a metre across, the metal monoliths obstructed the footway, failing what transport engineers call “the double buggy test” while upsetting wheelchair users and aesthetes alike. Mancunians, who normally like to pick a side, were unusually unanimous: they hated the boxes. They were not placated when the council stuck big labels on the front explaining that they were temporary features “as part of the installation of upgraded digital advertising displays”. The boxes, apparently, were covers to protect the wiring as the new hoardings were hooked up to the mains. On Monday night one crusading resident decided to stage a pedestrian fightback. Armed with a stack of paper and some wallpaper paste, they stuck fly-posters on at least 30 of the advertising boxes. Some drew on Manchester’s radical history by updating a Suffragette slogan to point out the chasm between the council’s rhetoric and its actions. “Words: ‘Walking will be the main way of getting round the city’; Deeds: ‘Fuck you pedestrians, here’s a big grey box.’” read one. Another simply said: “Fuck these stupid boxes.” Poetry it was not. But this act of revenge quickly drew approval not just from Mancunians but pedestrians around the country who feel they are fighting a losing battle over pavement space. Whether it is electric car charging cables acting as trip wires, alfresco cafe tables or plain old antisocial parking making walking a nightmare, there is an increasing resentment about the encroachment of clutter on pavements – particularly at a time when the government is trying to get more people out of their cars and on to two feet or two wheels. Tom Brooke, a 32-year-old nurse, was taking photos of one of the boxes in Piccadilly Gardens on Tuesday to show his friends “because they look ridiculous”. He doesn’t drive and likes to walk: “They are in the way and what is the point of more advertisements? We already have a lot of advertisements in the city already,” he said. Nadia Kerr, a solicitor who specialises in representing cyclists after accidents, said that while riding her bike recently she nearly crashed into a pedestrian who had stepped into the road to avoid the grey box of doom. “I was sympathetic to her options, although she ought to have looked before stepping into the cycle lane,” she said. “Street clutter is a real issue and needs good planning just like any other public realm.” Bev Craig, who next week will become leader of Manchester city council, said she could understand the allegations of hypocrisy but that the advertising earned the cash-strapped local authority £2.5m in rent each year – plus “between a couple of hundred thousand and half a million profit annually”. Turning down £3m was not easy at a time when the council has had to cut £40.7m from next year’s budget after 11 years of government cuts, she added. Of the 86 sites, 81 had been home to old backlit paper advertising columns and units for 20 years, a council spokesperson said. Planning was granted for the upgrades after taking into account “highway safety for each individual unit as well as the historic impact of their placement, including how pedestrians move on the highway”. Chris Boardman, the Olympic cyclist turned travel commissioner for Greater Manchester, said: “Councils are dealing with competing demands, and one of them is the dire need to raise funds. Advertising in public spaces is a reasonable way to meet that need. But I don’t believe it must or should be at the cost of those traveling on foot. “To help everyone, there needs to be an overarching plan that ensures all departments involved in looking after our streets know that pedestrians don’t just need to be accommodated, they need to be valued and prioritised. I think with minimal imagination and strong political leadership, it’s perfectly possible and practical to achieve both outcomes.” Stephen Edwards, interim CEO of Living Streets, the walking charity, said: “Our pavements should be wide enough for everyone to pass each other easily. When footways are blocked, it forces people into the carriageway and into traffic. Our research shows that people are more likely to get out and support their local economy when their streets are clutter-free.”Well-known universities, including Exeter, Bristol, Oxford and Cambridge, were found to have done the least to help those from the lowest-income households, in analysis by the Institute for Fiscal Studies (IFS) that for the first time ranks higher education institutions in England by their contribution to social mobility. The research comes as the government details new measures that would compel universities in England to improve the performance of local schools and pupils, and to do more to help their graduates find rewarding careers. The IFS study found that Oxbridge and other highly selective universities admit so few people from disadvantaged backgrounds that their impact is far outweighed by other institutions recruiting low-income students in greater numbers and helping them into higher paid careers after graduation. Queen Mary University of London (QMUL) is the sole example of a member of the Russell Group of leading universities with an outstanding record in both admitting a high proportion of students who had received free school meals and boosting their career prospects. Prof Colin Bailey, the principal of QMUL, said he was “incredibly proud” of the achievement by staff and students. “Recruiting students from backgrounds typically under-represented at universities, and supporting them to succeed, is at the heart of everything we stand for as a university,” Prof Bailey said. The IFS examined the school, university and workforce history of nearly 1 million young people in England who took GCSE exams between 2002 and 2006, and tracked their careers until around the age of 30. From the data it constructed a social mobility index, using the proportion of disadvantaged young people admitted to a university or course and their later progression into a job in the top 20% of earnings. “Despite having very high success rates, we see that the elite institutions do very poorly in terms of mobility rates, as they let in so few low-income students. Instead, low- to mid-ranking institutions, often based in London, are the best performers in terms of mobility,” the IFS said. The University of Westminster admitted 22% of students who had previously been on free school meals, with one in four going on to well-paid jobs, giving it one of the highest social mobility ratings of 5.6%. In contrast, Bristol university admitted only 1.2% of pupils previously on free school meals – meaning that despite more than 40% progressing to highly paid careers, its rating was 0.4%. The IFS calculated the average mobility rate across all universities in England to be 1.3%, which it said was “well below our benchmark rate of 4.4%, the rate you would get if there were equal access to university for all income groups”. The figures also showed that high average graduate earnings did not equate to improved social mobility. “It is plausible that policies that restrict funding for low-returning courses could come at a cost in terms of social mobility,” the IFS noted, in reference to rumours that the government was looking to cut funding for courses based on graduate incomes. The Sutton Trust, which helped produce the research, said it showed universities can be powerful vehicles for social mobility, and that graduates from disadvantaged backgrounds are much more likely to end up as a high earner than those who don’t go to university. Sir Peter Lampl, the trust’s founder, said universities should “give young people from low income backgrounds a break on the grades they need to get in, as their grades, in many cases, do not reflect their potential”. Michelle Donelan, the universities minister for England, will unveil new efforts to involve higher education in offering tutoring and summer schools for all local pupils. The government also wants a greater emphasis on universities helping their graduates find skilled employment, and more support for any students in danger of dropping out. “We need to send a message to every disadvantaged young person thinking about higher education that they will have the support through school, college and university to get there and achieve a positive outcome,” Donelan will say. The Department for Education has also named John Blake, a former teacher who is currently a policy director for the Ark schools multi-academy trust, as the new director for fair access and participation at the Office for Students.A giant metal shed in Somerset is alive with the chirps of more than 17,000 three-day-old chicks. The yellow balls of fluff are still adjusting to their new home. When one breaks into a run, dozens more follow. They move like leaves blown around a town square. “They’re not all named!” says Simon Barton, raising his voice above the din. Chicks climb over our boots, pecking at everything in search of food. We shuffle rather than walk lest we squash one. Barton, a former TV engineer, quit the BBC 25 years ago to move here with his wife, Karen, a nurse. The couple took over and grew Karen’s father’s chicken farm not far from the Quantock Hills. They now produce more than a million birds a year. The chicks arrived two days ago in a lorry from a huge hatchery. In the next six or seven weeks, they will multiply in weight 45 times to reach their target of 2.4kg (5lb 5oz). The broilers, as meat chickens are known (“layers” lay eggs), will then be trucked to a poultry processor and on to customers including Sainsbury’s. Right now Barton has 197,000 chicks across several sheds. The one I’m in is the length of a jumbo jet. It sounds like a lot of birds. It looks like a lot. Yet in the UK we eat 17,000 chickens – the number I’m looking at in this one shed – every nine minutes. We consume more than 1bn broilers a year. Later, sitting in his modest home office, Barton looks at the Sainsbury’s prices for whole chickens like his. “So, they do a medium bird for £3.50,” he says, running a finger over a page in his diary, where he occasionally scribbles numbers from supermarket websites. He looks up at me. “That’s the price of a latte.” Animal welfare organisations have long criticised a complex supply chain that has grown into a stunningly efficient beast of protein production. Advances in breeding and nutrition along with basic economies of scale have slashed prices. Now the industry itself is asking questions about the fraught chickenomics of the £3 broiler. Last month, in an intervention that made headlines, Britain’s typically shy “chicken king” called for a “reset” on pricing. It was perhaps surprising because Ranjit Singh Boparan is arguably the chief architect of the industry. As the UK’s biggest poultry supplier, his 2 Sisters Food Group processes more than 10m birds a week, including all of Barton’s broilers. “How can it be right that a whole chicken costs less than a pint of beer?” Boparan asked in a press release under the headline “Food’s great reset”. The effects of Brexit, the pandemic and soaring costs were “decaying the food sector’s supply-chain infrastructure”, he said, warning that shoppers face a “different world” in which they pay more. Labour, heat, electricity, packaging and the carbon dioxide used in processing and packing are all more expensive. The price of chicken feed, which accounts for 70% of Barton’s costs, is up 15%. A poultry plant in Yorkshire last month reported that the three tonnes of offal it normally sells each week was going in the skip because there was no one to process it. The British Poultry Council tells me Brexit cost the sector 15% of its workforce. Yet the cost of chicken in the meat aisle and on menus has so far remained pretty steady. At the time of writing, Tesco is selling a whole bird for £2.66, flagging it as an “Aldi price match”. Then there are all the processed products, from breast fillets to dippers and Tesco’s “meaty strips” for dogs, which contain “animal derivatives” including chicken. We have come to expect our most popular protein to be affordable. Low-income shoppers depend on it. “But we’ve run out of headroom,” says Barton, pushing his hands together to illustrate a squeeze. With the help of big loans, he has invested £1.5m in the farm in the past five years – all of it to maximise efficiencies and cling to profitability. The new shed he’s showing me, which is heated to a constant 32C (90F), cost almost £500,000 to build. “Everything’s pretty much down to the last penny now,” he adds. Barton, who is proud of what he does, is willing to show me what it takes – and costs – to grow affordable chicken. I want to know how we got here. What are the consequences for animal welfare and the environment, words that were notably absent from Boparan’s cri de coeur? And, if not £3, then what is a fair price for a chicken? In 1967, when the government started recording average chicken prices in the UK, a kilo cost 39p. In September this year, a kilo cost £2.76. Adjusting for inflation, that’s actually a huge price drop; 39p in 1967 would be £7.24 today. A medium broiler 50 years ago was about £11 in today’s prices. We can trace the decline to a small town in Maryland. In 1948, tens of thousands of fertilised eggs from across the US arrived at a farm for a competition to find the “chicken of tomorrow”. At the time, chickens were still reared primarily as egg layers. Male birds were a byproduct to be culled as chicks or reared as tasty but scrawny and barely profitable broilers. After the deprivations of war, the industry spied an opportunity to feed the world with bigger, better, cheaper, faster-growing chickens. After 12 weeks, the competition birds were slaughtered, weighed and judged. The winning bloodlines were interbred in what was the start of a revolution. It turned chickens into a science project, a plump commodity – and a fast-food staple. The UK played a big part in it. In 1956, a Scottish company called Chunky Chicks secured a licence for some of the genetic stock from the Maryland contest. Chunky Chicks was then acquired by the Ross Group, which is responsible for one of the world’s most popular broilers, the Ross 308. Meanwhile, in East Anglia, a US company called Cobb created the Cobb 500. The birds had lighter bones, bigger breasts, faster growth rates and smaller appetites for expensive feed. Cobb and Ross are now owned by, respectively, the US-headquartered food conglomerates Tyson and Aviagen (Aviagen is in turn owned by the secretive German billionaire Erich Wesjohann). They engineer and breed branded chicks with varying characteristics, selling these into the global industry of breeders and hatcheries. Cobb 700s, for example, are advertised for their “outstanding breast meat yield”. Ultimately about 90% of the world’s broilers are now Cobb or Ross birds. Chickens were well suited to this kind of forced evolution. “The generational gap is so fast, which means these two companies can change things really quickly,” says Emily Burton, a professor of sustainable food production at Nottingham Trent University and a poultry nutritionist. While their controversial use in the UK has declined, antibiotics were also vital in making giant sheds viable for huge flocks. As the industry grew, attracting big players and buyouts at every level of the chain, there was no stopping a meat that met few cultural or religious barriers to consumption. “But when you position yourself as the lowest-price commodity product, the only way is down,” says Burton. “The margins are too tight.” To reverse the decline, she adds: “You really have to reinvent yourself.” Until January this year, Liam Hodgson worked at Moy Park, a rival to 2 Sisters Food Group. In a poultry version of “poacher turned gamekeeper”, he then joined the RSPCA. As corporate outreach manager, he is now responsible for promoting chicken welfare. “A lot of the other charities were sceptical of me at first,” Hodgson, 28, tells me. The RSPCA has for decades challenged a rapacious business model. It is increasingly now working with the industry to find the next “chicken of tomorrow”. Hodgson sees opportunity in Boparan’s call for a reset. A squeezed supply chain may be the chicken king’s primary concern, but an appetite for change may also benefit animals that have endured 75 years of unnatural selection. The cheapest broilers can now reach slaughter weight in five weeks. Such gains in crowded sheds, where birds are denied the chance to peck, perch and explore, can strain hearts and legs, and harden muscle. Chicken faeces can cause lesions and ammonia burns on feet and legs. In the Netherlands, animal welfare groups call five-week broilers plofkip, which roughly translates as “exploded chicken”. Abattoirs can be ugly too. Exposure of bad practice, as well as high-profile welfare campaigns, have helped lift standards. But minimum requirements are still not exactly plush. Sheds in the UK can house no more than 39kg of bird a square metre. By the time they’re ready for processing, that’s the equivalent of about 16 fat chickens on a beach towel. In Somerset, Barton is at the forefront of a shift towards higher standards. He owns another farm, not far from the one he’s showing me, where chicks are stocked at a marginally roomier 38kg/m2, which meets standards for the Red Tractor assurance scheme. Red Tractor chickens must also have windows, and bales and logs for perching and pecking. The chicks I’m meeting are RSPCA Assured broilers. They are stocked at 30kg/m2 and are a different breed – Hubbard JA87 – that grow for a couple more weeks (Hubbard, a multinational hatchery, is part of Aviagen). They have more to peck at and perch on, although they are still reared indoors. Assured birds also meet the Better Chicken Commitment (BCC), a welfare policy launched with RSPCA backing in 2017. It challenges retailers and food companies to switch all supplies to the higher standard by 2026. Waitrose and KFC signed up in 2019. M&amp;S announced this year that it would meet the standard by 2022. But hundreds of other big companies are lagging. Switching requires investment. But after that, Barton tells me returns for BCC and Red Tractor birds are roughly the same, because he can charge 2 Sisters about 20p more a kilo for the higher standard. He says Red Tractor birds still make up about 95% of the market, but he and Hodgson expect that to change as the industry looks for wriggle room in which to “reset” prices – and expectation of price – and consumers demand better welfare. But this will have unintended consequences. Poultry production is so efficient that, kilo for kilo, it has a relatively low carbon impact – roughly on a par with olive oil and almost a 10th of that of beef, according to the Carbon Brief website. But higher welfare standards require more land, more heat and more feed, which mostly comes from land-intensive soya. If we want to eat “happier” chickens, there will be an environmental cost. Of course, we could eat fewer animals. The next “chicken of tomorrow” may yet be grown in a laboratory. The rise of flexitarianism may also help. In the meantime, while BCC may not look like a welfare revolution, the RSPCA sees it as an achievable compromise. “It’s not perfect, but it’s a positive step in the right direction,” Hodgson says. Burton, who has independently researched the sector for almost 25 years, is more effusive. “BCC is the most exciting thing that has happened in the industry since I started,” she says. Barton’s RSPCA Assured chicks are still getting used to their shed. Suspended lines dispense feed granules into plastic yellow pans. Two shiny steel weighing platforms also hang from the ceiling for curious chicks to hop on as they please. Barton can see via an app on his phone that today each bird weighs 67g – a 14g gain in two days. “It ramps up later,” he says. A recent RSPCA survey, which did not include prices, suggests that 85% of 18- to 34-year-olds are willing to pay more for slower-growing chicken – and 70% in older age groups. Barton says an industry of entrepreneurs is poised to adapt – to reset. He thinks 2 Sisters may soon ask him to convert all his sheds to BCC standard to meet rising demand. Apart from anything, he adds, farmers prefer more spacious sheds “because there’s more room to walk through the birds”. I ask the farmer what he thinks is a fair price for a chicken. Like everyone I speak to, he prefers not to put a figure on it. “We just want a proportion of any increase,” he says. Hodgson estimates BCC birds are 20-30% more expensive for consumers – another pound on our £3.50 Sainsbury’s medium whole chicken. If more than your average latte, £4.50 is still in pint-of-beer territory, to use Boparan’s comparison. Of course, you can pay a lot more. A free-range or organic chicken, which is even slower growing and has spent plenty of time outside, costs from £11 in supermarkets. That’s a striking match of the 1967 average. Barton is just about still making a profit, but knows of other farmers on the brink. Everyone fears the effects of a strain of avian flu now sweeping the country. “It’s becoming very tense,” Barton says. Ultimately, he tells me, it won’t be he who determines the value of our favourite meat – but me and you. “At the end of the day, we will produce what the consumer wants,” he says before we shuffle carefully out of the shed and lock the door.For centuries people have said it with flowers but research suggests a new tradition is gaining popularity in the UK – expressing love, thanks, perhaps even regret with the gift of a tree. A third of people said they would consider saying it with a tree rather than a bouquet and more than one in 10 had already done so, according to the research commissioned by the National Trust. However, the conservation charity also said only 7% of people in the UK knew the best time of year to plant, and it was launching a drive to improve “tree literacy”. The research, carried out by YouGov in September as the leaves began to turn and released before the Tree Council’s national tree week, beginning on Saturday, found that 49% of UK adults would consider planting a tree to help the environment, while 35% would think about giving a gift of a tree rather than flowers, with 12% already having done so. Trees appear to have become more important to people since the Covid crisis, with more than a quarter of those polled saying they noticed trees more than before the pandemic. Almost 40% said they took “considerable notice” of how trees changed throughout the year. The question of when to plant was trickier, with 42% saying spring was the ideal time to plant rather than winter. Spring and summer are the worst time for planting, the trust says, as young trees need a lot of water. Also, broad leaf trees are dormant in winter so can be moved from nurseries and planted with minimal impact and stress to the tree. Celia Richardson, the trust’s director of communications and audience, said the charity was detecting a changing relationship between people and trees. “There’s a Greek proverb that says a society grows great when old men plant trees in whose shade they shall never sit. We’re delighted by the growing enthusiasm among donors and gift-givers for trees that will serve everyone long into the future,” she said. “We think it’s part of a changing relationship. We know people are noticing and talking about the trees around them more and social media is full of the joys of things like #treeoftheday. Trees were hugely important features of society and culture in the past, and it’s so good to see signs that we are returning to closer relationships with them.” Donations to the National Trust’s Plant a Tree appeal topped £1m this year and the charity is aiming to plant more than 600,000 trees this winter. One of the interesting projects is the Clough Woodland Restoration Project in Derbyshire, where at least 39,000 trees are being planted. Cloughs are steep valleys or ravines. Jonathan Collett, manager of the project, said: “Due to the sites being hard to access, we are having to heli-lift in the stakes to support the new trees being planted so this site is a bit more complicated – but we definitely think it will be worth the effort. We’re planting native broad leaf trees including holly, hawthorn, sessile oak, alder, rowan, bird cherry, downy and silver birch. Once established, the trees will make fantastic homes for birds such as siskins, treecreepers and spotted flycatcher.”Panorama: The Electric Car Revolution – Winners and Losers 7.30pm, BBC One Elon Musk’s Tesla is a trillion-dollar car company that’s valued at more than all the other major car makers put together. Just about digested that? It’s time to investigate any dark truths behind the electric car revolution with reporter Darragh MacIntyre, who wants to know where Tesla gets the rare metal for its car batteries and how ethical its supply chain is. He meets the African nuns who say Musk needs to do more to protect some of the poorest people on the planet. Hollie Richardson Between the Covers 7.30pm, BBC Two Ben Miller, Kacey Ainsworth, Robert Rinder and Sindhu Vee join bookworm host Sara Cox to review Still Life by Sarah Winman and the Booker-longlisted Exit West by Mohsin Hamid. HR Paul O’Grady: For the Love of Dogs 8pm, ITV O’Grady is back with more dogs that – unless you have a heart of stone – will win you over. Daisy is a poorly Shih-tzu pup who needs a life-saving operation; energetic mixed-breed Lizzie needs to be tamed, and two timid chihuahuas, Marley and Maisy, struggle to come out of their shells. HR Shetland 9pm, BBC One This series concludes as it began: Douglas Henshall’s lugubrious Jimmy Perez is once again juggling family trauma and the demands of his job. This time, his father’s problems are feeding into his work, bringing him to an upsetting realisation about the Galbraith case. Another fine run, with idyllic scenery and human darkness offsetting each other perfectly. Phil Harrison Grand Designs: House of the Year 9pm, Channel 4 Kevin McCloud, design expert Michelle Ogundehin and architect Damion Burrows nose around five more fancy homes that have been longlisted for the 2021 Riba House of the Year award. Each covetable property showcases an uncommon building material, from weathering steel to kiln-dried Danish oak. Graeme Virtue Comedians Giving Lectures 9pm, Dave Sara Pascoe introduces three more comedians putting their own spin on pre-existing lectures. Babatunde Aleshe poses that perennial question: “Are the Illuminati real?” and Jessica Fostekew explores “The brain-changing benefits of exercise”. Josh Widdicombe asks: “Is living in the countryside for you?” (“Yes, it’s brilliant … ”) Ali Catterall Film choice Bruised (Halle Berry, 2021), Netflix Halle Berry makes her directorial debut with this largely compelling drama, doubling up as its lead. She plays Jackie Justice, an alcoholic former Ultimate Fighting Championship fighter who is drawn back into the mixed martial arts cage when she has to take care of the son she abandoned. Personal redemption through sporting success isn’t the most original angle, but this is clearly a passion project for Berry, and she keeps the mood downbeat and gritty, particularly in the fight scenes, which are convincingly brutal. Simon Wardell Silent Running (Douglas Trumbull, 1972), 1pm, Horror Channel Douglas Trumbull’s sci-fi fable is – as you would expect from the special effects master behind 2001: A Space Odyssey – a pleasure to look at, but at the film’s heart is an environmental message that outgrew its counterculture origins to become globally relevant today. Bruce Dern plays Freeman Lowell, a botanist on a spaceship that contains a biodome full of samples of Earth’s near-extinct plant life. When the order comes to destroy the dome, Lowell rebels (“They can’t blow up this forest!”), enlisting his three little robot helpers to ensure the survival of his precious green domain. SW Live sport Uefa Champions League Football: Manchester City v Paris Saint-Germain 7pm, BT Sport 2. Lionel Messi visits the Etihad Stadium. Liverpool v Porto is on BT Sport 3 from 7.15pm.The homegrown apple is in danger of becoming a rarity in India, as farmers have lost up to half their harvest this year, with predictions that the country’s main orchards could soon be all but wiped out. Early snowfalls in Kashmir, where almost 80% of India’s apples are grown, have seen the region’s farmers lose half their crops in the third year of disastrous harvests. Officials are trying to calculate the loss to the apple industry, which contributes almost a third – 50bn rupees (£500m) – to the local economy annually. The apples are sold in fruit markets across India and some are exported. Researchers have warned that orchards in the Kashmir valley, which is ringed by the Greater Himalayas and the Pir Panjal mountains, are likely to become unsustainable in the next few years, as the climate crisis affects production. The last 20 years have seen gradual changes in weather patterns in the region, which have intensified in the past five years. This is the third year harvests have been affected by early and heavier snowfalls in the Kashmir valley. According to Kashmir’s department of horticulture, 5bn rupees were lost from harvests in 2018. This rose to 22.5bn rupees in 2019, which saw the heaviest snowfall Kashmir has experienced in 60 years. “In the light of the changing climate, apple harvesting is not sustainable [here],” said Dr Irfan Rashid, assistant professor at the University of Kashmir. “Usually, Kashmir receives the snowfall after 15 December, but over the last two decades, we are experiencing early snowfalls. The harvest time for many apple varieties is November. In the last five years, we have had three erratic snowfalls and in the future the situation may exacerbate.” He added: “Climate models forecast a very grim scenario as far as erratic weather is concerned. The Himalayas, which includes this region, is going to receive more frequent extreme events as we progress through the century. It is very normal that Kashmir will be witnessing extreme weather events.” In response to the crisis, officials at Kashmir’s department of horticulture have been encouraging farmers to plant new “high-density” imported varieties, which are harvested earlier than existing crops. The government has been promoting subsidy schemes to help farmers buy and market the new varieties and wants to increase the amount of land used for growing. Ajaz Ahmad Bhat, director general of the horticultural department, said: “We cannot stop what is coming. The only way out we have is conversion to high-density varieties.” Research published this year suggested new varieties could generate significant economic returns and outweigh the initial high outlay. Rashid said the government strategy could help mitigate the impact of erratic snowfalls, but added it would result in the loss of local varieties. “Already, the local varieties like ambri are shrinking,” he said. Farmers have been reluctant to embrace new varieties, pointing to disappointing results from pilot projects. “Shifting to high-density varieties is not easy for us,” said Nawaz Ahmad Thoker, a farmer from Ramnagri, a sleepy village surrounded by orchards in Jammu and Kashmir state. “We will have to uproot the existing orchard and then plant the new saplings, which will incur us huge costs.” Thoker, whose family has tended their seven-acre (2.8-hectare) orchard for 35 years, broke down when he surveyed the damage to his crops after heavy snowfall at the end of October. Trunks of half the trees were split and branches still with their fruit attached were buried under six inches of snow. He estimated he had lost 100,000 rupees (£1,000), which will mean a difficult year for him and his family, as he struggles to pay for his children’s school and parents’ healthcare. “It was not only the year’s harvest lost in front of my eyes, but the three-decades of hard work by me and my family, destroyed,” he said. About 70% of his apple trees were damaged by early snow in 2018 and 2019. “I am thinking of doing some other work, maybe start a business so that my children have a good future,” said Thoker. “It seems our next generation will not be able to see these apple orchards.”You’ve never seen so much red velvet. Crimson drapes across the ceiling of London’s Piccadilly theatre, past the crystal chandeliers, the lit-up windmill, the blue jewelled elephant and the neon sign that reads: Moulin Rouge. On stage, there are fishnets, ruffled skirts, sequined bustiers and extravagant feather headdresses. All to make you feel as if you’ve been transported to Paris’s seedy Pigalle circa 1899. Rest assured, if you loved Baz Luhrmann’s 2001 film, the one with Ewan McGregor and Nicole Kidman singing Elton John in a collision of belle époque and 20th-century pop, you will get what you’re looking for here. Moulin Rouge! The Musical does not drastically reinvent its source material. “We’ve all been to that adaptation where you’re like: ‘What did you do to ET? Why is ET a serial killer?!” says director Alex Timbers. “Our goal is that in the first five minutes” – the show opens with a blistering rendition of Lady Marmalade – “your shoulders go down, phew, and you realise everyone who made this loves the movie too.” Luhrmann’s film, which took $179m at the box office, was the final part in his “red curtain trilogy” after Strictly Ballroom and Romeo + Juliet, and the most flamboyantly OTT of the three, a fast-edited onslaught of maximalist glamour. A love story about penniless songwriter Christian and cabaret star/courtesan Satine, it’s an ode to theatrical dreamers, so not surprising it ended up on stage, winning 10 Tony awards on Broadway and now opening in London and Melbourne. The book, written by playwright John Logan, mostly shares the same plot as the film, but there are minor tweaks. “The requirements of theatre are different,” says Timbers. “You need protagonists with agency who are always making active choices.” So courtesan Satine gets a bit more clout, and the love triangle between her, Christian and the Duke is made more difficult. “This is all with Baz’s blessing,” adds Timbers. The movie may be theatrical, but its style is characterised by a lot of things that can only be done in the edit suite: jump cuts, closeups, whip pans and other effects. Getting the same feel on stage has been a challenge. For music supervisor, arranger and composer Justin Levine – tasked with merging 70 songs from the last 120 years of popular music, plus original material, into a score crammed with medleys and mashups – music was a way to do that. “You can jump cut to a song, you can crossfade between songs, and sometimes hearing two songs at the same time gives you that sort of delightful dizzying effect that I find so thrilling in the movie,” he says. “The song is the closeup,” says Timbers – it’s the moment we zoom in to what a character’s feeling. “And I think your lighting designer [in this case Justin Townsend] is your editor, focusing your eye: Look over here! Look over here!” Then there’s the choreography, created by Sonya Tayeh, an Emmy nominee for her work on US TV show So You Think You Can Dance, as well as choreographer for Kylie Minogue and Florence + the Machine. Her work uses the power and snap of commercial choreography alongside the rich lyrical possibilities of modern dance (Twyla Tharp is a major inspiration). “I play a lot with momentum and suspension,” says Tayeh, describing her experiments with tempo and freezes; she can mimic an editor’s tricks, like a “speed ramp”, with a sudden acceleration, or subvert what the music’s doing, hitting the brakes when the song is gathering pace. “You have a book that you’re following and you have to make it come alive,” the choreographer adds. “Turning it into a pop-up book, lifting up the words in a really colourful way.” Tayeh, who spent her teens clubbing in Detroit, is using dance to provoke emotion and drive narrative, not just as pretty decoration. “This cast have been so eager,” she says. “They take such big bites of it, they have so much heat and energy.” On stage the cast are readying for a tech run, and Christian (played by Rada-trained American actor Jamie Bogyo) and his bohemian friends Santiago and Toulouse-Lautrec are rehearsing a scene where they espouse a version of the show’s credo in song – “Freedom, beauty, truth and love” – before segueing into T Rex’s Children of the Revolution. That’s typical of the musical swerves the show makes. New musicals using existing pop songs are everywhere now, from Jersey Boys to &amp; Juliet, but they weren’t so ubiquitous when the film came out 20 years ago. It’s a device that serves the story well. Christian is supposedly a gifted songwriter. “You’ve seen plays, right, where someone says they’ve written the greatest poem, or book or song,” says Timbers, “and at some point in Act II they’re going to have to read it and you’re like, hmm, I give it a B+. Here the outrageous conceit is that Christian has written all the great songs that you love.” The effect of familiar music, of course, is instant connection with the audience (and all their associated emotions and memories of those songs). “The earworm is immediate,” as Timbers puts it. Levine has updated the soundtrack to include songs from the last 20 years, such as Katy Perry’s Firework and Lady Gaga’s Bad Romance. Rather than just stringing together hits, he approached the songs as material to compose with, switching the order of lyrics to tell the story in hand, or cutting to another song when the first has served its purpose. “Often great popular music isn’t a conversation,” he says, “it’s one singular expression. I Can’t Get No Satisfaction – from the minute that song starts you’re not going to learn a lot more.” There’s an argument that the jukebox approach is a kind of dumbing down, and that it’s making it harder to get wholly original musicals made. Levine says it’s hard to get any musical made these days, yet, “I think shows like Hamilton and Dear Evan Hansen prove there absolutely is an appetite for original material.” There has always been a porous line between the stage and pop music worlds, he says, pointing to when the pop stars of their day were recording Broadway songs by Cole Porter or the Gershwins. “There was a much more symbiotic relationship between popular music and musical theatre then,” he says, but it continues. “Jay-Z seems to be a big fan of Annie,” says Levine referring to the rapper’s version of Hard Knock Life. “And last time I checked, 7 Rings by Ariana Grande [based on My Favourite Things] had 1.5bn streams on Spotify.” When Luhrmann made Moulin Rouge, he was just reversing that tradition. Luhrmann himself wasn’t involved with the initial creation of the stage musical. He and his wife, designer Catherine Martin, saw an early workshop and shared their thoughts. “And I was really humbled by how constructive they were and gracious,” says Levine. Once on Broadway, however, Luhrmann co-produced the cast album with Levine and producer Matt Stine. “He’s a very musical person,” says Levine. “Baz hears and notices everything. He has a hyperactive thought process. There would be all these little references, some of which were maybe only for mine and Matt’s benefit and Baz would catch them.” “To work in the Piccadilly theatre which has this rich history, for two dopey Americans, it’s really neat,” says Timbers, looking at Tayeh as we sit backstage on velvet chairs. And they’re sincere about how deeply they love the show, more than you might expect for a raucously entertaining knees-up, which some New York critics applauded more for its style than its substance. “It’s a beautiful message of family and community and pride in who you are and really living for something you believe in,” says Tayeh. “It’s a celebration of individuality and self-expression, sacrifices for art, and sacrifices for love.” They’re approaching it from every angle with high passion. “It’s like a blenderised version of Traviata, Bohème, Romeo and Juliet and the Orpheus myth, so you have to be operating on that level,” says Timbers. “It’s about daring greatly, believing boldly, and loving blindly.” Moulin Rouge! The Musical is at the Piccadilly theatre, London, the Regent theatre, Melbourne and the Al Hirschfeld theatre, New York.Eleven years ago this column described the campaign by the Environment Agency to prevent the killer shrimp, Dikerogammarus villosus, from escaping from Grafham Water in Cambridgeshire. Extensive efforts were being made to get anglers and boat owners to sluice their kit before going to other rivers and lakes. Diddington Brook, the only outlet from the giant reservoir, was being filtered to prevent the shrimps getting to the River Ouse. Sadly the attempt failed and what the agency calls the worst non-native invader of England and Wales’s waterways is now all over the country and impossible to control or eradicate. Adults grow 3cm long, much larger than native shrimps, and earn their common name by killing water boatmen, damsel fly lava and even small fish, not necessarily to eat but just because they can. They also destroy the food supply of trout and wading birds, although many fish species will eat them too. The shrimp originates in the Caspian Sea and has spread west across Europe through human-made canals and in the bilge water of boats. The species is extremely hardy and can stand water temperatures from freezing up to 30C, and live in any fresh or brackish water. Like so many other unwanted invasive species that arrived unintentionally, it is here to stay.AstraZeneca is to let more people take part in clinical trials from the comfort of their own homes in an attempt to increase the diversity of participants. Recruiting volunteers to clinical trials can be difficult, but they are a crucial step in the development of new drugs, tests, devices and other interventions. Concerns have been raised that a lack of diversity among people participating in clinical trials means drugs and medical equipment may be less effective in certain groups. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, on Sunday announced a review into systemic racism and bias in medical devices to examine why people of colour and women have worse health outcomes. Cristina Durán, the chief digital health officer, R&amp;D, at AstraZeneca told the Guardian typically only 3% to 5% of eligible patients choose to join a clinical trial, with recruitment taking as long as 18 months. Experts have stressed it is crucial there is diversity among trial participants, as genetic, social, and cultural factors can all affect the way different groups respond to interventions. Early trials of Covid vaccines were criticised for predominately involving white participants, despite the virus having a disproportionate effect on people of colour. A lack of diversity in clinical trials has also been cited by the nonprofit organisation breastcancer.org as one of the potential reasons Black women in the US have worse breast cancer outcomes than other groups. Now experts at AstraZeneca have said shifting data collection to the home may break down barriers to participation in clinical trials, potentially increasing diversity and the speed of research. Durán said before the pandemic the company had sought to delve into the issue of recruitment, by carrying out interviews with patients. “The feedback was mainly that it was very burdensome for patients to participate, because it did require for them to travel to a hospital or site, to spend quite a significant number of hours at that site, either waiting or having the procedures done to collect the data,” said Durán, adding historically about 90% of such data was collected at such locations. Durán said the team found participation could be made far more accessible. “We reviewed close to 100 protocols – those are the instructions of how to run clinical trials – and 70% of that data could be collected[…] at home.” Heart rate and activity are among metrics that can be monitored at home and it is also possible to take blood samples and evaluate lung function. Durán said while it was feasible to collect some of the data at home before the Covid pandemic, the crisis had accelerated the approach. “All the technology was there, but what we’ve seen through the pandemic is a change of behaviour,” she said, with many people having to interact with healthcare in a different way, for example through telemedicine calls with doctors. Phillippa Brown, vice-president of development operations, R&amp;D, at AstraZeneca said that among other approaches to increase participation of minority populations, the company has been increasing the diversity of investigators on clinical trials – a move she suggested could help to build trust with local communities. Stephen Evans, professor of pharmacoepidemiology at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine said “increasing diversity in trials is something that virtually every trialist wants to do”. But doing some things from home could come with downsides. “People may not make the measurements as carefully as they are made in a clinic,” he said, adding it was also extremely important participants were unaware of the treatment they have been given – for example whether it was an active drug or a control. “Otherwise the biases could become very substantial,” he said.Top story: Johnson’s judgment ‘irredeemably flawed’ Hello, Warren Murray with you again. Together let’s stick our noses in where they absolutely belong … Frustrations with No 10’s leadership are growing in the Treasury, with Rishi Sunak’s department understood to be concerned about the prime minister’s fumbled timing of decisions. Delayed announcements of the £96bn integrated rail plan and the social care cap have brought scorn and negative coverage for the government, while votes for government policies have been shunned by Tory MPs in parliament. Some have privately voiced growing concerns about Johnson’s competence – on Tuesday the PM’s spokesperson was forced to insist “the prime minister is well” after his speech to the CBI in which he lost his place and started talking about Peppa Pig World. Johnson’s recent woes began when he birthed the Tory sleaze affair by backing attempts to prevent Owen Paterson being punished for lobbying the government on behalf of two companies that paid him more than £100,000 a year. One Tory observer said Johnson’s judgment was looking “irredeemably flawed” and there are calls for him to overhaul his Downing Street team. But many Conservative MPs blame Sunak for forcing the government to pare back its plans to save money. Asked about a potential shake-up in the No 10 team, a source insisted: “Downing Street is focused on delivering for the public and the team is united around that goal.” * * * Windrush compensation languishes – Just 5% of Windrush victims have received compensation four years after the scandal emerged. Twenty-three eligible applicants have died before getting a payment. Up to 15,000 people were expected to qualify for compensation but some applicants say the process has become a source of further trauma rather than redress. The home affairs select committee say the scheme should be taken out of Home Office control and given to an independent organisation to run. In 2017 the Guardian uncovered the Windrush scandal, under which the UK government erroneously classified thousands of legal residents as illegal immigrants after they arrived from Caribbean countries between 1948 and 1971. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; Offenders whose crimes lead to the death of an on-duty emergency service worker will receive mandatory life sentences under Harper’s law, brought in after PC Andrew Harper, 28, was dragged to death behind the car of escaping thieves in Berkshire. &gt; The Labour MP Stella Creasy has asked for urgent clarification from Commons authorities after being reprimanded for having her infant son in a sling as she spoke in parliament on Tuesday. While Commons rules state that MPs should not have children or infants with them in the chamber, Creasy has taken both her children into the Commons before, without any complaints being made. &gt; Well-known universities including Exeter, Bristol, Oxford and Cambridge have done the least to help those from the lowest-income households, according to a ranking of higher education institutions based on their contribution to social mobility. &gt; A British government should remain neutral on the question of a united Ireland in the event of a poll, Labour’s shadow Northern Ireland secretary, Louise Haigh, has said. A poll is not considered imminent but has become a topic of discussion on both sides of the border since Brexit. &gt; AstraZeneca is to let more people take part in clinical trials from home in an attempt to increase the diversity of participants. The drugmaker has opened a £1bn R&amp;D centre on the outskirts of Cambridge housing 16 labs and 2,200 scientists. * * * Killings after parking dispute – A husband and wife were stabbed to death at their Somerset home as their children slept upstairs, police have said. Stephen Chapple, 36, a teacher, and Jennifer Chapple, 33, who worked in a coffee shop, died in their house in the village of Norton Fitzwarren, near Taunton, as paramedics tried to save them. Police found the Chapples’ children, aged five and six, still asleep – they have been put in the care of relatives. Neighbours said there had been disputes about parking in the street and police had visited at least three times to speak to those involved. Two men, aged 34 and 67, were arrested on suspicion of murder after the attack on Sunday night. Magistrates on Tuesday granted an extension to custody time for the 34-year-old, while a man aged 67 was released under investigation. A murder investigation is being led by the major crime investigation team. * * * Home schooling on rise – Councils in England have identified a 34% jump in pupils being home-schooled by choice compared with last year. The Covid pandemic appears to have accelerated the trend towards elective home education (EHE). The Association of Directors of Children’s Services (ACDS) has warned, though, that it is not appropriate for children who are, for example, in vulnerable circumstances. Gail Tolley from the ADCS said local authorities lacked the powers to ensure children were safe and receiving a good education at home. The ADCS is awaiting the outcome of a Department for Education (DfE) consultation in 2019 that proposed a national register of all EHE children and young people and a duty for local authorities to support parents who educated their child at home. * * * Nobel no-thanks – A post-Brexit scheme to draw Nobel laureates and other prestigious global prize winners to the UK has failed to attract a single applicant in the six months since it opened, it has been reported. “Chances that a single Nobel or Turing laureate would move to the UK to work are zero for the next decade or so,” the physics Nobel winner Andre Geim told New Scientist magazine. The magazine quoted Jessica Wade, a leading scientist at Imperial College London, as saying it “doesn’t surprise me at all. UK scientists’ access to European funding is uncertain, we’re not very attractive to European students as they have to pay international fees, our pensions are being cut and scientific positions in the UK are both rare and precarious.” Ministers have admitted its failure to garner any interest. Today in Focus podcast: Autistic but only recently found out When the television presenter Melanie Sykes and the model Christine McGuinness revealed they had been diagnosed with autism as adults, it brought new attention to the challenges for others like them whose symptoms have been missed. This is the story of one autistic woman – and how diagnosis in her 30s changed her life. Lunchtime read: Chicken fees How much should we actually be paying for the nation’s favourite meat? Britons eat 17,000 chickens every nine minutes. Fifty years ago a medium broiler cost £11 in today’s money. Now it is less than a latte or a pint of beer – raising serious ethical and environmental questions. Some of those in the industry are speaking up. Sport Manchester United have spoken to Ernesto Valverde regarding becoming their interim manager while Mauricio Pochettino, the current favourite for the permanent job, failed to confirm he would see out his Paris Saint-Germain contract. Goals from Cristiano Ronaldo and a first for Jadon Sancho gave United a 2-0 win at Villarreal and put the smiles back on supporters’ faces after what caretaker boss Michael Carrick called “an emotional few days”. Two goals in three minutes helped Chelsea to beat Juventus 4-0 but the gloss of securing a place in the Champions League last 16 was taken off after N’Golo Kanté and Ben Chilwell went off injured at Stamford Bridge. Millie Bright has said she is “humbled and honoured” to have been asked to captain England for the World Cup qualifiers against Austria and Latvia. The England and Wales Cricket Board’s plan to improve inclusivity within the sport in the wake of the Azeem Rafiq racism scandal has been held up as counties dispute the timescale for making their boards and leadership teams more diverse. Anthony Watson has been reprimanded by a Rugby Football Union disciplinary panel for conduct prejudicial to the interest of the game after comments made on social media criticising a match official. Ben Stokes’s return to action was delayed when rain halted play early in the second session of England’s first Ashes warm-up match in Australia. And the former Leeds rugby league player Kevin Sinfield has raised more than £1.1m for charity after running from Leicester to Leeds in under 24 hours. Business Mervyn King, the former governor of the Bank of England, has said central bankers have been caught unawares by rising prices that have exposed their “King Canute” theory of inflation. King accused authorities across the world of relying too heavily on models that may no longer reflect the changes wrought in the financial system by “unsustainable” quantitative easing. Hours after King’s comments, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand raised rates for the second time this year in another warning signal that borrowing costs could be about to rise across the world. The FTSE100 is tracking to open flat this morning while the pound will buy you $1.337 and €1.190. The papers The government’s woes are the lead again in the Guardian with “Treasury frustration as key plans mishandled by No 10”, and the i concurs: “Trouble at the top”. The Telegraph leads with “AstraZeneca vaccine may give longer protection” and the Times also has a health splash: “Patients to travel for treatment”. The Daily Mail splashes on the change in the law inspired by the Andrew Harper murder case: “Life for killing police &amp; nurses”. The Express leads on the same story – “Police killers to be jailed for life”, while the Mirror splashes on the other big crime story of the day: “Loving couple killed in ‘parking row’”. The FT has “Biden’s bid to tame oil prices with 50m barrels from reserves falls flat” and the Sun claims “Wills &amp; Kate bin BBC”. Finally, the Scotsman says “Relief for business as passports extension plan stopped”.A group of animals has been drafted in to combat a hazard in the skies above the runways of Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport, the Netherlands’ aviation hub. A six-week pilot project is studying whether a small herd of pigs can deter flocks of geese and other birds attracted to discarded sugar beet on nearby farmland. The 19 pigs have been enjoying life on a 2-hectare (5-acre) plot between two runways, turning a field of crop residue into a muddy haven and eating the food that attracts the birds, which can collide with planes and in the worst cases even get sucked into engines. Two years ago, a KLM Boeing 747 was hit by one such suspected “bird strike”, and had to return to the airport. This was also the cause of the famous US Airways near-disaster in 2009, when both engines lost all power and the captain, Chesley Sullenberger, had to land his stricken Airbus A320 on the Hudson River. In the year from November 2018, there were 565 strikes near Schiphol, peaking in the summer. The number fell to 259 in 2020-21 as air traffic waned during the coronavirus pandemic. Ernst Koelman, of the Netherlands’ Human and Transport Environment Inspectorate, said the government regarded every bird strike as a “potential risk” and recorded each incident. However, long aware of the safety risk, the airport – which is surrounded by natural areas that attract wildlife – has 20 bird controllers tracking avian activity and using technology such as noise and laser beams to deter them. Stan Gloudemans, co-owner of a small-scale outdoor piggery, Buitengewone Varkens (“extraordinary pigs”), was keen to help when the Royal Schiphol Group, which manages the airport, came to him to see if his animals could do even more. “Geese like beet, and when it’s left on the fields, they flock to eat it,” he told the Guardian on a visit to the trampled field just west of Amsterdam. “Over there are 30 geese enjoying the beet, but those geese are a danger to aircraft. Here, the pigs have eaten up the beet so the geese stay away. “This is a trial with two hectares, although the Haarlemmermeer [the district surrounding the airport] is 2,000. I’d dare to say that it’s already a success; next year, on to bigger fields!” The trial is being run in cooperation with the infrastructure and water management ministry, the agricultural supply agency RVR Loonbedrijf and Buitengewone Varkens, a venture inspired by Portuguese and Spanish pigs that graze on acorns. “Schiphol came to us as other pigs are mostly in stalls,” said Gloudemans, as he raced to fill troughs with supplementary feed, followed by the surprisingly swift beasts. “All of our pigs are outdoors, we have around 300 a year, and they eat things like nettles, Japanese knotweed for municipalities, and other plants in nature reserves: they like everything. Schiphol asked if they might be able to eat beet and chase away geese.” Growing numbers of wildfowl in the Netherlands posed a growing challenge for air transport, he said. “There are 10 times as many geese in the Netherlands now as in 1970 – the goose is huge in the Netherlands,” he added. “Geese are dangerous, but they are animals, and you need to deal with them in the right way. The pig is a double enemy: he tries to catch the geese and he also eats their food. It’s a dual attack.” Willemeike Koster, a spokesperson for Royal Schiphol Group, said after an “informative” trial period, which had just ended, the airport was considering whether it was feasible to deploy pigs on a larger scale. Referring to the reclaimed land of the area, she said: “Amsterdam Airport Schiphol is located in a polder landscape, with a lot of water, grassy meadows and rich farmland. These factors all contribute to Schiphol being a popular roost for birds. However, birds constitute a risk for aircraft. “Our first impression is that few geese were spotted in the [pigs’] area. And the pigs did their job by eating the crop residues, which are now gone. All data collected from the bird radar and visual observations, among other things, will be analysed in the coming months.” Although the noise of planes taxiing and taking off is loud and frequent, there is no evidence that the pigs are bothered, with their tails high and wagging. Herman Vermeer, a researcher in pig welfare at Wageningen University &amp; Research, said although he had not investigated the effects of noise on outdoor pigs, they were likely to become well adjusted. “Pigs often need quiet to communicate with each other; for example, with a mother and piglets in a stall, noise can disturb them,” he said. “But in an outdoor situation, pigs are often shocked the first time they hear a noise, but they are also opportunistic and flexible. “I expect that if they know the noise, they would behave normally, just as there are people who don’t have any problems near a train station or airport,” Vermeer added. “If they are unhappy, they show it like a dog in their tail.” Sign up for the Animals farmed monthly update to get a roundup of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at animalsfarmed@theguardian.comThe New South Wales government has signed off on a plan to dramatically reduce the number of feral horses in the Kosciuszko national park to 3,000, but environment groups say it is not enough to solve the park’s “horse crisis”. The government ended its long-running internal stoush over feral horse management, with the former deputy premier John Barilaro announcing in his valedictory speech on Wednesday the plan had been agreed. For three years, the management of feral horses in the alpine wilderness has split the Coalition after Barilaro introduced legislation in 2018 that vetoed culling. Since then, populations have ballooned, with the government’s most recent figures estimating there were 14,380 feral horses in the park, far too high to protect vulnerable ecosystems and native wildlife that is recovering from the 2019-20 bushfires. The final plan largely sticks to a draft version that was published in October and would reduce the number of horses to 3,000 by June 2027 through measures including ground shooting and aerial mustering. The plan rules out aerial shooting despite noting that “if undertaken in accordance with best practice, aerial shooting can have the lowest negative animal welfare impacts of all lethal control methods”. It says aerial shooting could result in the government losing its social licence to remove feral horses from the park. Horses would be removed from 21% of the park and allowed to remain in 32% of the park. The 47% of Kosciuszko that is already free of feral horses would remain so. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Environment groups say the plan is progress after three years of deadlock but said allowing thousands of horses to continue to roam in the park would see the continuation of significant environmental damage. They say the measures that have been agreed now need to commence as soon as possible. James Trezise, the conservation director of the Invasive Species Council, said the environment minister, Matt Kean, “was hamstrung by draconian legislation that requires the protection of feral horses in Kosciuszko national park”. “The reality is this plan is a long way from what’s needed to solve the park’s horse crisis,” he said. “We remain deeply disappointed that 3,000 feral horses will be protected in one-third of Kosciuszko national park, consigning areas to ongoing horse damage.” Trezise said the plan locked in damage to the Byadbo and Pilot wilderness areas in the park’s south, wetlands such as the vast Currango peat wetlands in the north and critical habitat of threatened species such as the northern corroboree frog, stocky galaxias and the broad-toothed rat. Chris Gambian, the chief executive of the Nature Conservation Council NSW, said the challenge for the government now was to ensure the plan was implemented quickly given the necessary resources. “Every horse in the park is doing damage – leaving 3,000 in place leaves a massive risk to endangered species,” he said. “But any action is better than the gross inaction we have seen for too long now.” Kean said the plan was based on consultation with experts and the government had received more than 4,000 submissions from the public on the draft. “Today we release a plan that will finally provide protection for the numerous threatened species and the suite of important alpine and sub-alpine ecosystems that call Kosciuszko national park home,” he said. He said areas from which horses would be removed included habitat for the northern and southern corroboree frogs, the smoky mouse and the broad-toothed rat as well as important alpine and sub-alpine ecosystems. In his speech on Wednesday, Barilaro described the final plan as a farewell gift. He said the areas where horses would remain had the strongest link to wild horse heritage values and historic pastoralism. “This final plan gives everybody certainty by delivering a way to manage a sustainable population of wild horses in only very select areas of the park, but more importantly it recognises their important heritage value for future generations,” he said. The government said some of the measures – specifically trapping and rehoming of horses – would commence immediately.My first time back on stage doing standup comedy properly in front of an audience was at the Soho theatre in August. I say “properly” because, although I have worked socially distanced rooms that have been utterly lovely, clusters of masked individuals looking like handmaids do not make what we in the industry call “an audience”. People sitting apart don’t respond like people sitting together. You don’t laugh at your favourite sitcom alone on the sofa the way you do at a below-average comic in a comedy club. The gig was at noon, and I stood backstage thinking it would probably be a bit flat. I’m not funny before lunch. The audience wouldn’t have had a drink – I hoped. But as I stepped out on to the stage and started riffing with them, something glorious happened. They laughed as one. It was like surfing and making love all at once. A remarkable, glorious balancing act. I had forgotten this was possible. It was as if a part of me I thought had died had come back to life. It was then I realised – I had stopped believing in my own talent, but it was just hiding itself away on Zoom. More recently, I took my goddaughter to a series of low-brow, mid-brow and high-brow West End shows and every cast milked the curtain call as if they were being resurrected live on stage. There wasn’t a fixed grin of “eight shows a week” to be seen. The stage managers were literally bringing the curtain down on excessive breakdancing. The audiences were wild. There’s no business like show business, and pre-pandemic we had forgotten that. We remember now. It seems to me that critics are also enjoying criticising again. I guess everyone has missed their jobs – but I do hope they find a way to tell their readers there’s joy to be had in any theatre right now. The curtain is rising. We’re grateful to be home.A friend once joked to Joe Lieberman, former senator and vice-presidential nominee, that the Democratic party was like his appendix: it was there but not doing much for him. “It’s a funny line,” he says by phone from his law office in New York, “but the truth is that it’s more than that because I feel good physically when the Democrats do well – in my terms – and I do get pain when they go off and do things that I don’t agree with.” Lieberman may be in for a world of pain now. The other Joe – also 79, also a Democratic ex-senator – was expected to share his centrist convictions as US president. Instead Joe Biden as president has surprised friends and foes alike with the scale, scope and audacity of his multitrillion-dollar agenda. The Democratic party itself has moved left over the past decade, making it an increasingly awkward fit for Lieberman, who voted for George W Bush’s Iraq war, endorsed Republican John McCain over Barack Obama for president and is still close friends with the South Carolina senator Lindsey Graham, the quintessential Republican apologist for Donald Trump. So it was that in a recent appearance on C-Span to promote his new book, The Centrist Solution, Lieberman was assailed by a caller from Oregon over his “archaic” views and policies that “have done nothing for the poor and the working class”. Another, from Connecticut, upbraided him for the prolonged wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, the deregulation of Wall Street and a crime bill that “put so many Black and Brown people in this country in jail”. Yet he remains unbowed and undeterred by political currents. Lieberman, co-chair of No Labels, a group focused on bipartisanship, continues to preach a deeply unfashionable gospel of compromise working across the aisle in a country that seems paralysed by a cold civil war. When he joined the Senate in 1989, he recalls, a typical vote would see about 40 conservatives on one side, 40 liberal on the other, and 20 that were an unpredictable mix. By the time he left in 2013, there was no Democrat with a more conservative voting record than any Republican, and no Republican with a more liberal voting record than any Democrat. He attributes the polarisation to the gerrymandering of congressional districts, which makes incumbents risk averse, the increasing influence of money in politics – “they expect you to do ideologically what they want you to do” – and the partisanship of both cable news and social media, which encourages politicians to play to their echo chambers. Lieberman recounts from his Senate experience: “We would want to be able to go home at election time and say, ‘My friends, here’s what I got done for us.’ But now people tend to want to go home and say, ‘Oh, here’s what I tried to do except for those bastards in the other party.’ That’s a really vicious cycle that takes the country nowhere. The public, certainly the broad middle, is sick of all this.” This disaffection, Lieberman believes, helps explain why, in 2016, millions of Americans decided to blow it all up by electing an outsider, celebrity businessman Trump. Evidently it did not work as Washington became more poisonous and polarised than ever. Does the “centre ground” mean anything any more when one party, the Republicans, has veered into far-right extremism, for example by embracing Trump’s “big lie” about a stolen election and failing to condemn the 6 January insurrection at the US Capitol? Lieberman’s answer will strike some as out of touch and trafficking in false equivalence: “The divisive forces in both of our two major parties have moved further away from the centre. But I believe those more extreme segments of both parties are in the minority in both parties. “The majority, I’d say, in the Republican party is centre right and in the Democratic party is centre left, and it’s quite possible for them to make their way to the centre and negotiate and come up with centrist solutions. In the book, I’ve tried very hard to distinguish centrism from moderation. Centrism is not an ideology. It’s a strategy for making democracy work.” He continues: “It takes leaders who are willing to work together across party lines to get something done and, if that doesn’t work, it takes voters who I think are in the majority, certainly the plurality, to demand at election time that the candidates they vote for will work across party lines.” To many bruised by years of Washington gridlock, this will sound naive. Lieberman’s support for the 60-vote filibuster, a Senate procedural rule, as one of the last remaining incentives to bipartisanship is out of touch with a new generation of progressives who regard filibuster reform as essential to protecting voting rights and democracy itself. But he does allow the possibility that the two-system party might no longer be fit for purpose – and that the long-awaited, much-derided case for a viable third party might become irresistible. “If one could imagine the Republicans nominating Donald Trump again the president and the Democrats – assuming for a moment that Joe Biden doesn’t run again – nominate somebody further to the left, which is possible as a result of Democratic primaries, wow, there’s going to be a big space in the middle open and somebody will take it,” he says. “The conditions now are unprecedented in American history. The degree of partisanship and the degree of effective control of the political system by minorities to the right and left in both parties really may open the door to a successful third-party campaign for president, perhaps as early as 2024.” Lieberman has reason to be a student of third-party candidacies. In 2000 Ralph Nader’s Green party polled at less than 3% but was widely blamed for depriving the Democratic presidential nominee Al Gore and running mate Lieberman of critical votes in their narrow defeat by Bush and Dick Cheney. The losing vice-presidential candidate himself, however, is philosophical: “I never blamed Nader because he had the legal right to do what he did and there was some interesting post-election polling that surprisingly indicated that the Nader vote would have divided between Bush and Gore.” He describes the supreme court’s ruling in favor of Bush in the disputed election as a “miscarriage of justice”, however. A Gore-Lieberman administration is now one of the great historical what-ifs, an alternate timeline that could have shaped the 21st century very differently. For example, Lieberman points out, Bush oversaw a big and unnecessary tax cut that put America back in deficit territory after three surpluses in a row under Bill Clinton. “I’m confident that President Gore would have felt a responsibility to go into Afghanistan, from which we were attacked [on 11 September 2001], but would he have gone into Iraq? I doubt it. That would have changed history a lot. “The other major change would have been obviously that Al Gore was the leading American champion for doing something about climate change. We would have pushed through some reactions to climate change which would have put us in a better, safer situation now.” Criticized for his resistance to withdrawing from Iraq, Lieberman lost a Democratic primary election for his seat in Connecticut in 2006 only to win election as an independent. Two years later, he again marched to the beat of his own drum by endorsing his old friend McCain, a Republican senator for Arizona, rather than the Democratic senator Obama, the first African American nominee of a major party. He insists: “Surprisingly, neither Barack Obama or Hillary Clinton, both of whom I really knew well, ever asked me for my support. McCain did and I thought, what the hell? He’s my friend, totally capable of being president, and so I don’t regret at all supporting him. “We had great areas of agreement on foreign and defense policy but we disagreed a lot. I consider myself a centre-left Democrat. He’s a conservative Republican but a maverick so he broke on climate change, he broke for a while on campaign finance reform.” It later emerged that McCain had wanted Lieberman as his running mate, believing the country ready for a bipartisan ticket, only to be persuaded by his staff to go for the inexperienced, rabble-rousing Sarah Palin instead. Another crossroads of history. McCain later admitted it had been a mistake. Lieberman, the nearly man for a second time, comments: “If McCain had been able to have me as his running mate, I have confidence that we would have done better than he did with Governor Palin. But it’s hard to say that we would have won. Obama was just walking on the mountaintop at that point and Bush 43 was unpopular and the economy was in bad shape, so people really wanted a change. “And not only was Obama a change in party but he was African American. It was a breakthrough moment for America. I think a lot of people voting for him felt not only that he was the change and capable but that we were going to prove again what we are as a country. So it was an extraordinary moment.” The close friendship between Lieberman, McCain, who died in 2018, and another senator, Graham of South Carolina, saw them dubbed “the three amigos”. But where McCain evidently loathed Trump, Graham has defended the former president’s indefensible actions while enjoying his hospitality on the golf course. Does Lieberman ever call him and say, snap out of it? “Well, we talk a lot. Lindsey will always try, by his nature, to be where he feels he can be effective and so you’ve watched him sometimes be quite close to Trump and at other times be critical. We remain friends. I have nothing negative to say about him because he is my friend but I do think that his great skill ultimately – and I watched it while I was in the Senate – is to be a bridge builder, a bipartisan centrist problem solver. “At the right moment he will be, I hope, part of the sort of restoration of the Republican party in which he grew up and where his really dear friend – and mine, of course – John McCain was ultimately the nominee. That’s the Republican party Lindsey most naturally fits into.” It is a party that can still be saved, Lieberman insists. “I don’t think Trump is going to win in 2024 and Republicans who are not tied to him will see that increasingly and people will challenge him, including some who will go back to the regular conservative Republican party, not the party that was so extreme and nasty and willing to ignore the law of the United States. “I don’t know who it will be. A lot of people are looking at taking him on. It will take some guts. There’s something brewing out there. So, am I optimistic that the more mainstream, centrist elements in the Republican party will take over again? I am.” For their part, Republicans have condemned Biden for campaigning as a centrist but governing as what they perceive as a radical who pushed a $1.9tn coronavirus relief bill, $1.2tn infrastructure deal and $1.75tn social and climate spending package. Lieberman, who worked with him in the Senate for 24 years, says: “The squad, the further left in the Democratic party, seems to be having influence that is taking him, at least in public perception, further to the left than I certainly thought he was and I’m confident he is now. “It may be understandable because we’ve just come through an unprecedented crisis because of the pandemic and he wanted to do everything he could to get us back on track. So the bills he supported were bigger than any I ever voted for or that he voted for in the 24 years. But I think we we saw him at his natural best on the bipartisan infrastructure reform bill that just passed and he signed.” Ever hopeful, Lieberman notes that the president defied progressives by nominating Jerome Powell for a second term as chair of the Federal Reserve. He adds: “Biden is solid. He sees the world realistically and he knows he can’t be Roosevelt or Lyndon Johnson now in part because he doesn’t have the great Democratic majorities that they had. “And the country, thank God, is not where it was in the Depression, as bad as the pandemic was. The old Joe, which is the real Joe, will be dominant in the next three years of his presidency.”As cases begin surging once more in the US, millions of people are expected to travel for the Thanksgiving holiday, and health workers and hospital systems are now preparing for an influx of Covid patients after having little time to recover from the summer surge. Last year, there was a major surge in cases around the holidays. But this year, new tools could blunt the spread – if they are taken up quickly. US scientific agencies on Friday recommended boosters for all adults six months after mRNA vaccination, and children over the age of five recently became eligible for vaccines. Existing treatments like monoclonal antibodies are highly effective if given early, while two promising antiviral medications from Merck and Pfizer may be authorized in coming weeks. But the new treatments may come against a backdrop of rising cases during the holiday season. “It is a race against time,” Kyle Enfield, the associate chief medical officer of critical care at University of Virginia Health, said. More than 92,000 Americans are now testing positive for Covid-19 each day, and more than 1,000 people are dying from the virus every day, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Cases are rising in a majority of states, with hotspots in the midwest, north-east and parts of the south-west. There have already been more Covid deaths this year than there were in 2020, due to the more transmissible Delta variant and low vaccination rates across much of the country, and total deaths from Covid-19 in the US may reach 1 million by spring. Even so, about 20 million passengers are expected to fly this Thanksgiving, the US Transportation Security Administration (TSA) announced last week. These numbers are approaching the record-breaking travel seen around Thanksgiving in 2019, when 26 million people were screened for flights. “We anticipate that travel may be very close to pre-pandemic levels this holiday,” David Pekoske, administrator of the TSA, said in a statement. Given the cooler weather and upcoming holidays, “I do think that we are likely going to see an increase in cases over the next couple of weeks,” said Enfield. “Winter can be a busy time in the hospital because of the regular flu and pneumonia [cases] that people get, but this year, I think we’re going to add in ongoing Covid transmission.” But it’s hard to predict how big the next wave will be, he said – and much of these calculations depend on vaccination rates as well as existing and potential medications. Many hospitals in Massachusetts, a state seeing some of the fastest-growing cases and hospitalization rates in the country, are already at or over capacity, Emily Rubin, a pulmonary and critical care physician at Massachusetts General hospital, told the Guardian. It’s not just Covid filling the wards. “We have a large number of ICU patients who are in the hospital with non-Covid illnesses,” she said. Part of the reason has to do with delayed care during the pandemic that leads patients to get sicker than they would have otherwise been. Experts are hoping that even if Covid cases rise, the vaccines will help keep hospitalizations and deaths lower than last year. “It gives me a little bit of hope that we’re seeing some breakthrough infections that are not as severe as the ones that we’ve seen in the past,” Enfield said. “But I think that the next couple of days and weeks are really going to be telling for what the real impact is going to be.” In the meantime, hospitals are hiring as many nurses and clinicians as possible and increasing the number of patients who can receive monoclonal antibodies at infusion centers. People experiencing Covid symptoms should be tested immediately, and those who test positive and are at high risk of severe illness should immediately undergo monoclonal antibody treatments. But providing the monoclonal treatment is challenging, because it usually requires an hour-long infusion at a specialty center. “We have increased capacity substantially over the past couple of months, and we are doing everything we can to extend that to keep up with demand. But the demand has grown substantially as we’ve seen the rising cases,” Rubin said. Having enough staff for these centers has been difficult, Rubin said, as health systems across the country face worker shortages. “Since the whole system is very stressed, every step along that chain can take some time,” Rubin said. New antivirals could be much easier to give to patients, and the Biden administration has set aside billions for the new medications. First, however, they need to be authorized by the US Food and Drug Administration and then distributed throughout the country. “We’re eager to see them. We’re also eager to see the data in more detail,” Rubin said. “We haven’t, of course, seen published, peer-reviewed data, but we will be eager to see those.” Like monoclonals, the antivirals appear to work best early in the course of an illness, so getting test results quickly and then receiving the medication soon after would be key. Easily accessible antivirals would also help in rural areas and places that don’t have infusion centers, helping address inequities that have plagued some communities – especially communities of color, which have been hit disproportionately hard by the pandemic. With “all of these therapies, there’s concern that they are not being distributed equitably and that different communities of patients have differential access, and that’s a big concern”, Rubin said. But if the pills are easy to take anywhere in the country and work well to prevent hospitalization and death, she said, “that would be sort of the holy grail”. Medications for later in the course of illness – when patients usually show up at the hospital – still need to be developed. In the meantime, Rubin and Enfield urge people to take as many precautions as possible: getting vaccinated against Covid and the flu, which may be particularly bad this year, as well as wearing masks and distancing. “There is a lot that every person in the public can do right now to help out,” Enfield said. “All of us who’ve been doing this for a while are tired,” Enfield said. “We’re really hopeful that soon we’ll see the number of cases continue to go down and we’ll have a chance to breathe a sigh of relief.”If it’s Wednesday – or Monday, or Tuesday, or Thursday, or … it must be another TV series milled by Disney+ from the apparently inexhaustible supply of grain from the Marvel Cinematic Universe. This time, it is the turn of the eponymous Hawkeye. Following hard on the heels of the mindbending, genre-mashing WandaVision and the loopy Loki, the new miniseries is a quieter thing, set on a more manageable (or less ambitious) scale. Hawkeye (Jeremy Renner) is hoping for a quiet life after the celluloid shenanigans with which he has exhausted himself over the past few years. He is in New York with his kids, filling them with festive cheer before sending them back to their mother and promising to rejoin them for Christmas in six days’ time. Alas! He has reckoned without the origin story of Young Avenger Kate Bishop (Hailee Steinfeld), which began in 2012 in the wake of a certain attack on NYC, during which she watched with awe the protective prowess of a certain expert marksman. She asks her mother for a bow and arrow and by the time we meet her in the present day she too is a crack arrow-shot (and proficient in all martial arts, fearless and altogether proto-superheroic. All she is missing is the suit and that problem is about to solve itself). Kate follows Jack Duquesne (Tony Dalton), her mother’s deeply creepy new fiancee (her beloved father was killed in the 2012 attack) to a black-market charity auction in a warren-like wine cellar. No sooner has a certain suit worn by a certain Avenger in his Ronin phase come up for sale than the cellar is attacked. “For reasons that are not clear to me,” I write in my notes for the first but not last time, Kate swipes the suit then plunges into the melee to rescue Jack and his equally creepy uncle Armand (a cameo from Simon Callow, who has evidently popped in for the moustachio-twirling time of his life before he goes off for a nice lunch) from the marauding horde. Outside, however, Kate’s suit attracts Ronin’s enemies and before long Hawkeye has to rescue her. The second episode has Hawkeye – frequently imploring people to call him “Clint”, to the detriment of any UK viewer who wishes to take proceedings seriously and yet for whom the name has become unbreakably linked with Petula “Where’s my Clint?” Gordino’s inamorato in Dinnerladies – tracking down the suit and, unwillingly, establishing a rapport with his fellow archer. Mentoring and the uncovering of a criminal conspiracy ensue. None too briskly, none too innovatively but capably enough to keep you coming back for the remaining four episodes. Especially as we still have the arrival of Florence Pugh as Yelena Belova and Alaqua Cox as Maya Lopez/superhero Echo to look forward to. The chemistry – comic as much as anything – between Renner and Steinfeld is tremendous. Renner has made a career out of being the uncharismatic second fiddle on the big screen – so uncharismatically on occasion that it has sometimes felt that the bluff really should be called. The translation to small screen suits him and his low-energy presence well. When he is kidnapped by goons (and kept in a children’s abandoned play area instead of a warehouse – they have all been converted into apartments, his captors explain), he asks whether he can speak to their manager. “It’s like talking to furniture,” he explains wearily, and in the unheightened atmosphere, entirely believably. But it is Steinfeld who dominates. She sells the frustrated teen aspects of Kate – always pushing at her would-be mentor’s boundaries – and scenes as a horrified and powerless bystander to her mother’s (an as-ever underused Vera Farmiga) relationship with Jack as well as she does the blockbuster action sequences. If the plot isn’t up to much – what little happens in the first two episodes is erratic and riven with holes that leave you taking a lot on trust and hoping backfill will begin soon – the characters are credible and worth a little more emotional investment than usual. Or at least MCUsual, although we are not in Wanda and Vision territory either. Hawkeye may not be a resounding bullseye but it hits the spot well enough.The hairdresser steadied my head as I sat in the swivel chair, face mask on, staring into the mirror. In December 2020, another lockdown loomed, and nearly 12 months earlier I had made it a New Year’s resolution to get short hair that year. Within 45 minutes, my shoulder-length mop was down to a couple of inches. People often get radical haircuts in response to life-changing events, such as a breakup or the loss of a loved one. I got mine because I wanted to embrace how I felt as a butch lesbian. I’ve been gender non-conforming for as long as I can remember. Around the age of four, I staged a protest against wearing a dress at Christmas. I was horrified, one birthday, to be given a Barbie. My mum now loves me for who I am, but as a teenager growing up in Cumbria I knew she wouldn’t accept my sexuality. She had raised me as a Christian and homosexuality conflicted with her faith. At secondary school, I learned that words such as “gay” and “lesbian” were to be used negatively – as insults or jokes. A PE teacher was rumoured to be a lesbian and students gossiped about the way she looked. She presented herself in quite a masculine way, and had short hair. I realised I liked girls by the time I was 13. For the next few years, I hated myself. I felt sordid, ashamed and wrong: I had been told that people like me were wrong. I tried praying and dating boys. But I couldn’t change who I was. I connected with more masculine-presenting and butch lesbians, such as Ellen DeGeneres or friends on my football team. But they were laughed at for their men’s clothes and mohawks. School kids would snigger about angry, men-hating, leather-faced dykes. I felt so much shame when they did. Finally, in 2011, when I was 17, I gathered up the courage to come out as a lesbian by having my hair cut: a fierce short back and sides with a quiff on top. I drove to the nearby town of Brampton and made an appointment with a hairdresser for the following week. I seemed quite calm with the receptionist as I made the booking but, back in the car, I cried violently, my head pressed to the steering wheel. I felt completely alone, trapped in a nightmare from which I couldn’t wake up. The day after booking, I cancelled the appointment. I had come out to a friend in the village, and she wondered whether it might be too much for me rather than coming out gradually, then doing the hair later on. Looking back, I’m glad she said that – I wasn’t ready. I actually came out about a year later: I was with my first girlfriend and couldn’t hide our relationship. My friends and most of my family got behind me. It took time, but my mum is now one of my biggest supporters. I was happier after I came out, but felt repressed by my appearance and the stigma against looking butch. I bowed to what I perceived as overwhelming societal pressure to appear physically palatable to the heterosexual majority, but repeatedly looked online at people whose style I wanted to copy; for example, the actor Lea DeLaria and, more recently, Harry Styles – my lesbian icon. I idolised the 2012 pompadour of Alex Turner, lead singer of the Arctic Monkeys. I found inspiration in transgender and non-binary people, too, including several drag kings in London, where I now live. I disagree with claims that transgender and non-binary people erase or threaten my identity as a butch lesbian and a cisgender woman. Conversely, they have been a massive source of strength to me, particularly in terms of living authentically. By my mid-20s, I was wearing more menswear and less makeup. I bought suits for formal events such as weddings, having caved in to dresses until then. By 2020, it was approaching a decade since I had booked that first haircut and I promised myself I would have it done before the year was out. My then girlfriend was encouraging and, due to the pandemic, I wouldn’t see many people for months. I had time to adjust. Once my hair was cut, I felt revitalised. I would run my hands through it in the shower and smile. A friend compared me to Charizard – the dragon-like Pokémon – in that I had evolved into my final form. (I fall into the “soft butch” sub-category: ie, I’m mostly “masculine”, but sometimes buy from the women’s section and will consider the odd spa day.) Sometimes, I am innocently misgendered in public. There is occasional abuse, too. A few weeks ago, a man in the street asked aggressively if I was a boy or a girl. It wasn’t that he was eager to learn about my gender identity: it was as if he wanted to hurt me. I’m proud of the way I look now. But the sad reality is that I gained nothing from those years of not being myself. I feel uncomfortable when I look at old photographs of myself from weddings or a prom: long hair, face doused in makeup and wearing dresses. I spent so much time acting because I was scared of what other people would think. Pressuring people who don’t want to conform to gender stereotypes doesn’t change them. It damages them. My haircut helped to liberate me. I just wish I had felt able to do it years ago.A key group of Republican attorneys general that donated $150,000 to co-sponsor the 6 January rally where Donald Trump pushed his false claims of election fraud before the Capitol attack could draw scrutiny from a House committee investigating the events on or in the lead-up to the riot. The group – a part of the Republican Attorneys General Association (Raga) called the Rule of Law Defense Fund – has attracted strong criticism from watchdogs and ex-prosecutors even as Raga looks forward to next year’s midterm elections and many of its members are fighting on numerous fronts against Joe Biden’s agenda. The controversy around Raga appears to be yet another way that Trump and his supporters have increased their grip on more mainstream elements of the Republican party, and involved them in efforts to further their agenda. The RLDF, the policy arm of Raga, ponied up $150,000 for the 6 January rally, and arranged robocalls the day before informing people that “we will march to the Capitol and tell Congress to stop the steal,” a message that was probably reinforced by Texas’s attorney general, Ken Paxton, who told Trump’s rally: “We will not quit fighting.” Watchdog criticism of the Raga policy arm that backed the rally stresses that the group’s funding and robocalls occurred after dozens of court rulings rejected Trump’s claims of fraud. They say it undermines respect for the nation’s laws, as well as departing from the group’s main focus of helping get Republican attorneys general elected. Further, the rally funding and robocalls by the RLDF sparked resignations of high-level officials, including the Raga chairman, the Georgia attorney general, who broached concern about the group’s direction when he stepped down. The controversies about Raga’s rally activities come as the group has received a hefty $5.5m from the dark money Concord Fund since the start of 2020, which can help Republican attorneys general in the 2022 elections, and as many Republican attorneys general including Paxton have filed lawsuits to thwart Biden’s energy, immigration and vaccine policies. The $150,000 check that the RLDF donated to the rally came from the Publix supermarket heir Julie Jenkins Fancelli, funds that ProPublica reported were arranged by the Republican fundraiser Caroline Wren, a “VIP adviser” to the rally who has been subpoenaed by the House committee investigating the 6 January Capitol attack. Asked about scrutiny of Raga and its big donation for the rally, a House select committee spokesperson told the Guardian that it “is seeking information about a number of events that took place in the lead-up to the 6 January attack, including details about who planned, coordinated, paid, or received funds related to those events”. Some watchdog groups deplore Raga’s role in the rally. “It was clear before 6 January that the planned rally was based on lies, partisanship, and disrespect for the rule of law,” Austin Evers, the executive director of American Oversight said in a statement. “That’s what Raga and its corporate sponsors chose to fund. The fact that the rally turned into a violent assault on democracy itself makes Raga’s involvement worse … Raga and its funders should be held accountable.” Likewise, some ex-prosecutors express strong concerns about the message that the robocalls by Raga’s political arm conveyed. “Attorneys general are supposed to support adherence to the law,” said Paul Pelletier, a former acting chief of the fraud section at the DoJ. “By the time of the rally every court in the country had affirmed the lawfulness of the election results and had specifically rejected charges of fraud. At that stage, it seems Raga, by urging protesters to ‘stop the steal’, was simply promoting an unlawful attack on our democracy – the antithesis of their mission.” Raga’s then executive director, who resigned soon after the Capitol attack, denounced the violence by the mob, which resulted in several deaths and ore than 140 injured police officers, and in a sweeping denial stated that neither Raga nor the RLDF had any “involvement in the planning, sponsoring or the organization of the protest”. But campaign finance watchdogs don’t buy Raga’s denial. “Raga’s policy arm and other groups helped organize a rally that preceded a riot and an attack on democracy,” said Sheila Krumholz, the executive director of Open Secrets. The fallout at Raga over its 6 January role increased in April when Chris Carr, the Georgia AG who chaired the overall group, announced suddenly he was stepping down as chair, and noted a “significant difference of opinion” about Raga’s direction in a resignation letter. Later in April, Raga announced that Peter Bisbee, who had overseen the RLDF when the robocalls occurred, was being promoted to become Raga’s executive director. Since Biden took office many Raga members, including Paxton and others from Missouri and Louisiana, have filed a wave of lawsuits to block several Biden priorities. The surge of lawsuits is seen as potentially helpful in the runup to 2022 campaigns when 30 Republican and Democratic attorneys general will be running for re-election after serving four-year terms. In the 2020 elections, Raga for the first time targeted incumbent Democratic attorneys general with ads, and may try to oust Democratic attorneys general who were key Biden allies last year in states such as Pennsylvania and Michigan where Trump and his allies pushed false claims of fraud. While Raga this year witnessed some corporate backers hold back checks after 6 January, its fundraising was bolstered when it pulled in $2.5m, by far its largest contribution and more than a third of the total raised for the first half of 2021, from the dark money Concord Fund, which the Federalist Society executive Leonard Leo helped create. Raga also received $3m in 2020 from the Concord Fund. Raga roped in low-six-figure checks in 2021 from oil and gas giants like Koch Industries and the Anschutz Corp and the Koch-backed Americans for Prosperity. Over the years, Raga has garnered financial support from industries, including fossil fuels and pharmaceuticals, which GOP AGs have backed in major litigation. Trump himself is slated to host a fundraiser next month at his Mar-a-Lago club for Paxton, which appears to underscore his gratitude and the tough re-election campaign the former Raga chairman is facing as three Republican challengers to him have emerged. Those opponents are focusing on Paxton’s legal problems: he was indicted on securities fraud six years ago and the FBI reportedly has been investigating allegations of bribery and other misconduct. Last fall, some of Paxton’s former deputies accused him of improperly helping an Austin real estate developer and donor, prompting more FBI scrutiny. Paxton, who has not been charged, has broadly denied any wrongdoing. Paxton’s office this August released an unsigned 374-page report rebutting the charges of former aides and claiming he was exonerated, but attorneys for the ex-employees responded the report was “full of half truths, outright lies and glaring omissions”.Braemar out of season is a strange place to be. Not quite lifeless, but definitely falling into an autumnal torpor. After an extraordinarily busy summer hosting the great flood of northbound domestic tourists, in late October just a few B&amp;Bs and pubs are hanging on before some much-needed downtime. At the edges of the village though, and in the wider, wilder countryside beyond, a lot more life is to be found. Red squirrels are emboldened by the reduced traffic, the red deer rut is just coming to an end. Dan Brown and Rachael Iveson-Brown, owners of Wild Discovery, are at a similar stage of life: busy preparing for winter and renewal next year. I’m heading out with the couple to experience their new electric bike safari around a scenic part of Aberdeenshire. The autumn colours are aflame, the River Dee, appearing like polished steel, imperfectly mirrors the infernos above. Our starting point for the safari is literally regal. Balmoral Castle and its sprawling estate lie in the heart of Deeside and it’s in that car park I meet my hosts, along with Tony Yule, owner of eGuide Scotland, which provides bike tours all year round as well as the e-bikes for this more specialised trip. In 2019, Dan and Rachael, and Tony, set up their businesses separately, not knowing each other or that Covid was on the horizon. After a few exceptionally bleak months, first in 2020 then at the start of 2021, things have rebounded, and their entrepreneurship no longer feels like such a terrible idea. We’re using electric bikes because they’re much more likely to get people out into the wilderness. The Highlands can be a daunting enough environment to explore, but doubly so if you’re worried about whether you have the leg strength to get you up the next rise. “Plus, it’s really multi-sensory, unlike these guys,” says Tony as we’re passed by a polished black Range Rover, a guide with a mic in the front seat, guests hermetically sealed in the back. In this year of surging domestic tourism, an organised trip such as ours brings order where there has been so much chaos. As visitors streamed north over the last two summers, many for the first time, they found it difficult to control their motorhomes, lockdown pets, and bodily functions. There’s no need to worry about those North Coast 500 problems here in the Cairngorms – there are proper roads rather than passing places, large car parks, and even toilets. Out on the trail, Dan explains that while there are humans in this part of the world who have latterly benefited from the pandemic, the same cannot be said for the wildlife. On a loose checklist of Highland animals I hope to see, capercaillies are close to the top. “‘Hope’ is probably the best word,” says Rachael. “Yes, they’re not doing so well,” adds Dan, before the couple explain that in Scotland numbers of these large, boisterous grouse are thought to have plummeted by as much as 30% in the past two years alone. Any breather the climate got from humankind’s reduced international travel was evidently not felt by these birds. “There are just around 10 males left in Deeside,” Rachael says gravely as we remount the bikes. It’s not long before we’ve stopped again. This time to look at an impressive Scottish wood ant nest, then buzzards wheeling high above. On a luckier day they may have been golden or white-tailed eagles. Even without those trophies, Dan and Rachael’s encyclopaedic knowledge of the environment means I never feel short-changed. Part of the mission on these safaris isn’t just about what you are seeing but understanding what you aren’t. Our bumpy path leads out of the forest and briefly away from the autumnal foliage, the Highlands suddenly erupting around us with mountains on all sides. From this vantage point we can see Lochnagar rakishly wearing a cloud hat, glens rolling up and away from us. More than that, though, we can see a landscape endlessly altered by man. Many of the areas in front of us are extravagantly bald, the result of burning for grouse hunting. Much of the damage caused by the clearing has been exacerbated by red deer, the numbers of which are thought to now exceed 400,000. As they have for centuries, estates around here want to maintain this artificiality in order that rich people can travel to Scotland, see these animals, then easily shoot them. The fabled Highlands landscape is far uglier as a result. “We understand that there are livelihoods tied up in it, but we do have questions about how the land is managed,” says Rachael over her shoulder as we cycle away from an incoming squall and back to the cover of trees. This section of almost unadulterated Caledonian Forest is far more varied and beautiful that what had gone before, immediately more photogenic than the planned forests of regimented pines elsewhere. Some of the only development here came with the installation of a scenic footbridge over the Falls of Garbh Allt, said to have been ordered by Queen Victoria in 1878. She loved this place and was an unlikely pioneer of woodland preservation in this part of the country. The contemporary landowners are of course the Windsors. The royal family are well liked around these parts and access to their land is straightforward when the Queen is not in residence. During our cycle, days before the beginning of Cop26 in Glasgow, large marquees are being assembled in the lavish lawns of Balmoral Castle, presumably to host an event related to the conference. The House of Windsor may well have some sway, if not with Cop26, then perhaps with other wealthy landowners in this part of their territory. Some kind of rethink is needed around here, for the sake of man and beast alike. Why not make it a matter for royalty? “The whole landscape is slowly changing, bit by bit,” says Dan. “If they reduced grouse hunting and eased deer pressure, you could end up with a fantastic corridor of Caledonian Forest. There’s room for rewilding and sport to co-exist.” Wild Discovery offers private half-day e-bike tours of Deeside from £110 per person, e-bike included. In spring they will also offer a two-night adventure weekend from £499 per person, e-bikes and accommodation included. Visit wild-discovery.com For accommodation in nearby Braemar, Craiglea B&amp;B has doubles from £70, craigleabraemar.comThere’s a violent gang stalking urban America. In New Hampshire a motorcyclist crashed after being assaulted. In New Jersey, a terrified postman rang 911 after a dozen members attacked at once. And in Michigan, one town armed public workers with pepper spray. In September, the Daily Messenger in upstate New York had had enough and published a tongue-in-cheek call to arms: “We need to call out the militia, folks. This could be the greatest threat against humans and their civilization since Krakatau erupted. Wild turkey all over America are rioting, rising up in rebellion against the influx of people into their habitat.” The wild turkey has lived in what is now North America for more than 10,000 years, and was branded a “bird of courage” by founding father Benjamin Franklin in 1784. It’s deeply symbolic, for some, of Thanksgiving; as the animal pardoned by the US president each year before 46 million commercially raised turkeys are eaten by an estimated 88% of the population. It’s also one of the greatest conservation success stories in modern America, going from all but extinct in large parts of the country as recently as the 1970s, to so numerous that the 4ft-tall, 20-30lb, highly adaptable animals have successfully “overrun” hundreds of US cities. Trashing homes, intimidating people and holding up traffic, earning their reputation as one of the most bad-tempered neighbours on the block. Or, as Scientific American, put it, “ugly hooligan nuisance birds”. “Every year they grow astronomically, the population is absolutely huge,” said Carter Heath, a veteran hunter from New Hampshire and the regional director of the New England chapter of the National Wild Turkey Federation (NWTF), a citizen-led group that advocates for regulated hunting. The 49-year-old, who dresses in head-to-toe camouflage and hangs the heads of favourite kills in his living room, added: “In one way it’s a miracle. I don’t think anyone anticipated that it would be this successful.” In precolonial times, there were an estimated 10 million turkeys across what are now 39 US states. But thanks to unregulated hunting and the clearing of forests for farmland by European settlers, numbers plummeted to just 30,000 to 200,000 by the 1930s. By 1863, when President Abraham Lincoln made Thanksgiving an official holiday, wild turkeys had virtually disappeared in New England, according to the New England Historical Society. In 1884, Harper’s Weekly predicted that the bird would soon become “as extinct as the dodo”. The campaign to bring them back started in the 19th century, with conservation laws, hunting caps and the reappearance of forests credited partly to abandoned farms after the Industrial Revolution and Great Depression. But it wasn’t until the 1950s to 1970s that conservation groups began trapping a few of the remaining birds at a time and shipping them around the country to start new colonies. By the early 2000s, numbers reached 7 million, with the NWTF estimating about 25,000 in Massachusetts, 20,000 in New Jersey, 40,000 in New Hampshire and 60,000 in Maine. Chris Bernier, a biologist for the Vermont fish and wildlife department for the last 27 years, estimates that the state has 45,000 turkeys, bred from just 32 birds released in the 1960s and 1970s, with hunters allowed to kill 6,000 to 7,000 a year. Bernier said it was a mixed blessing. “The turkeys came back, which was amazing from an ecological point of view …unfortunately we live in their territories now,” he said. “It didn’t take long for them to adapt. They can exist deep into suburbia with no real predators and a ready supply of food.” In 2018, David Scarpitti, a turkey biologist for MassWildlife, which controls the population in Massachusetts, told the conservation group the National Audubon Society: “It’s gone from a conservation success story to a wildlife-management situation.” There are hundreds of urban conflicts reported each year, with some towns banning residents from feeding them, citing feeding as a catalyst. For bothersome birds, however, there are few ways for urban areas to safely cull large numbers, with just two official hunting seasons a year, often allowing only bow and arrows. The usual guidance on managing an aggressive bird is to to clap your hands, be assertive or wave an umbrella. Relocation remains the best option. In 2020, one of the most notorious offenders, a turkey called Gerald in Oakland, California, was relocated after he attacked more than 100 people in 12 months. The rogue turkey split the city into those who thought Gerald should have special privileges, and those who wanted to eat him. The incident hints at another complex part of American turkey-lore: some people love them. For every attack, each state seems to have their own adored “People’s Turkey”, from Godzilla in Michigan, to Dorothy in Kentucky, to Smoke in Wisconsin, who was appointed an honorary mayor. People flood social media with videos, start fanclubs with thousands of members, even prosecute their “murders”, including four teenagers in Michigan charged with killing Mr Gobbles in 2019. The suburban wild turkey is clearly here to stay. Even if not everyone is happy about it. In Somerville, Massachusetts, last year, a large male nicknamed “Pat Cluck” or “Mayor Turkatone”, with a history of aggression, was euthanised by the state. While there was an outpouring online from those who enjoyed seeing him strut down the street, one mother in her 30s, whose car was repeatedly vandalised by Pat, told the Guardian: “I won’t lie. He got what he deserved.”After years of saving, I finally have the means to buy my first home. However, my mortgage application was declined because my credit record shows a £13 default against an O2 account that I closed in 2019. O2 explained that I am actually in credit by £14 and the fact this was not refunded has created a default. I was told this was standard practice. O2 promised to have the default removed, and told me it would take 30-60 days. This could scupper my house purchase. MB, Lewes, East Sussex O2 is talking nonsense. Credits never show as defaults on a credit record, and disputes with credit reference agencies must receive a response within 28 days, not 60. When I challenged O2, it suddenly discovered there was no £14 credit. Instead, you owed £12.85 when your account was closed and, as far as you know, you weren’t informed. O2 says the confusion arose as you held both a business and a consumer account. The customer service agent, who misinformed you, could only see your business account was in credit, and did not realise there was a defunct consumer account on which money was owing. It has now cancelled the sum as a goodwill gesture and removed the default, but too late to save your property purchase. CH of Nottingham also faces losing the house he is trying to buy because of a default O2 has erroneously placed on his credit record. He had closed his account in 2017 and, three months later, was contacted by a debt collector claiming he owed £23. “O2 admitted it hadn’t made any effort to contact me about this mysterious debt and agreed to call off the debt collectors,” he writes. “My wife and I recently had a mortgage application declined because O2 turned out to have recorded a default against us. All attempts I have made to correct this have been ignored, and our family’s dream of owning our home is in tatters.” This case is even more disturbing because you never did owe the debt. O2 confirmed to me the default was loaded in error in 2017 and, due to another error, was not removed. It has now paid you a miserly £50 in goodwill, and sent a letter confirming its error to show to your mortgage lender. Customers who discover an erroneous default against their name should order a copy of their credit report from the three main credit reference agencies, and raise a dispute directly with the agency where the default is registered. It will issue a notice of correction while the dispute is investigated, and the default will be removed if the company that issued it admits an error. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsIn a year that has seen the musician Grimes sell a collection of digital artworks for almost $6m (£4.4m), and the original photo behind the 2005 Disaster Girl meme go for $473,000 (£354,000), Collins Dictionary has made NFT its word of the year. The abbreviation of non-fungible token has seen a “meteoric” rise in usage over the last year, said Collins, up 11,000% in the last year. Any digital creation can become an NFT, with the term referring to a certificate of ownership, registered on a blockchain, or digital ledger of transactions. The most valuable NFT to date is a collage by digital artist Beeple, which sold for £50.3m at Christie’s in March. Collins defines NFT as “a unique digital certificate, registered in a blockchain, that is used to record ownership of an asset such as an artwork or a collectible”; its lexicographers, who monitor the 4.5bn-word Collins Corpus to choose their word of the year, said they went for NFT because it demonstrates a “unique technicolour collision of art, technology and commerce” that has “broken through the Covid noise” to become ubiquitous. “It’s unusual for an abbreviation to experience such a meteoric rise in usage, but the data we have from the Collins Corpus reflects the remarkable ascendancy of the NFT in 2021,” said Collins Learning managing director Alex Beecroft. “NFTs seem to be everywhere, from the arts sections to the financial pages and in galleries and auction houses and across social media platforms. Whether the NFT will have a lasting influence is yet to be determined, but its sudden presence in conversations around the world makes it very clearly our word of the year.” Last month the Oxford English Dictionary named vax as its word of the year, noting that in September usage of the word was up more than 72 times on the previous year. NFT beat two other tech-based words on Collins’ shortlist of 10 words of the year: crypto, the short form of cryptocurrency, usage of which is up 468% year on year, according to Collins, and metaverse, a term coined by Neal Stephenson in his 1992 novel Snow Crash. Describing a three-dimensional virtual world – such as that planned by Meta, Mark Zuckerberg’s rebranded Facebook company – metaverse’s usage has increased 12-fold since 2020. Other words and phrases in the running included the Covid-focused pingdemic, hybrid working and double-vaxxed, while climate anxiety also made the list, reflecting growing concerns about climate change. Collins also noted a rise in the use of neopronoun, thanks to ongoing conversations over gender and the representation of trans and non-binary people; it defines the word as “a recently coined pronoun, especially one designed to avoid gender distinctions”. Collins chose “lockdown” as its word of the year in 2020, and “climate strike” in 2019. Collins’ 2021 Top 10 words NFT (ˌɛnɛfˈtiː) abbreviation for 1 non-fungible token: a unique digital certificate, registered in a blockchain, that is used to record ownership of an asset such as an artwork or a collectible. noun 2 an asset whose ownership is recorded by means of a non-fungible token: the artist sold the work as an NFT cheugy (ˈtʃuːɡɪ) adjective, slang no longer regarded as cool or fashionable climate anxiety (ˈklaɪmət æŋˈzaɪɪtɪ) noun a state of distress caused by concern about climate change crypto (ˈkrɪptəʊ) noun, informal short for cryptocurrency: a decentralised digital medium of exchange which is created, regulated and exchanged using cryptography and (usually) open-source software, and typically used for online purchases double-vaxxed (ˌdʌbəlˈvækst) adjective, informal having received two vaccinations against a disease. Also: double-jabbed hybrid working (ˌhaɪbrɪd ˈwɜːkɪŋ) noun the practice of alternating between different working environments, such as from home and in an office metaverse (ˈmɛtəˌvɜːs) noun a proposed version of the internet that incorporates three-dimensional virtual environments neopronoun (ˌniːəʊˈprəʊˌnaʊn) noun a recently coined pronoun, especially one designed to avoid gender distinctions pingdemic (ˌpɪŋˈdɛmɪk) noun, informal the large-scale notification of members of the public by a contact-tracing app Regencycore (ˈriːdʒənsɪˌkɔː) noun a style of dress inspired by clothes worn in high society during the Regency period (1811–20). Also called: Regency chicThey made millions from it. They threatened our health and poisoned the land. Among the filth they buried were industrial quantities of syringes, bloody bandages, oily waste from scrapped cars, shredded plastic and asbestos. Fleets of lorries travelled from as far afield as Birmingham to drop their loads at the sites the two men ran in south Wales, to avoid paying landfill tax. Yet these men, though responsible for one of the biggest illegal dumping crimes ever prosecuted, suffered nothing worse last week than suspended sentences, community service and fines and confiscation orders that together amount to around a tenth of the money they are known to have made. Over the past few months, we have begun to notice the scarcely regulated pollution of our rivers and seas. But hardly anyone is aware of what’s been happening to the land. If anything, it’s even worse. The illegal dumping of waste, much of it hazardous, most of it persistent, is now a massive crisis in the UK, caused by shocking failures of government. Large areas of land and crucial groundwater sources are being contaminated by illegal tipping, and barely anyone in power seems to give a damn. The disposal of waste in this country relies to a large extent on self-regulation. It’s up to you to check that the person to whom you hand your waste is a registered and responsible carrier. But a study into fly-tipping and unregistered waste carriers in England by Ray Purdy at Oxford University’s law faculty and Mat Crocker, the former deputy director of waste at the Environment Agency, shows that checking is nigh on impossible. Hundreds of different businesses use identical names on the Environment Agency’s official register, which often bear no relation to the names under which they advertise or trade. Many provide false names and false locations, including abandoned buildings, sports venues and, in one case, a Premier Inn. Technical glitches, unfixed after five years, ensure the site is scarcely functional. Astonishingly, Purdy and Crocker discovered that the Environment Agency had no data for online traffic, and no research into how many people were aware of the register’s existence. There is no facility on the register to report businesses working illegally. Across the past three years, though 140,000 businesses have applied to be listed as waste handlers, the Environment Agency has refused only 19. Despite widespread evidence of fraud and several prosecutions, it subsequently revoked just two registrations. The frequent spelling mistakes in company names and addresses suggest that not even the most basic checks have been conducted. But this is the least of it. Purdy and Crocker’s research shows that most businesses don’t appear on the list at all. Of the thousands of waste disposers they sampled, they discovered that almost two-thirds were not registered, and therefore operating unlawfully. All together, they estimate, there are over a quarter of a million unregistered waste handlers in England. Investigating adverts placed by people offering to remove your rubbish, Purdy and Crocker reported that many of those who appeared to be sole traders (“man and van”) in fact belonged to organised networks. Of 10,426 ads on Gumtree they followed, they found that over 4,000 had been bought by just two organisations, which together spend about £300,000 a year advertising on the platform. Yet these ads claim to be promoting small local businesses. Each of the vans in a network, the researchers estimate, could allow the organisation to evade £132,000 of taxes. The return on investment for a company running 100 fake sole traders, they reckon, is somewhere between 40 to 1 and 80 to 1. Here, as in Italy, it seems we have a waste mafia. But unlike the Italian mafia, ours seldom needs to resort to intimidation or violence, because no one stands in its way. All together, the report suggests, between 1m and 6m tonnes of waste in England are handled outside the lawful system every year. Illegally dumped waste contaminates the soil, the water and – when it is deliberately burned or spontaneously combusts – the air with a vast range of toxins, most of which are likely to be unmonitored and unrecorded. The more hazardous the waste, the greater the incentive to cut corners. We have no idea what the impact on our health and that of the rest of the living world might be, or what the results of this staggering regulatory failure would cost to clean up. During a rare prosecution in 2019, a court was told that a large illegal waste dump in a quarry close to Chew Valley Lake in Somerset might end up costing us as much as £9bn in remediation, if the contaminants leach into the water supplying Bristol and other settlements. Rusting drums photographed at an illegal dump in Pirbright, Surrey, beside a string of nature reserves, are suspected to contain extremely toxic polychlorinated biphenyls. An unidentified yellow substance has been reported leaking from the site into local streams. If some of this sludge emanates from the barrels, the possible consequences are scarcely calculable. According to the ENDS Report, local campaigners claim that Surrey county council and the Environment Agency have known the identity of the people using this site since 2009, but have failed to take legal action against them. On the rare occasions when the Environment Agency, or its equivalents elsewhere in the UK, can find the money for a pair of wellington boots and a hi-vis jacket and send someone out to check, they tend to offer repeated warnings before taking action. Even then, the most common punishment is a fixed penalty notice. If a case gets to court, people who might have made a fortune from their illegal activities are fined a few hundred pounds. In a recent prosecution, a man was found to have run an illegal dump that contained over 600 tonnes of waste, and evidence was presented that he had been burning hazardous materials. He was fined £840. The Environment Agency announced, “We hope this case will send a clear message”. It will, but not the one it intends. It’s a familiar story: of almost total regulatory collapse. The failure of the Environment Agency’s waste register looks similar to the farce of company registration, devastatingly exposed by Oliver Bullough. This story reminds me both of the catastrophic failure to protect elderly and vulnerable people against fraud and of the dumping of raw sewage and farm manure into our rivers and seas. All these failures are inevitable outcomes of 40 years of “cutting red tape”, of slashing the budgets of regulatory agencies, of outsourcing and self-reporting. We were promised freedom. But the people our governments have set free are criminals. Yet another filthy business is cleaning up. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistThis is the kind of novel that mocks the give-it-10-pages, I-need-to-be-grabbed-because-life-is-too-short school of reading. Even those of the trust-the-artist, persevere-and-stand-fast persuasion should prepare to be tested. I confess: I was confused, bewildered, lost. I wrote down the names of the characters. I backtracked. I cross-tracked. I re-tracked. The shape of the narrative only really began to declare itself around page 90. But then … oh, what an engaging education Harsh Times turned out to be, and how I came to look forward to my time in its company. I should not have doubted a master. Now 85, Mario Vargas Llosa has won numerous literary prizes, from the Nobel down. He ran for president of Peru in 1990 and has a serious claim to be the pre-eminent Latin American writer of his generation. He has written myriad plays, novels, much journalism and nonfiction. In many ways, he is the embodiment of what a great novelist should be: unafraid to write panoptic political novels about the fate of nations and the clash of political ideologies; intellectually capable of encompassing such scope; artistically skilful enough to suffuse it with resonance, torque and drama; and all of this without losing the immersive kinesis of individual stories taken from all points on the compass of the human character. This is exactly what we have here in Harsh Times. We’re in Guatemala in the 1950s: neck-deep in corruption, the CIA and international conspiracy. Vargas Llosa stays tight to the historical facts but vividly creates the inner lives of his historical and invented characters, allowing the novel to speculate on detail and motive. The story ricochets back and forth in time, but the period that it focuses on is between the 1954 CIA-backed coup in which President Árbenz was overthrown and the 1957 assassination of his successor Carlos Castillo Armas, also as part of an international intrigue. The traumas begin as the result of a breathtaking historical lie (the first of many contemporary resonances). Edward L Bernays is the director of public relations at United Fruits. The company is making staggering profits selling Guatemalan bananas all over the world, and is financially linked to the Republican US secretary of state, John Dulles, and his brother, Allen, director of the CIA. They “hadn’t invented the banana, of course”, Vargas Llosa notes with the wry humour that suffuses so much of his middle and later work, but they had “never paid a cent in taxes” and treat their workers as little more than slaves. Now there is a threat, though: President Árbenz wants to pass the Agrarian Reform Law in order gradually to change the economic and social lives of millions of people. Bernays goes on a fact-finding mission and reports back that “the danger that Guatemala should turn communist … is remote”. So, in order to protect United Fruits profits, they need to invent something – a “grave”, “immediate threat”. “What threat? The very same one,” Bernays says, “that I have just told you Guatemala doesn’t represent: the Soviet Trojan horse sneaking through the USA’s back door.” Yep, we’re back to that old-time political favourite: pretend there’s a problem and then offer yourself as the solution so you can grab power. The beast, once born, duly slouches to Bethlehem and the coup against Árbenz succeeds. How, the president wonders as he surrenders, was it possible that they “could invent something so fantastical as communism in Guatemala? It was a lie through and through, an indecent caricature of reforms, whose entire point was to prevent poverty, injustice and social inequality from pushing Guatemalans towards communism.” Thus Guatemala becomes a “frantic country” gripped by a ruinous and wholly unnecessary antipathy towards something that never threatened, and is soon “racing backwards towards tribalism and absurdity”. Plus ça change. A substantial part of Vargas Llosa’s gift has always been to illuminate the interior lives of characters regardless of their moral position – something only the greatest writers can do. Everyone in this book is mired in consequential life-and-death decisions. We fear for Marta Borrero, Armas’s lover, when she flees Guatemala in terror in the back of a car driven by the monster, Gacel. We cheer for her when she sinks her teeth into the ear of the degenerate Héctor Trujillo. Somehow, we care about Colonel Enrique, the vile head of Armas’s security, as he crawls back from the rag-and-bone degradation of five years in variously savage prisons infested with “perverts”. Johnny Abbes García, meanwhile, the Dominican intelligence officer responsible for so much Latin American bloodshed, is rendered masterfully here in fiction with “an extraordinary disjointed gait … as if he were crumbling apart with each step”. Vargas Llosa fans will know him from his appearance in The Feast of the Goat, but we meet him in this book a few hours before his murder of Armas, listlessly toasting Chinese torture methods with rum in a yet-to-open-for-the-day brothel. “You want to know something?” he asks. “Times when I’ve had to make a guy talk, using force, I like to sing. Or recite poetry … I don’t usually go in for that kind of thing. Singing, reciting … Only when I’ve got to hurt someone and make him talk.” On the second reading, when you know who is who, Harsh Times really comes into its own and, indeed, starts to make artistic sense. The chopping and the changing are designed to make you feel the disorientation, the claustrophobia, the paranoia of the 1950s. Sure, this novel isn’t Vargas Llosa’s finest (although I can’t think of many rival eightysomething authors who could do better). But it is replete with his deep human sensibility; it swarms with life and a determination to tunnel down into the underlying truth of humanity. Power. Politics. Credos and dogma. Senseless, casual death. Hopeless, casual love. The perpetual cruelty that greed recycles. The intergenerational legacy of stupidity. The way humans continually end up running things to their own detriment. Our own detriment. • Edward Docx’s latest novel, Let Go My Hand, is published by Picador. Harsh Times by Mario Vargas Llosa, translated by Adrian Nathan West, is published by Faber (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Police in Solomon Islands have used tear gas and rubber bullets to disperse hundreds of protesters, who allegedly burned down a building in the parliament precinct, a police station and a store in the nation’s capital of Honiara, amid reports of looting. The protesters marched on the parliamentary precinct in the east of Honiara, where they allegedly set fire to a leaf hut next to Parliament House where MPs and staffers go to smoke and eat lunch. “It was quite traumatising for us,” a staff member working at the national parliament said. He said luckily for them the police were able to control the situation, enabling them to leave. A police station and another building, owned by a Chinese national, were also burned down during the protests. “We did not expect the crowd to come here,” said a female police officer on duty at the station. “We were all in our offices when we heard the crowd. We came out to look but they began raining our building with stones. So I shouted to my colleague for us to hide in a room in the station. We were in the room when we started to choke by the smoke of fire. It was then that we realised that they torched the building.” The protesters were demanding the prime minister, Manasseh Sogavare step down. Many of the protesters come from Malaita province, the most populous province in the country whose provincial government has had tense relations with the central government for years. The tensions between the provincial and national government intensified in 2019 when Sogavare announced that Solomon Islands would switch its diplomatic allegiance from Taiwan to China, to the chagrin of Malaita premier Daniel Suidani. Speaking to the Guardian from Auki, the capital of Malaita, Suidani said the protests – which he was not present at – happened as a result of the government not listening to the people or engaging with their concerns on a range of issues, including infrastructure projects and the China-Taiwan switch. “In my view, whatever the government wants the people to know, they must stand and tell them. They cannot run away from problems. It will not solve anything”, Suidani says. Alpheous Nori, an elder from East Are’are in Malaita who attended the protests but was not involved in the violence, says the situation got out of hand because the national leaders did not listen to the people. “It is time for the country to rebuild, reconstruct, revamp or redirect as the people have now spoken,” Nori said. Police were deployed in full riot gear and used tear gas and rubber bullets against protesters. They were able to stop some arson attempts in Chinatown, but some shops were looted. The Royal Solomon Islands Force issued a statement on Wednesday evening call on “all citizens of Solomon Islands especially those in Honiara to remain calm and refrain from taking any illegal action following today’s protest that did not turn out to be peaceful.” They urged people to return to their homes if they did not have “urgent business” in the centre of the city. The prime minister announced a lockdown in the capital from 7pm Wednesday until 7am Friday.If you happen to be in your early 40s with a particular set of interests, no two words will strike fear into your heart like “GamesMaster revival”. Between 1992 and 1998, GamesMaster, a video game challenge and review show hosted by Dominik Diamond (and, briefly, Dexter Fletcher), was appointment viewing. It was smart, it was silly, it was pitched just high enough over the heads of its target audience to make it feel cool, and it tapped into the console boom like nothing before or since. So when E4 announced a GamesMaster remake earlier this year, the tired middle-aged men of the world collectively let out a prayer. Please Channel 4, don’t mess it up. Reader, they did not. Miraculously, the new GamesMaster series has pulled off the near-impossible trick of modernising the show while retaining its core DNA. There are still game reviews and challenges, but all the faces are new. Patrick Moore – who in the original series played the titular sadistic, spherical cyborg – has been replaced by Sir Trevor McDonald, and in place of Dominik Diamond are three presenters; the comedy writer Rab Florence, the esports host Frankie Ward and the Instagram comedian Ty Logan. It stands as a cruel indictment of time that Florence is the only one of the new presenters old enough to remember the original (and its coveted golden joystick trophy). And it turns out he didn’t even watch it that much. Speaking over Zoom from his house, which is lined floor to ceiling with imported Japanese games, Florence explains the primary appeal of the 90s GamesMaster was always its host. “I paid more attention to GamesMaster in its later years when it was very much the Dominik Diamond show,” he says. “I’m sorry, I was about four when the first series came out,” apologises Ward, eight months pregnant in a room kitted out with an intimidatingly expensive-looking microphone. “I remember it being around, but it wasn’t on at a time when I was actually in the house, because I was getting home from school.” Sensing my resentment, she adds, “But you know, Ty’s like 23 years old, so he’s the real common enemy here.” GamesMaster marks Logan’s first proper presenting job and, even though he wasn’t even born when GamesMaster was last broadcast, his excitement is palpable. “To be given such a big role, I don’t even think it’s sunk in yet. It’s still overwhelming.” There have been other attempts at video game shows in the years between GamesMaster iterations, but none have really worked. The simple reason for this is that they relied too much on the games themselves. Under Diamond’s watch, however, GamesMaster became something of a benign dictatorship. You watched it for the force of his personality. And it’s this that has most successfully been preserved. The three new hosts all have their roles to play: Ward is the voice of authority, Logan provides the puppyish enthusiasm – but it’s Florence’s wry, knowing, slightly cynical presence that takes centre stage. During our chat, he also demonstrates paternal concern for his colleagues. Early on, Logan’s Zoom drops out, and Florence brings everything to a halt to coach him through it. They’ve only made three episodes together, but the affection is palpable. “We do have a good chemistry, and you cannot fake that,” says Florence. “We are all from completely different worlds as well. I’m from Scotland, Frankie’s from esports, Ty’s online doing all these things.” “I’m from Scotland, she’s from esports,” Ward mockingly parrots back. “Esports is a country, right?” replies Florence. And it’s here that I overstep the mark. The new GamesMaster is more magaziney than before, with reviews mixed with films that put gaming in a broader context. It’s a bit like Top Gear, I mention. As one, all three faces drop in abject horror. Eventually, Florence (the Clarkson of the gang), tries to pick up the pieces. “I think the comparison matches because we are three odious personalities, just like the cast of Top Gear,” he says. “No, I think we got lucky by ending up with three people who have really good chemistry.” Although the hosts are apparently sworn to secrecy about the contents of each episode – “I don’t know why”, grumbles Florence, “it’s not a Marvel film” – it’s clear that the gaming world has changed beyond all recognition in the past 25 years. The contestants on the original GamesMaster were kids who had a Megadrive they played in their spare time by unhooking the aerial from the back of their TV. Now, esports is big business. Ward reveals that, after finishing work on the show, she flew to Romania for an esports event with a top prize of $18m. If GamesMaster struggles at all, it’s in trying to reconcile the homespun charm of the original with the full-pelt commerce of the current landscape. Perhaps the audience is being eased in gently, but two of the first challenges in the reboot are Super Mario and Mortal Kombat; franchises that are 36 and 29 years old respectively. Who is this new version aimed at, then – middle-aged nostalgists, or younger people used to the world of Twitch streams? “We’re not competing with esports,” says Ward. “This is a much more accessible show, in the sense that it’s not just about one game. Some Twitch shows can be six hours long. They’re a major time investment. You mentioned Top Gear earlier, and there is a magazine quality to it. You’re going to learn things. You’re probably going to see a video game you haven’t heard of and be like, ‘Ah, I need to get that because we’ve got people coming round at Christmas and I want to beat them.’” A full season of the new GamesMaster hasn’t been confirmed, but it’s clear that all three hosts are champing at the bit to make more. As we wrap up, Florence reveals that episode two contains a brand new game designed for the show by some children. As I pry, I become more and more reassured that the shonky spirit of GamesMaster remains undimmed. “The game is terrible,” sighs Florence. “Don’t get excited. It’s garbage.” “It’s got a really catchy theme tune,” offers Ward hopefully. “No, that’s terrible, too,” argues Florence. “It’s got bums in it,” says Ward. “A lot of bums,” adds Logan excitedly. “It’s got bums. It’s got cows. And it’s got bombs,” continues Ward. Like I said, GamesMaster is going to be just fine. GamesMaster returns on 24 November at 10pm on E4.When Gai Assulin’s mentor and idol reunite at the Etihad Stadium on Wednesday as Manchester City and Paris Saint-Germain meet in the Champions League, the man himself will be 10 miles away playing five-a-side with friends. The 30-year-old began his career under Pep Guardiola at Barcelona, earning the nickname the “Israeli Messi”, but finds himself without a club. Liverpool’s Thiago Alcântara has described Assulin as “the most talented player I’ve ever seen in La Masia”, the winger impressing in the B team as he helped Guardiola win his first title and the chance to replace Frank Rijkaard as head coach. Assulin was rewarded with a debut under Guardiola in the Copa del Rey but he did not make another first-team appearance before moving on a free transfer in 2010 to City, where he did not get a look in under Roberto Mancini, who had little interest in the club’s youngsters. The early pressure of being synonymous with Lionel Messi was not a tag Assulin particularly enjoyed as he looked to come out of the Argentinian’s shadow. “They like to compare in football; it is something they do all the time and for me it is a big compliment, but Messi is the greatest footballer in history,” Assulin says over lunch in Bramhall, Stockport. “Sometimes it is not good if you take it in the wrong way, as the expectation is for you to go on to the pitch and do the same as Messi all the time. Whichever club I went to, they saw I was compared with Messi, so they thought I was going to be Messi and score 50 goals a year, so that comparison at the time was not as positive. “Right now, after being at so many clubs, I see it as something positive and I take it as something that hasn’t been said about so many players. Messi is the best in history, so it’s nice to be compared to him for something that I did right at the time.” Assulin departed Crema in Italy’s Serie D at the end of last season, the sixth country ticked off in his career, and has since been at home in Cheshire with his partner and eight-year-old daughter. While searching for his next move, Assulin has been doing the school run, coaching, playing five-a-side and helping with his partner’s children’s clothes shop. On an indoor pitch at an industrial estate in nearby Cheadle Hulme it is not hard to spot the man with La Masia education among those from Moston and Moss Side. “Football is something irreplaceable,” Assulin says. “It is the thing I love the most in life and I will always love it and I will do it whenever I can. Even though I am not with a team now, I try to play and to train to do it as best I can. Coaching is something that I am building for the future, when I can’t play football any more.” Since leaving City in 2012, Assulin’s CV has taken on an eclectic look, including a short spell at Kazakhstan’s Kairat Almaty, alongside Andrey Arshavin, and Romania’s Poli Iasi, but he has always tried to stay true to his La Masia credentials. “Everything I did in my career is obviously connected to the football I learned in Barcelona and especially coached by Pep. He showed me the movements and how to tactically be on the pitch. Whenever I play, I try to get those elements into my game; the movements, going one against one, helping the team defensively, so all of that I learned in Barcelona. I was very happy to learn from the best.” Assulin’s story is often told as unfulfilled potential, a talent’s career played out thousands of times on Football Manager. The reality is that Assulin has enjoyed the ups and downs that come with such a tumultuous industry as professional football. “I grew up as a kid in Israel, in a small town and my dream was to play first-team football for a professional club. I gave everything with my dad, who pushed me the most because he really believed in me. I never thought in a million years I would be playing for the first team at Barcelona – that was so far from my dream. I only dreamed to play for a normal club, but things got better and better, so I have achieved that, so that will always stay with me. I was the youngest player to represent the Israel national team, which is an unbelievable achievement.” The next step is unknown for Assulin, who hopes to stay in England to be closer to his daughter after many years away. “She has seen me score a few goals in Italy and Israel and she is very proud of me,” he says. “She wants me to keep playing football as she wants to tell her friends that her dad is in football but she also wants me to stay in Manchester.” He wants a chance to keep his childhood dream alive for another season, whatever the level. “You get into a moment you can’t find a club – it’s football and it’s happened to a lot of players – so there are a lot of thoughts in your head, naturally, and you think negative things: ‘What should I do? Should I stop?’ But it is not an option for me, as football is everything.”Super League matches will be broadcast live on free-to-air television for the first time in the competition’s history in 2022 after it agreed an initial two-year deal with Channel 4. Ten matches will be broadcast on the channel next year, starting with Warrington’s trip to Leeds on Saturday 12 February. The remaining nine fixtures will be announced later this week but will include two play-off matches at the end of the season. Super League has prioritised a free-to-air TV deal as part of its new broadcast arrangement with Sky Sports, which also begins next year. With reduced income from Sky and clubs therefore receiving significantly less funding, the competition was keen to explore a secondary deal with another channel. The competition achieved record viewing figures in 2021. The anticipation now is that with Channel 4 agreeing to show 10 games a season, those numbers will increase. “We are delighted to be able to confirm a brand-new broadcast partnership with Channel 4,” Ken Davy, Super League’s chairman, said. “They have a great track record of showing some of the best sporting competitions. “The opportunity to offer live Super League action to fans on a free-to-air platform across the whole season is fantastic and one that we hope will continue to serve our current fans, as well as attract many new fans to the sport.” Super League has been synonymous with Sky since the competition launched in 1996, with the broadcaster holding exclusive rights for 25 years. That will now change, however. “I must thank our principal broadcast partner, Sky Sports, without whose support this partnership would not have been possible,” Davy said. Super League officials are already optimistic that the arrangement with Channel 4 will run beyond its initial two-year term, with the competition keen to command a regular place on free-to-air TV. “We’re absolutely thrilled to be bringing Super League to free-to-air television for the first time in its history,” Peter Andrews, Channel 4’s head of sport, said. “It’s fantastic news for rugby league fans and it’s a really special addition to Channel 4’s sports portfolio, particularly since it’s one of our first major partnerships since moving to our new national HQ building at the Majestic in Leeds.”“In light of Lewis Dunk’s second appearance as an emergency goalkeeper for Brighton: what’s the best record of an outfield player going in goal?” asks Lee Hopkinson. It’s not easy to define what constitutes a good record: a string of saves, a clean sheet, penalty heroics, a long stint or multiple appearances could all count. There are many examples, too, so we’ll pick some of the best and a few that are less well known. Let’s start with the legendary England and Bolton striker Nat Lofthouse, who twice went in goal for Wanderers – both times, oddly enough at Wolves. On the second occasion he saved a penalty from Eddie Clamp. Another England legend, Bobby Moore, saved a penalty at Stoke in a madcap League Cup semi-final second replay (yeah, different times). Niall Quinn is another member of the penalty-saving club; in April 1991, he memorably denied Derby’s Dean Saunders when he was thrown into action after Tony Coton was sent off in the 34th minute. City, who led 1-0 through a goal from Quinn at the time, went on to win 2-1. Eight years later Quinn replaced Thomas Sorensen in goal for Sunderland for the last 15 minutes and kept a clean sheet to secure a 1-0 win against Bradford. Quinn had scored that goal earlier in the game, too. James Walker remembers an outfield player who spent almost an entire match between the sticks. “Jack Sampson, who is a striker, lasted 86 minutes in goal for Macclesfield Town against Dover Athletic in 2016 when the keeper Ritchie Branagan was sent off. He managed to keep a clean sheet with it ending 0-0 at full-time. Here is a picture of him claiming his man of the match award.” Damon Maddison nominates Chelsea’s Dave Webb, a story told in this Joy of Six. “The same feature mentions that Glenn Hoddle filled in three times without losing a match,” writes Damon, “but Webb’s 100 minutes between the sticks may just trump that (depending on how we’re defining ‘best record’).” Phil Jagielka filled in for Sheffield United’s Paddy Kenny twice. The first was in a 2-1 win at Millwall, when Kenny was sent off after a half-time tunnel brawl. The 10-man Blades came from 1-0 down to win 2-1. The second stint came against Arsenal in 2006, when Kenny went off injured with 30 minutes to go. Jagielka denied Robin van Persie a late equaliser as United won 1-0. The United manager Neil Warnock’s faith in Jagielka was such that he rarely bothered naming a sub goalkeeper. Gent’s Eric Viscaal saved a penalty in the 89th minute and scored one in the 90th while playing at Cercle Brugge in 1993. And finally, earlier this year, the former Republic of Ireland midfielder Michael Doyle starred in goal for 72 minutes when Notts County’s first-choice keeper was sent off. He psyched out a penalty-taker, made a number of saves and shrugged off taunts that he “can’t even reach the crossbar” as 10-man County beat Dagenham and Redbridge 3-1. Overworked international teams “Italy played their 19th international of 2021 when they faced Northern Ireland,” begins George Jones. “What’s the record for internationals played in a calendar year by a nation?” “In 1993 the USA men’s team played 34 full international matches,” writes Jason Maxwell. “Most of the team were contracted directly to the US Soccer Federation in preparation for hosting the 1994 World Cup. So instead of playing for a club team the USSF arranged for as many games as possible for the national team to get playing time. All but eight of the matches took place in the Unites States.” The USA did manage to make it into the last 16, so perhaps it was worthwhile. Sons scoring for their dads (2) In last week’s Knowledge we looked at sons who had scored for teams managed by their fathers. And – you guessed it – there are more. “Kevin Bond must have bagged a few for his Dad John back in the tiny-shorted early 80s,” writes Dave Scott. “He played for him at Norwich and Manchester City.” He did indeed bag a few, including this cracker against Everton in 1981-82. Bond also scored in City’s famous 3-1 win at Anfield on Boxing Day 1981. A ramshackle Liverpool were 12th in the table after that game; they still won the league. David Achenbach has a couple more examples. Michael Bradley scored nine of his 17 goals for the USA men’s team while they were managed by his father, Bob, and Gavin Strachan scored once while playing under Gordon at Coventry. And then there’s this gem. Never mind a Knowledge answer; that match should be a Forgotten Story. Knowledge archive “When I were a lad, many moons ago, I remember the days of one substitute per side,” sniffed Darran Jalland in 2006. “The sub was usually only used in the event of an injury, and very occasionally as a tactical switch. With subs being so commonplace now, when was the last time an English top-flight match featured no changes at all?” Jonny Cooper at Opta supplied the answer to this question. There have, to our surprise, been 48 Premier League matches with no substitutions on either side, though only three have happened since the turn of the century. The most recent was Manchester United 3-0 Fulham in 2002-03. Before that there was West Ham United 1-1 Manchester United in the same season, and Leeds United 1-2 Ipswich Town in 2000-01. Can you help? “Currently only five Premier League teams have a positive goal difference (and one of those is a very minimal +1),” notes Richard Hirst. “But what is the lowest number of positives in a league at the end of the season?” “At present, at the end of Brazil’s 20 team Serie A season, the top six qualify for the Copa Libertadores, the next six qualify for the Copa Sudamericana and the bottom four are relegated. This leaves only four positions with little significance for the following season. Can any league offer fewer meaningless places in their final table?” asks Eugene Francis. “What are the most seasons a club has gone without anything noteworthy happening?” wonders John Ruddock. “I’ll define noteworthy as a trophy, a promotion, a relegation, or a cup final.” “Newcastle, Norwich and Aston Villa all had new managers on Saturday,” writes Richard Farmer. “Each of their captains, who all happen to be centre-halves, scored. Is this a unique treble for the new manager bounce?” “I noticed while watching Spain that Raúl de Tomás had ‘R.D.T.’ on the back of his jersey,” notices Dean Whearty. “Any other instances of players using initials on the back of their jerseys?” Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.Look at British politics in recent years and one thing stands out: an ever-dwindling supply of compassion. Migrating people who are left to drown as ministers send in patrol boats. Disabled people going hungry as social security is targeted. More divisiveness, via online abuse and anti-immigration sentiment, provoked by Brexit. And while the pandemic has in some ways brought communities together, it has also seen chilling callousness, as clinically vulnerable people die in large numbers with little fuss. Even topics that you would expect to guarantee compassion, such as growing child poverty, often descend into point scoring – or people turn a blind eye, suggesting we might now be desensitised even to a toddler going cold in the winter. This is hardly to say cruelty is a new phenomenon for Britain. But the feeling that things are getting worse is hard to shift. The public share the concern: a 2019 survey from Action for Happiness found 60% of people believed Britain had become less caring over the past 10 years. In a new book, How Compassion can Transform our Politics, Economy, and Society, a range of writers and public figures – including Alf Dubs, AC Grayling, Pragna Patel and me – attempt to figure out how we got to this point and outline ways we could build a more compassionate society. There has been a normalisation of suffering in modern Britain – or more accurately, certain people’s suffering. I have been writing about poverty and austerity for almost a decade, and at times it feels as if the worse it gets, the harder it is for some people to care. These unfeeling views are not born in a vacuum. They are the result of a carefully engineered hostile environment fostered by sections of the media and political classes. It was not an accident when a newspaper described migrants as “cockroaches”, nor when the future prime minister described Muslim women as “letterboxes”. It is in their interests. Just this month, the former Tory minister Lord Freud effectively admitted that the party introduced the benefit cap in 2013 not to save money, as was claimed at the time, but because turning the public against benefit claimants wins votes. Dehumanisation has been a key part of our political discourse in recent years: discussion of “scroungers” and “illegals” dismisses even the basic humanity of people in need. And yet there is also surely a problem in our own lowered expectations – that we now just assume that those who are working-class, disabled people or people of colour will live a life of hardship and discrimination. We might call it prejudice mixed with compassion fatigue. There are moments that expose the reality of government policy that manage to produce public outrage. Think of Stephen Smith, whose emaciated body visibly showed the cruelty of the benefits system. Or how the recent death of a newborn baby in jail highlighted the need for prison reform. Sadly, the reality is that the outrage fizzles out without any real change. So how do we build something better and reinject compassion into our politics and our wider culture? It’s first necessary to consider what we mean by compassion. Compassion often holds paternalistic undertones – charitable gifts for the “deserving poor” – or comes as an empty gesture. Recall the response to key workers during the first coronavirus lockdown: each week, politicians and the public alike stood on their doorstep to clap for the NHS. And yet, within a matter of months, these same institutions and staff were being abandoned. Compassion can’t be reduced to a “touchy-feely” wave of the hand – or indeed a clap. It must represent a commitment to wide-reaching structural changes, from a properly funded social safety net, to sanctuary for refugees, to gender equality. How, then, do progressives sell this? First, compassionate policy makes good economic sense. Feed and clothe deprived children now and future health, social security and crime bills will go down. Build more social housing and the taxpayer will save billions of pounds in housing benefits paid to private landlords. It is often cheaper to do the right thing. But it’s also crucial we make the principled case for a more compassionate political culture: if a fellow human being is struggling, we should do all we can for them simply because they need it. We respond to stories – both their substance, and who is telling them – so creating a more representative media is one way to ensure fairer perception of marginalised groups; currently, only 11% of journalists come from a working-class background, while fewer than 1% have a disability. Parliament is likewise woefully unrepresentative of the public at large. Rich white male MPs lining their pockets from the Caribbean are never going to legislate in the interests of the disadvantaged. Part of it, I think, is maintaining hope in the goodness of our fellow human beings. During terrorist attacks, we are told to “look for the helpers”. When we see social injustice, we should do the same. For all the individuals and groups sowing division and hate, there are countless more fighting for kindness and collectivism. Each of us has the power to spread compassion, whether that’s by volunteering for a homeless charity, campaigning for a political party that shares our values, or by not amplifying contrarian accounts on social media. It is easy to feel disheartened; these are dark times for many and it feels as if the light is fading. But the first step in finding a fairer way to organise our society and economy is having faith that it is possible. Compassion’s greatest enemy is fatalism, and its greatest friend is the belief that empathy will win out in the end. Britain can be better than this. Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnist and author of Crippled: Austerity and the Demonisation of Disabled PeopleI vividly remember the day I learned a harsh lesson in the tragic burden of malaria that too many of us from the African continent have endured. I was 15, living amid the chaos of Nigeria’s Biafran war, when my three-year-old sister fell sick. Her body burning with fever, I tied her on my back and carried her to a medical clinic, a six-mile trek from my home. We arrived at the clinic to find a huge crowd trying to break through locked doors. I knew my sister’s condition could not wait. I dropped to the ground and crawled between legs, my sister propped listlessly on my back, until I reached an open window and climbed through. By the time I was inside, my sister was barely moving. The doctor worked rapidly, injecting antimalarial drugs and infusing her with fluids to rehydrate her body. In a few hours, she started to revive. If we had waited any longer, my sister might not have survived. Thinking about that day, I consider how far we have traveled in the fight against malaria, with the recent historic announcement from the World Health Organization (WHO) recommending the world’s first malaria vaccine (RTS,S) to reduce illness and death across regions where children are at risk. As part of a package of interventions, tailored to local malaria conditions, the vaccine could save tens of thousands of young lives every year – especially among the most vulnerable, as my little sister was. Since 2019, more than 800,000 African children have had at least one dose of the RTS,S vaccine as part of a pilot in Ghana, Kenya and Malawi. Now, with the right investment, millions more children could be immunised and grow up with less malaria, fewer hospitalisations and healthier lives. Malaria is emotional – it strikes suddenly and kills our children. But I am an economist, so I put emotion aside to consider whether the vaccine is a good investment. Malaria impoverishes countries. A 2001 study estimated per capita income levels in malaria-endemic countries to be 70% lower, and malaria results in $12bn (£9bn) in lost productivity around the world each year. Some countries spend up to 40% of their public health budget treating the disease. This is the stark divide that malaria creates every day in Africa and one that a malaria vaccine can help close. Analysis of data from 180 countries demonstrates a clear link between a reduction in the burden of malaria and faster economic growth. Malaria disproportionately affects the poor and hampers the economic development of communities. Malaria has pushed many a working family into poverty. So yes, as an economist, I can say that investment in a malaria vaccine is money well spent – for economic development, for poverty reduction and to reduce inequities. I applaud the governments, the WHO, its partners and the funders that have supported the pilots that have brought us to this point. I was honoured to chair the board of Gavi, the vaccine alliance, in 2019, when we made important decisions on efforts to bring this vaccine forward. Today, in a different capacity but with the same passion, I urge the global health community to again be bold and invest in the malaria vaccine on a robust scale, so that we may reap the fruits of this breakthrough for children’s health. My sister is now a doctor, working to save the lives of others, and the mother of three children. Saving children from malaria is about protecting Africa’s future. Despite progress against the disease, millions of Africans have died from malaria since 2000, most of them about the same age as my sister when she became sick. They will not have a chance to become doctors, teachers, farmers, computer programmers or play any other role, or to have and care for their own families. But with the introduction of the world’s first malaria vaccine, and continued investment, we can curb this terrible disease. The RTS,S vaccine is a cost-effective new tool, something concrete we can act on now to give millions of boys and girls the chance to contribute – and ensure Africa’s economic progress is no longer slowed by malaria. As the world witnesses tremendous inequities in access to vaccines, and we explore ways to bring vaccine development knowhow and capacity home to Africa, it is our collective responsibility to invest in the malaria vaccine now in our hands, and ensure that it reaches those who need it. Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala is the director-general of the World Trade OrganizationWe will wrap up the live blog here for the day. Here’s some of what made the news today: The defence minister, Peter Dutton, won a defamation case against a refugee activist over a tweet, receiving $35,000 in damages. The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, announced the government plans to list both The Base and the entirety of Hezbollah as terrorist organisations under Australian law. New Zealand will open to international visitors in 2022. The border will initially open to NZ citizens and visa holders coming from Australia in January, then citizens and visa holders coming from the rest of the world in February, and finally opening to all vaccinated visitors from April. The NSW deputy police commissioner, Karen Webb, will become the first female NSW police commissioner, replacing outgoing commissioner Mick Fuller. Victoria recorded 1,196 new Covid-19 cases and three deaths, while NSW reported 248 cases and two deaths. The Northern Territory recorded 11 new Covid-19 cases, bringing the cluster, centred in Indigenous communities, to 51. Amy Remeikis will be back with you tomorrow morning for the last sitting day of this the second last sitting week of 2021. AAP has a report on new Magnitsky-style laws introduced into the Senate today making it easier to slap sanctions on serious human rights abusers and criminals. The laws would allow the government to hit those who conduct egregious acts of international concern, including human rights abusers. The previous sanctions regime does not mention human rights and is not used for this purpose, leading to a joint parliamentary committee recommending more specific sanctions. The foreign minister, Marise Payne, said it would allow the government to respond more directly to national security threats by targeting people proliferating weapons of mass destruction, committing human rights abuses or engaging in serious corruption. “Our reforms will deny access to our economy for the proceeds of egregious abuses ... and ensure our banking systems do not become a safe haven for these proceeds and any associated foreign influence,” Payne said. “Cyber-sanctions serve as an important tool of statecraft. Rules apply online just as they do offline and perpetrators must be accountable.” Debate on the bill was adjourned until the next sitting period. Labor supports the Magnitsky-style laws, which are named after a Russian whistleblower who died in a Moscow jail after accusing Russian officials of tax fraud. The US, the UK and Canada have used the measures to respond to Russian aggression. Earlier this afternoon, the PM announced a $242.7m “Trailblazer Universities” initiative, which will pick four universities and fund them up to $50m each for commercialisation of research around manufacturing in defence, space, resources tech, food, energy and medical products. The unis will also be able to get $8m in CSIRO specialist support through Test Labs. There will be a competitive application process, after universities submit expressions of interest, from which a shortlist will be made. Universities will be assessed against the following terms: Commercialisation readiness, including the adoption of innovative intellectual property arrangements, and clear promotion pathways for academics engaged in commercialisation activity to reward research entrepreneurs. Research capability to support a National Manufacturing Priority, including research translation and commercialisation capabilities to become a world-leading centre in a priority area. Industry alignment, including collaborative partnerships with industry and co-funding from business partners, greater workforce mobility between businesses and universities, and offering courses in priority areas that are endorsed by industry. The shortlist will be developed in January, with a business case assessed up to March next year. The Coalition’s voter ID bill is back in the House of Representatives. Labor’s Andrew Giles labels it a “blatant voter suppression tool”, a “cheap trick” that the Morrison government thinks can help it win the election but has “nothing to do” with voter integrity. Giles said that long lines at US polling places show the efforts that voters have to go to overcome “racist” voter suppression methods there. Giles cited the Australian Electoral Commission’s finding that double voting is “vanishingly small” and is usually the result of electoral officers’ errors or the voter’s dementia. He said: The government knows people in Indigenous communities are less likely to have identification or carry it with them. This is “yet another barrier to Indigenous Australians’ participation and from having their voice heard in this place”. Even if the bill passes the House - numbers in the Senate are very shaky. One Nation supports it in theory but is having a dummy spit about other bills and Country Liberal Sam McMahon is unsure she can support it. The government would need their votes, rebels Alex Antic and Gerard Rennick and one of the crossbenchers – most likely Stirling Griff or Jacqui Lambie. Although some, including Griff, want an inquiry into the bill, the government wants it passed this fortnight, and Labor wants it voted down. The head of the OECD, Mathias Cormann, was also asked about the role of China during the Lowy Institute event. He said it was important to work constructively but also to “draw lines in the sand”. The former senior Coalition minister said China was “a significant market” and “now the world’s second biggest economy” while it was the biggest trading partner of a growing number of countries around the world. Cormann said that meant countries around the world had an interest in having “the best possible relationship with China”. And there are also issues, you know, whether it’s climate change or international tax, or a series of other issues that can only be effectively addressed by having all of the major and minor players around the table. And an issue like climate change will only be able to be addressed effectively if the US, China, India and others are around the table. So there’s a whole range of areas where it is very clear that we must find ways to effectively cooperate. Cormann added that the OECD was an organisation that brought together market-based democracies that shared a commitment to human rights and the rule of law. The political and economic system in China is different, and inevitably, there will be pressure points from time to time. Now, the key is going to be to work through those in as positive and constructive a way as possible. But also to be very clear on, you know, where it is important to stand up for our interest and to draw lines in the sand. And well I think that that’s going to require appropriate balancing, you know, for some time to come. I mean, ideally, we will end up with an appropriate, sustainable accommodation in the context of an international rules-based order, where we can continue to live together harmoniously, peacefully and pursuing the further expansion of global trade to mutual benefit. Mathias Cormann, the former finance minister turned OECD secretary general, has called for an “internationally more coherent and globally better coordinated approach to the pricing of emissions”. Cormann – who as a member of the Abbott government helped abolish the Gillard government’s carbon pricing scheme – mentioned climate action during the Lowy Institute’s Owen Harries Lecture this evening. He said: While emissions across OECD member countries peaked in 2007, there is much more work to be done. Earlier this month, I was at Cop26 where the need to accelerate global policy action to match climate commitments was obviously very stark. And it’s great that more and more countries including Australia have committed to a net zero emissions target by 2050. However, ultimately, it will be real outcomes and not commitments that matter. And to be truly effective in helping to reduce global emissions, climate action needs to be globally coherent and better coordinated. Cormann said one issue was that individual jurisdictions must “actually help reduce global emissions instead of simply shifting emissions to other parts of the world” – meaning emissions have to be cut everywhere. The challenge is to ensure the level of ambition and effort in individual jurisdictions can be lifted to the level required while maintaining a global level playing field, avoiding counterproductive trade distortions, and carbon leakage. (This, incidentally, is why the EU and others are considering carbon border adjustment charges, aka carbon tariffs.) Later, in Q&amp;A with the Lowy Institute executive director Michael Fullilove, Cormann was asked whether Australia should have taken a more ambitious 2030 target to Glasgow. Cormann avoided directly criticising the Australian government, saying it was important “to have credible and realistic transitions” to net zero by 2050. I think it’s always important to be more ambitious, but it’s even more important to be able to deliver the outcomes. And the outcome that we need the world to deliver is global net zero by 2050. And in that sense, we’ve got to continue to make decisions that help reduce the global problem. That don’t just shift the problem from one jurisdiction to other jurisdictions around the world. Amy has just informed me that the House of Reps is having to recount a vote on the litigation funding bill due to “technical glitches” involving the iPads they use. LNP MP George Christensen has also crossed the floor to vote against the bill. His crossing the floor didn’t change the outcome - it passed 65-63. A bit rough, we’ve all been there. The very lovely Josh Taylor will take you through the evening, as I contemplate floristry or some other lovely career. It’s been another day of just absolute batshittery in the parliament and the exciting news is, we have five more sitting days to go this year! Who knows what tomorrow will bring – outside of the prime minister introducing the religious discrimination legislation (which started life as the religious freedom legislation) – an election promise which will be sent straight to a senate committee, and therefore will be unlikely to be passed before the next election (unless that election is in May) Given all the questions you have asked me about election timing at this point, the only answer I can give you is the same as every other time – the prime minister will call an election when it is best suited to him. If everyone calms down over the summer, and the prime minister is able to stay away from the news, enabling people to forget, then there is every chance he will call an election for March, if the polls show there has been an uptick in support. Because the longer he waits, the more opportunity there is for something to go wrong. But there are still those who want to see a budget handed down to go to the election with. So again, it will depend on when the prime minister thinks the timing is best. There has to be an election by May 22, so that is the only absolute in any of this. But first we have to get through the end of the sitting – and at this point, the end of the first sitting week. Will Andrew Wallace have decided if he wants to follow in the footsteps of Tony Smith or Bronwyn Bishop by then? Probably not. Can question time get any worse? Always. Am I entirely grateful to the Canberra Guardian team and the Guardian brains trust at large for all their hard work? Completely and absolutely. This project doesn’t exist without them, or the heart of the blog, Mike Bowers. I am just the ranting typing monkey to their intelligence, calm and patience. And we all take our hats off to you, our readers, for keeping us going. We truly appreciate you and your support. It means the world to us and does make everything worth it. We’ll be back early tomorrow. Until then, please – take care of you. The voter ID laws are still in the house, but the ABC reports another Coalition senator is considering crossing the floor. This time it is Country Liberal party senator (who has lost the number one ticket spot on the NT senate ballot) Sam McMahon, who says she is in discussions with the government over whether or not the legislation is needed, or something she can support. McMahon told the ABC: I’ve got concerns about how they’re going to impact, particularly Indigenous Territorians,” she said. I think there’s very little, if any, evidence of voter fraud in the Northern Territory. I’m thinking that it is possible that I might not be able to vote for them but, like I said, that’ll hinge on discussions that I have with my colleagues.” Anne Aly was on Afternoon Briefing talking about her position on the religious discrimination bill (Labor is yet to come to a caucus position) I am pleased that some of those provisions in the first and second draft, especially around the provision of medical services, have been removed, and that the Folau case has been removed. In principle I support religious freedom as a person of faith myself, and as a person who has a lot of contact with faith-based communities within my electorate and across Australia to support those provisions. I note one of the first and longest running debates I had when I was first elected was about the remove of provisions to protect against discrimination in 18C, the racial discrimination act, interestingly having this discussion about religious freedom and discrimination. I had concerns about the provision in the current bill around the belief clause, around the statement of belief clause, I think there are some parts of that that could be problematic and that need to be knotted out more. I understand it has been a recommendation the bills go to a Senate inquiry and I hope that those aspects of that particular clause, the statement of belief because our knotted outcome I have concerns that clause might overrun some state legislation that offers better protections for people of faith, and for faith communities. The Western Australian deputy police commissioner says he expects fewer than 24 police officers to lose their jobs with the vaccine mandate for police coming due on December 1. As AAP reports: Western Australia’s premier is confident critical industries won’t be disrupted as the deadline nears for mandatory COVID-19 vaccinations. Fly-in, fly-out resources workers, police officers and fire and emergency services staff are among those who must have received their first dose by December 1. A larger cohort including retail and hospitality workers have until the end of the year to get jabbed. WA is expected to reopen its borders in late-January or early-February, subject to 90 per cent of people aged 12 and over being fully vaccinated. About 85 per cent of West Australians have now received at least one dose but there has been backlash over the mandates from a vocal minority, some of whom have levelled violent threats against the premier and other leaders. Premier Mark McGowan expects most people will agree to get vaccinated when faced with a threat to their livelihood. “We had exactly the same issue in the aged care workforce,” he told reporters on Wednesday. “As the deadline approaches, people see sense. They get vaccinated, life goes on, they keep themselves safe, they continue to be employed and in due course they wonder what all the fuss was about.” WA Police deputy commissioner Col Blanch said officers who refused to get vaccinated before the deadline would likely lose their jobs. He told Perth radio 6PR he expected the number to be fewer than two dozen. The state government will this weekend launch a summer vaccination drive including targeted promotions and events and pop-up clinics at selected supermarkets. Clinics will also open at cricket matches at Optus Stadium, beginning with Saturday’s WBBL final. Remote communities remain a continued focus with only about a third of Aboriginal people in WA being fully vaccinated. Police have increased Mr McGowan’s personal security after two young men allegedly threatened to behead the premier and his family. The men, aged 18 and 20, are alleged to have phoned Mr McGowan late on Saturday and left a number of threatening messages. They are due to face court next month. Mr McGowan, who has indefinitely closed his electorate office amid security concerns, is also weighing whether to move his family from their nearby home in Rockingham, south of Perth. “The people involved in all of this share my address all of the time, so it’s a bit of a problem,” he said. “I’m not too worried about it in a personal sense, (although) it’s not pleasant. “The main thing I’m worried about is making sure people get vaccinated before they catch COVID.” Police Commissioner and vaccine commander Chris Dawson said threats had also been made against his life, resulting in charges being laid. He said police were monitoring back roads between WA and the Northern Territory, whose outbreak has grown to more than 50 cases. AAP has a little more on what I think the government is calling ‘can do capitalism’: Leaders of a business climate club say they are dodging “petty party politics” and getting on with the job of decarbonising the economy. “We’re trying to keep the politics out of it and just get on and do what we can,” said CSIRO chair David Thodey, who co-chairs the Climate Leaders Coalition group. The biggest climate question for Australia is how to get small and medium-sized firms on board, he told the audience of an online event held by the Committee for Economic Development of Australia on Wednesday. “I do think that governments can play a critical role here and I think they need to be at the table, setting policies and incentivising everybody to move,” he said. “I’m not going to buy into their petty party politics because there’s nothing rational in it.” Business leadership and peer group pressure will make a difference, Thodey said. “I’m not going to have irrational arguments or discussions around technology road maps and things like this that are only a part of the solution.” But state governments have “wonderful” initiatives and continue to step up on net zero and 2030 targets, he said. “We will encourage and work with anybody who wants to make a difference.” The CLC is a group of 33 Australian companies that account for just over a fifth of the country’s current greenhouse gas emissions under current global accounting rules. AGL, BHP, Fortescue Metals, Rio Tinto, Santos, and Wesfarmers are among its members. Thinking of those in the flood zone – stay safe out there peeps. It is going to be another wild summer. Via AAP: The State Emergency Service has responded to almost 3000 calls for help during the flood crisis that’s gripped NSW for a week, and there is no reprieve in sight with more severe weather forecast. Commissioner Carlene York says the SES has been “extremely busy” with the requests, including 150 in the last 24 hours. More than 60 flood rescues have been conducted, including six in the last day. The bulk of the calls have been in Forbes, Gunnedah, Orange and Coffs Harbour, mainly for fallen trees and leaking damaged roofs caused by heavy rain. York is urging people to monitor the Bureau of Meteorology and SES websites for forecasts and warnings, saying it’s important for people in danger zones to prepare to evacuate. “Have an evacuation kit ready, get your important documents, know who to contact and know where to go,” she said on Wednesday. BoM hazard preparedness and response manager, Jane Golding, has warned that with catchments saturated, dams full and rivers high it doesn’t take much to trigger a flood. “More rain means more flooding,” Golding said. Severe thunderstorms are also developing over inland NSW. Warnings were issued on Wednesday afternoon for the lower west and Riverina regions, with areas between Ivanhoe and Narrandera in the path. Narrandera recorded 46mm of rain in a three-hour period on Wednesday. Heavy rain is also expected further west near Broken Hill and Menindee. A low pressure system is forecast to deepen before it moves towards the east coast on Thursday and Friday, with strong southerly winds expected to follow it, bringing more danger. Mike Bowers had to endure that question time in person. Here is some of what he saw: Anyone who has seen the Peppa Pig tiktok challenge knows what I am seeing here (it’s not bad, just funny) Colour me shocked Question time ends. The pain though, it lingers. It is worth noting that asked to condemn a member of his government’s benches comments on vaccine mandates, which also said civil disobedience was ‘part of the solution’, Scott Morrison turned it into an attack on Sally McManus and Labor MPs who were found guilty following court cases which occurred because of findings of the NSW Icac – which Morrison has recently criticised as a body. It also doesn’t make sense. He claims that the McManus comments about breaking unjust laws (which McManus was talking about in the context of unprotected strike action in 2017) were relevant to a question asking him to condemn George Christensen’s anti vaccine mandate comments, which included comparisons to Stalin and Pol Pot, and said civil disobedience was ‘part of the solution’. So the question has to be asked – in what way? In what way are they relevant? Is Morrison saying that unjust laws should be broken? Because it makes no sense. Morrison has said that Icac has too much power now that Gladys Berejiklian’s actions form part of one of it’s investigations, but he is also criticising the Labor party for the actions of Eddie Obeid, which were found out because of an Icac investigation. All building to an attack to call Anthony Albanese a “weak reed” in answer to a question on why he won’t condemn a member of his own backbench who is threatening to withhold his vote or cross the floor and de-rail the government’s attempts to pass legislation in the house, while also ramping up his anti-vaccine mandate rhetoric which is being celebrated by far right elements within the anti-vaccine protest movement. Scott Morrison was asked to condemn the comments, and said he does. But he won’t name the member. Or call out the comments specifically. Instead, he calls the opposition leader ‘weak’ for comments a union leader made in 2017 about unprotected strike action, and brings in Eddie Obeid, who was found guilty in a court, after prosecutors decided to follow up the findings of an investigation by Icac, a body Morrison has recently criticised as it looks into dealings of a Liberal politician. Question time ends. The next question should go to Terry Young, but Bob Katter has shown up with a question, so Young gives the floor to Katter. And then Andrew Wallace reverts back to his previous form. Katter: Prime minister, Sally McManus who has been a great union member in this country. Would you quote her in this house, please. Scott Morrison is positive gleeful: I thank the member for Kennedy for his question! This is what the leader of the trade union movement said. “I believe in the rule of law when the law is fair and the law is right, but when it is unjust, I don’t think there is a problem with breaking it”, Mr Speaker. Now, Mr Speaker, we should respect the rule of law. We should always respect the rule of law, Mr Speaker! We shouldn’t encourage people to break the law, it shouldn’t be optional, Mr Speaker, for trade union leaders and militant union thugs, Mr Speaker, who might want to come on... It is not OK for members to encourage those to be wilfully not obeying the law I going on Mr Speaker and preventing people from accessing their place of work which those opposite, Mr Speaker, know all about. Know all about, Mr Speaker. There is no wonder, Mr Speaker, why those opposite did not want want me to read out that quote. It betrays their hypocrisy. It betrays their hypocrisy that it is alright for union thugs to come and try and knock this building down, Mr Speaker (that happened in the 80s). It is alright for that, we will support them then, Mr Speaker, we will support them when they are out working away, when John Setka (who Anthony Albanese had removed from the Labor party) and outlaw motorcycle gangs, Mr Speaker, and it is OK, Mr Speaker, when they commit these crimes they will let them stay in this country which is what happened under the Labor party, but when we, Mr Speaker, when we are in government, Mr Speaker, and we want to send those thugs out of this country and we want to introduce laws that strengthen our protections to enable us to keep the thugs out of this country, guess who votes against us? The Labor party, Mr Speaker. That is not the sort of weakness this country needs, Mr Speaker. The leader of the opposition was part of a Labor party which led outlaw motorcycle gang thugs and union leaders who work with them, Mr Speaker, to get away scott free! That is not how you run a country if you are a strong leader, Mr Speaker. This leader of the opposition is a weak reed, Mr Speaker. He is a weak reed. Tony Burke: There is no doubt this was not directly relevant to the question. Wallace: Has the prime minister completed his answer? Just before the prime minister continues...I will give the call to the prime minister but the prime minister should return to... To the general thrust of the question (which was just asking for him to quote Sally McManus) Morrison: Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker, Mr Speaker, I can only go back to what the leader of the trade union movement said, Mr Speaker, when she said she didn’t have a problem with people breaking the law, Mr Speaker. I understand the Labor party has sympathy with that. I wonder whether the leader of the opposition will be going out and meeting his mates that he backed into their roles in prison, in the New South Wales parliament they are going down to the [Obeid] ski lodge this winter! Again though, Scott Morrison doesn’t directly condemn George Christensen. Instead he tries to turn it to comments Sally McManus made in 2017 when she became the ACTU secretary and was asked about strikes without fair work protection. That’s when workers are not granted permission by the fair work commission to strike. I have done it, while working at what was Fairfax, over pay and conditions. The workers take on the risk in those cases – you can be fined and lose protections over the strike. McManus was asked about unprotected strike action in 2017 and said: I believe in the rule of law where the law is fair and the law is right but when it is unjust I don’t think there’s a problem with breaking it.” That’s the comment the prime minister is desperate to say. Not sure how it is relevant to what George Christensen said though. Unless he is saying that it is his position that Christensen’s comments fall under the same ‘unjust laws’ category? And Scott Morrison has found a line that even Andrew Wallace on his second day can’t let him cross. My question is again to the prime minister and I referred to his previous answer in response to my question about the comments in this parliament from the member for Dawson. In which he refused to mention the member for Dawson. I invite him to directly condemn the member for Dawson for the very specific comments that he has made saying that part of the solution is, to quote him, I don’t say this lightly, ‘civil disobedience’. Morrison: Mr Speaker, and I restate exact to what I have said in the previous question. And, Mr Speaker, I note this. This is a quote from Sally McManus, Mr Speaker. Anthony Albanese: It goes to direct relevance. This is a very specific question about a member of this prime minister concert government and statements that were made in this parliament. Andrew Wallace: The leader of the opposition will resume his seat. The prime minister is entitled to some preamble but it was a very direct question and I’m going to ask the prime minister to respond to the question, please. Morrison: I complete the quote as I was going to refer to as it is relevant. Wallace: The prime minister will resume his seat. Leader of the opposition, the managerial position business will resume his seat. The prime minister will directly respond to the question. It is not appropriate 12 seconds in or 15 seconds into a question to make a quote of Sally McManus. I ask the prime minister to respond to the question directly, please. Morrison: I do condemn those statements. But I also condemn statements like this, Mr Speaker. ...You are very touchy on this, aren’t you? You don’t want to let me read it out! Burke: Mr Speaker, I raise a point of order understanding order 91C where a member’s conduct should be considered disorderly if the member has persistently and wilfully refused to reform to the standing order which is exactly what the prime minister is now doing in defiance of your [ruling] Wallace: I would ask the prime minister again to respond to the question and be directly relevant to the question. Morrison: On the point of order, I have responded directly to the member’s question into denunciating those statements, I have been very clear about that, Mr Speaker. I have been very clear about that, Mr Speaker. I believe in the rule of law and the law is fair in the law is right! Wallace returns him to his seat. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: I refer to the speech prior to Question Time in which the member for Dawson criticised actions by state governments to secure the health of Australians referred to it as “police state” complete with medical apartheid, compared them with Stalin, Mao and Pol Pot and at the end of his speech said the solution is rediscovering human dignity along with, and I don’t say this lightly, civil disobedience. Will the prime minister unequivocally and without reservation condemn this call for civil obedience from his government member for Dawson? Morrison: As the son of a police officer, I believe that everyone should obey the law, Mr Speaker. Every single person should obey the law and no one should encourage anyone to disobey the law. No one, Mr Speaker. I don’t care if they are in this house or anywhere else and I indeed, Mr Speaker, would condemn any encouragement by any places in any place that like any person in any place encouraging acts of civil disobedience was a bit is not coming I would participate Mr Speaker. I don’t think I could be any clearer than that. I have been very clear in my denunciation of violence and threats and intimidation and I don’t care, Mr Speaker, whether that has occurred most recently all when it happened at the Shrine of Remembrance, Mr Speaker, or indeed when people and Labor unions try to crash through the doors of this building many years ago, Mr Speaker. Every single time I have seen this I find it appalling. I find it appalling, Mr Speaker, and I don’t think it is an issue that those opposite should seek to play politics with. Note he doesn’t directly condemn George Christensen? Or say his name or title? Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: Will the Prime Minister admit that real Australian workers are being paid less than their colleagues for doing the same job simply because they work for a Labor hire firm? Does he agree this is a real problem which is causing any quality and depressing wages or does he agree with his [deputy prime] minister, in the statement he made yesterday, that it is a made up issue? Morrison: Australians working across the country are working under the rules and laws put together under the Fair Work Act, and you know who put those laws and rules together? The Labor party. They put those rules and laws together. And, Mr Speaker, when they wrote those laws, the number of people employed, Mr Speaker through Labor hire was the same as it is now, exactly the same. There has been no real change when it comes to those issues over the course of that time, there are many different ways people are now being employed in the Australian economy, since they used to be, and it is important we have the dynamism and our economy to get people those many different options and choices about how they can participate in the Australian economy. We want to make sure they have those opportunities and do it in accordance with the rules and laws of the country and the rule of law when it came to those issues were written by those opposite. And so we will continue to make sure we enforce that rule of law when it comes to these conditions, and we want to see businesses succeed, businesses succeeding in this country, small and medium-sized enterprises have gone through, especially family businesses, through one of the hardest times they have ever had to go through, since the Second World War and certainly since the great depression, economically. They are the one workers rely on for their wages and if you have more small businesses doing better with taxes down and government out of the face so they can go ahead and employ more people and we took built into this parliament to try and improve the opportunities, we took a bill to this parliament in the course of this term, we sat down with employers and employees and sought to bring everyone together and took the product of that to this place and the Labor Party voted against it, they voted against it because they wanted to use this issue as a political issue, they are all about the politics, they are not about the solution, all insults and no ideas. The bill was voted down, because it didn’t actually include the protections which had been spoken of in those round tables. And why is it always about what businesses want, and not workers? Peter Dutton lays out his daily dixer, which is now just an excuse to call the Labor party weak on defence (it used to be weak on home affairs issues, but as he has switched portfolios, he has also switched his focus) If you want to see an example of weakness, when it comes to national security, find yourself a government that cuts defence spending on the cusp of an uncertain period in our region. This leader of opposition was a central figure in the Kevin Rudd and Gillard government, he was there for every decision that was made by prime minister Kevin Rudd and prime minister Julia Gillard, not just in relation to cutting defence spending and taking money away from the soldiers of the Australian principals, he was there when they made decisions, in fact he was a chief advocate of policy which resulted in this country losing control of our borders. This leader of the opposition, the more he is known to the Australian people, the more that they know, he is a weak, weak leader. I miss who asks this question, but the nub of it (to Scott Morrison) is: The prime minister said that batteries to store energy is as useful as the big banana and the big prawn. Then he said that that was a complete misrepresentation. Given the Prime Minister is on tape: the big battery in South Australia as useful as the big banana and a big prawn, why is he pretending that he didn’t? For the record, here is what Scott Morrison said as treasurer in 2017 in response to the South Australian battery project, which was put forward by Elon Musk. Morrison dismissed it as a “Hollywood solution”. It is so at the margin it barely is worthy of a mention. I mean, honestly, by all means have the world’s biggest battery, have the world’s biggest banana, have the world’s biggest prawn like we have on the roadside around the country, but that is not solving the problem. That’s just trying to say, ‘bright shiny thing over here, don’t look at the thing over there’, that’s an old trick from a politician.” He also said: 30,000 SA households could not get through watching one episode of Australia’s Ninja Warrior with this big battery. So let’s not pretend it is a solution”. (This is someone who now wants us to believe that he is invested in future technologies which are yet to be developed to solve Australia’s emissions reductions issues) At the time, Alan Finkel had recommended that batteries form part of renewable projects. Morrison: The comments I was making on that day, I recall them. I was down in Adelaide and I was talking about how the battery technology at that time, that large battery would not have been able to charge all of the television sets in Adelaide and wouldn’t get you through one episode of Australia’s Ninja Warrior, that was the point I was making. What we need in this country is long duration storage, Mr Speaker, which is why we are investing in projects like Snowy Hydro 2.0. Now, Mr Speaker, of course we should invest in battery technology, it is part of our low emissions technology plan to get us to net zero by 2050, Mr Speaker, but those opposite are kidding themselves if they think that is going to keep the aluminium smelters firing up. I tell you what is going to help those. What is going to help those in particular, Mr Speaker, is the work that we have invested through Snowy Hydro, to ensure there is a gas-fired power plant as you know who is opposed to that in the Hunter? The Labor party, Mr Speaker. The Labor party and the Greens working together to work against Australians having affordable, reliable power. They don’t want to see the gas, they want to turn the gas off on Australian industry, Mr Speaker! An exasperated Tony Burke: There is nothing asked about alternative policies. I don’t know why we have to rise each time. The prime minister knows this is not directly relevant and he does it to defy every single time. Andrew Wallace: The question was very open-ended in so far as it talked about the prime minister’s position in relation to batteries. And battery power. Burke: And there is no reference to opposition policy. Wallace: The prime minister will be relevant to the question. Morrison: I was asked about my comments on that day and I provided the context of the comments on that day. The context of the comments on that day was battery storage was not at a scale and frankly is still not at a scale that competes with long duration storage like projects like Snowy 2.0 and those sorts of battery projects are not at a level yet, but we must invest in them so we can rely on them for the heavy industry this country needs. That is what our policy is based on. We have a policy about reducing emissions about technology not taxes, choices not mandates, it’s about ensuring we are investing in a portfolio of technologies which means we can get the cost down to meet those important targets, ensuring we have reliable and affordable power and that’s why we invest in gas, that’s why we are keeping the gas on. Those opposite they really don’t like this policy, they have been attacking our policies, seeking to mock the policy, if you don’t like technology not taxes, it means you need taxes. It means taxes, taxes, taxes. Andrew Wallace is still struggling here. He doesn’t seem confident enough to pull the government MPs (or heckling Labor MPs) up on anything. He also doesn’t seem to have a grasp on listening to the answers, or deeming what is relevant. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: The Prime Minister said electric vehicles won’t tow your trailer, won’t toe your boat and will end the weekend but now he says he didn’t ridicule the technology. Does he think Australians don’t notice when he says something on television and later pretends it never happened? Why does this Prime Minister keep making things up? Morrison: Thank you, Mr Speaker. I want Australians to have choice. I want Australians to have a choice about what sort of car they want to drive, Mr Speaker. I want them to have a choice about whether they use gas or electricity, Mr Speaker. I want them to have a choice about whether they want to work in a heavy end two heavy industry in original area or have that job taken away from them, Mr Speaker. I want Australians to have the choices and for them to plan for their future with confidence, Mr Speaker. And I want the big companies that make these electric vehicles to get their prices down without the Australian people having to pub that make public subsidies into them so that if they wish to buy them they can do so. If the Labor Party was to send money over to Europe, Mr Speaker, to big manufacturing companies, to subsidise, Mr Speaker, now, those opposite us a where and when? This is the problem with the Labor Party, we don’t know what their policies are. We don’t know what their policies are, Mr Speaker. Albanese: Point of order, Mr Speaker, on relevance. This went to the Prime Minister saying that he didn’t ridicule the technology on electric vehicles. It didn’t come to a fantasy policy he is just making up. We want things to be made here. It is your lot that sent the car industry offshore. Wallace: In raising point of order it is not an opportunity to raise another argument. I asked the Prime Minister to remain relevant. Morrison: I am speaking about electric vehicles. Yesterday the Leader of the Opposition didn’t know what it was. He was the Minister for Transport! That was actually his job and he didn’t know what it was, Mr Speaker! Heaven knows what he would do a national security and the economy, the guy has never put a budget together. ...I will return to the topic. Our policy is that we want to ensure those technology costs come down so they can be affordable to Australians who wish to buy them. We don’t want, Mr Speaker, we don’t want to pay out subsidies for large companies overseas to make them cheaper, Mr Speaker. If people want to buy them then we want the car companies to make sure they are more affordable and they bring down the cost on their technology because there is a large market for it. But what we don’t do, I can tell you this. What we won’t do, Mr Speaker, is put up the price of the cars they are now buying and that they wish to buy, Mr Speaker, to try and force their choice to another choice, Mr Speaker. The Labor Party would love to tell you what to do, they love to make the choices for you... Wallace: The Prime Minister was not asked in relation to alternative policies. Morrison: I was not asked about alternative policies, Mr Speaker, because I couldn’t actually speak of the alternative policies. I wasn’t asked about alternative policies, Mr Speaker. All I can go in terms of alternative policies from the opposition is what they did at the last election Mr Speaker because that is the only thing we know and there is only one thing worse than Labor telling you what they are going to do... Is when they are so sneaky not to tell you! To be fair, there are a lot of interjections from the opposition benches of “liar” which Andrew Wallace is also not pulling up. So he is either a little hard of hearing, or he doesn’t yet feel confident enough to use 94A and boot them out. Jim Chalmers to Josh Frydenberg: Can the current treasurer, name any other treasurer, in the last 100 years, that has a worst record than him on waste, reports, debts, deficits, annual growth and real wages? Of course Frydenberg doesn’t agree, and lists his achievements. Very loudly. Because he still doesn’t know how to use a microphone. Especially when it comes to the word “sneaky” which he all but screams. New Speaker Andrew Wallace does not seem to have scrubbed up on precedent overnight – he is letting government MPs say pretty much whatever they want. Alternative policies (which are backed with a vengeance) apparently include Anthony Albanese’s economic qualifications. Helen Haines has the independents’ question today. My question is to the prime minister, with only five sitting days left this year there is no government bill for integrity commission in sight. If you truly want to pass a bill wright one, table it, you bring it on for debate, that’s what I’ve done but you have shut down debate on my bill in the House and shutdown debate Senate and have muscled the attorney general, who is missing in action on this. Come clean with the Australian people, Prime Minister, do you honestly expect Australians to believe you truly want a robust integrity commission? Morrison: The government has been returning to some priority legislation after having spent the last two years, focused on the pandemic response, the economic recovery. The first of those priorities has been to make sure we finalise the religious discrimination act which I look forward to introducing to the House tomorrow. At the same time the attorney general has been working steadily away and with cabinet, on our draft legislation for Integrity Commission, and that also soon will be available for people to give their responses to. He goes on, but it is not relevant. Paul Fletcher gets the call: I thank the prime minister for my ability to add to his comments. We have processed 330 written submissions, 46 consultations and roundtables, and meetings, we have committed substantial funding, almost $150m of funding has been committed for this body, at full capacity, the Commonwealth Integrity Commission will have 172 staff, as the prime minister has made clear the Australian mission for law enforcement integrity will be subsumed within the Commonwealth Integrity Commission, and of course we have also set out an explanation of the powers it will have. Tanya Plibersek to Scott Morrison: Why did the prime minister falsely claim a News Corp journalist had a claim filed against them when it wasn’t true. Why does the prime minister always accused first and make excuses later? Peter Dutton: The first point is the second half of that question is clearly out of order, it is a reflection on the prime minister, not a factual statement it’s not anything other than a slur and it should be ruled out of order. Tony Burke: To the point of order, it’s an unusual one, the question asked for some time, and effectively what is being put by the leader of the House is that it is not open to us to test the credibility of the prime minister. Andrew Wallace allows the question. Morrison: I thank the member for the question and I addressed those issues some time ago with those directly impacted by those remarks. I was [told some] reports which proved not to be correct and I contacted those directly affected and brought up the matter with them. That’s exactly what I did and what you should do in those circumstances. Barnaby Joyce once again tries to form sentences but once again, fails to make any sense. He is staying on the train that asking about jobs for mates is an attack on regional Australia. He also says the word ‘sneaky’ so often it begins to lose any meaning. Anthony Albanese to Scott Morrison: When will the Prime Minister show leadership and reign in Senator Rennick who is undermining the vaccination ever, spreading conspiracy theories and holding Australia back from being able to be opened up by undermining that very vaccination process. When will he stop pandering to Senator Rennick, offering concessions, and instead show leadership? Morrison: (Morrison starts with something unrelated and Tony Burke jumps up) I’ve only been going for three seconds! Three seconds! They are very touchy today, Mr Speaker! There he [Albanese] is, getting all upset and tetchy. Calm down! Mr Speaker. One of the people in this place who I have relied on heavily is the Member for Higgins. And her counsel and support and her experience that has guided I and the Minister for Health and I know who is opposing her at the next election. Someone who spoke against the AstraZeneca vaccine and a member of the Labor Party, Mr Speaker! Burke: On direct relevance, the prime ministers not even trying to be directly relevant to this question. It is the game the Deputy Prime Minister played yesterday. Andrew Wallace: No, the Prime Minister is being relevant. The Prime Minister is directly relevant in addressing the issue of the vaccination. The Prime Minister has the call. Morrison: Thank you, Mr Speaker. Mr Speaker, and this government has absolutely no truck at all, at all, Mr Speaker, with those who would speak against, he would speak against the importance of getting vaccines in this country. That is not my government’s policy, that that is not our government’s policy, Mr Speaker, and I would urge all Australians to continue to go and get that vaccine and I have such faith in Australia to do that, Mr Speaker, that I don’t think they need to be paid off like the Leader of the Opposition. They had to be, Mr Speaker! I have great faith that they knew what they had to do to protect themselves and their families and their communities. The Labor Party had so little faith in the people of Australia that he bought they had to pay them off the Mr Speaker, to do the right thing by public health in this country. I let that reflect on the views that the Leader of the Opposition has about the strength and the character of the Australian people. Wallace: The Prime Minister will return to the question. Morrison: Thank you, Mr Speaker, and I will. I encourage all Australians to go get the vaccination. It is actually this government who secured those vaccines, who has got them into the arms, Mr Speaker, supported the National vaccination program, which has seen authorised to one of the highest levels of vaccination in the world, Mr Speaker. And that is something that I think Australians can all be proud of. I had my booster shot the other day, Mr Speaker, ...Now, Mr Speaker, I put my arm where the vaccines need to go, Mr Speaker, and our government has put shoulder to well when it comes to the vaccination program and that is why, Mr Speaker, we have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. I was disappointed they were people over the other side of the house that spoke against AstraZeneca vaccine. Just before question time, Liberal Russell Broadbent added his voice to the internal resistance to vaccination mandates. In a short contribution Broadbent, the veteran Victorian moderate, shared a couple of accounts of adverse reactions to the Covid-19 vaccines. This is one of many conversations I have had [during the pandemic] and they all end pleading to me to help. What happened to ‘first do no harm’? Welcome to Australia.” Broadbent did not specify whether or not he would join other strikers in the parliament – the cohort of MPs refusing to pass government legislation until Scott Morrison reverses the mandates – but he declared he intended to “continue to represent my people.” Broadbent ended thusly: “Vaccine mandates without reasonable exemptions are not only unconscionable, they are criminal”. Mark Butler to Scott Morrison: Why has the prime minister allowed himself to become hostage to a senator who boasts he is unvaccinated and proudly spread this vaccine disinformation and what other changes to government policy is the prime minister willing to negotiate with Senator Rennick? (That’s about the government’s decision to lower the income loss threshold from $5000 to $1000 after negotiations with Gerard Rennick, who has given the government assurances he will be paired/vote with the government on non-legislative matters) Morrison: The government has been considering for some weeks now, improvements to the compensation scheme in relation to the people who have had adverse reactions to the vaccine, Mr Speaker, and we have decided to ensure that that threshold is $1000, Mr Speaker. Now, Mr Speaker, I don’t know why those opposite would think that is a bad idea. We have been running a national vaccine program that now has one of the highest rates of vaccination in the world but, Mr Speaker, we also know that in any national vaccine program, there are adverse reactions to vaccines and we put in place a scheme to provide confidence to the Australian people so they can go forward and get these vaccines, Mr Speaker, and that is one of the many reasons why under the national vaccine program we have one of the highest vaccination rates in the world. If those opposite don’t think we should have a scheme for people who have had adverse reaction to the vaccine, if they think that is some sort of pandering, Mr Speaker, to an anti-vaxxer movement, I disagree with them. We put this in place, Mr Speaker, to ensure that there was a proper scheme to give confidence in the national vaccine program. So what do those opposite do? When we put it in place and we make sure it is fair and equitable with the same tight restrictions about the proof of injury, Mr Speaker, and harm, what do they do? They want to play politics with it like they have all the way through the pandemic. I’m so pleased we didn’t have to rely on the opposition during the pandemic, Mr Speaker because he wouldn’t have had the results. Now, you may notice that Scott Morrison answered a question he wasn’t asked. No one said that it was a bad thing that there was compensation for people who had adverse reactions. No one said such a scheme should not be in place. The question was about changing the scheme because of a backbencher’s demands and what else would change. Morrison turned that into Labor being against the compensation scheme completely. Question time is about to begun. May Dolly have mercy. Over in the chamber, the 90-second statements are occurring. Both George Christensen and Russell Broadbent have used their time to speak against vaccine mandates. Dr Katie Allen is speaking to the ABC about the religious discrimination bill – she says she is broadly in support of it: I think it has the balance right. I have to say, people, I have had a lot of roundtables in my electorate over the last two years with regard to this bill, with religious leaders and the LGBTIQ community because I have a very large, vibrant LGBTIQ community and of course faith-based leaders. It is fair to say that faith-based leaders in Higgins are very progressive. They did tell me that they feel that there is the issue of religious discrimination. Many of them didn’t feel strongly that they needed to legislate but there were some who felt very strongly that they needed to legislate. This is the best bill I think that we could get. I think there is still a little bit more work to go on it but I am very proud of the fact that I have worked extremely hard with the attorney general to get some concessions and the first one is the removal of the conscientious objection for the health provision. Concetta Fierravanti-Wells is one of the conservative MPs who are not happy with the religious discrimination legislation, because it doesn’t go far enough. She is chatting to the ABC about why she thinks it is a problem for the coalition: Into the last federal election, we said that we would protect religious freedom and of course let’s not forget that at the last federal election the issue of religious freedom reared its head as a consequence primarily of what happened in the Israel Folau matter. So there was a perception, particularly in areas of south-western Sydney, culturally diverse areas, religiously diverse areas, that the Coalition was better placed to protect religious freedom. And I know that many people voted for the Coalition on the basis. When one compares the swings that happened in those areas to the votes that were tainted during the time of the same-sex marriage postal survey then it is very, very clear that there is a correlation between those two. ...If I can encapsulate it in this form. At the kitchen table, if I can put it that way, at the last federal election, I brought it down to is concern or a fear that if I quoted my bible would that get me into trouble? If it can happen to somebody like Israel Folau will it happen to me? Therefore, it’s now, the test here is what those faith leaders will tell those congregations now and say yes your religious freedoms have been protected. So that is ultimately the test. What I think and what commentators like yourself may or may not say is really not the issue here. The test will ultimately be what those faith leaders, particularly at the grassroots, preach to their congregations, and the assurances that they will give those congregations that their religious freedom has been protected. And ultimately I think that that is the test. There has been so much going on, not all issues are getting as much attention as they should. But the government attempts to crack down on charities, which includes gagging organisations with charitable status from commenting on anything deemed political, is deserving of more attention. The charity sector says the legislation could see charities deregistered if staff participate in protests in their own time. Andrew Leigh spoke to Adelaide radio 5AA about it this morning: “The chances of a charity being deregistered for illegal activity are about the chances of the typical Australian being convicted of murder this year: pretty low. The fact is that this is a solution in search of a problem. The government has been out there consistently trying to reduce the voices of charities in the public debate, because they don’t like being criticised. And yet charities, as you know, one of their main roles is participating in the public debate. …Anti-poverty charities don’t just run soup kitchens - they talk about inequality. Environmental charities don’t just plant trees - they talk about climate change. Legal charities don’t just help individual cases, but they also talk about the root causes of Indigenous incarceration. So our public debate is better when we have a whole bunch of charities involved in it, rather than a government that’s trying to silence them. It’s the downhill slide into question time. Let’s see how Andrew Wallace handles his second time in the Speaker’s chair. How his first time went really seems to depend on which side of the house you sit. Barnaby Joyce declared he already liked him better than Tony Smith, if that’s any indication. We’ve got the written judgment now in Justice White’s decision awarding Peter Dutton $35,000 in damages for Shane Bazzi’s tweet labelling him a “rape apologist”. In explaining the (relatively small) award of damages, the judge noted a few things: The tweet did not have a wide readership It was his impression that Dutton experienced an “initial affront” but had not expressed “continuing distress” from the tweet “There is no suggestion that the tweet has affected Mr Dutton in his day-to-day political or ministerial activities, or in his relationships with other people.” Justice White also rejected Dutton’s claim for aggravated damages, citing statements soliciting funds for Bazzi’s defence. He said: “There is nothing wrong in persons seeking forms of crowd funding for a defence to defamation proceedings.” “It was not inappropriate for him to bring to public attention the issues concerning freedom of speech raised by Mr Dutton’s proceedings ... [this was] a legitimate matter to be raised”. The NT has recorded another 11 cases of Covid. That brings its cluster, which is centred in Indigenous communities, to 51. Greg Hunt has released a statement on the changes to the compensation threshold for those with a demonstrable and proven adverse reaction to a Covid vaccine, which has resulted in the loss of more than $1000 in income: The Morrison government is reducing the claim threshold of the no fault Covid-19 Vaccine Claims Scheme to enable more people access to compensation for costs associated with a vaccine injury. The Covid-19 Vaccine Claims Scheme is designed to ensure that people who have suffered a recognised adverse event as a direct result of a Covid vaccine have rapid access to compensation. Reducing the threshold for access to the scheme from $5,000 to $1,000 will ensure more people can claim for eligible costs including lost earnings and care costs, providing greater levels of comfort to those yet to make the decision to vaccinate. The government has been considering this policy change for a number of weeks now and I thank all colleagues and stakeholders who have contributed to this decision. Australians will now have ready access to compensation from $1,000 for Covid-19 claims related to the administration of a Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) approved Covid-19 vaccine delivered through a Commonwealth Government approved program. And if the government’s voter ID laws make it through the parliament, voting will become harder for almost everyone! Longer lines! Further disenfranchisement! All for no reason! What a great move for democracy in a nation with compulsory voting, and no real issues with voter fraud. The chimney stacks at the Lithgow power plant, are now history as Peter Hannam reports: AAP has an update on where the quest for the robodebt information is at: The federal government is under pressure to detail a breakdown of funds returned to Australians served with unlawful debts. The “robodebt” scheme matching Australian Taxation Office and Centrelink data to claw back welfare benefits the government claimed were overpaid was deemed unlawful by the Federal Court. Labor and Greens senators want Services Australia to release publicly the total value of debts across class action members and the average share of the cumulative $1.2m settlement sum once finalised. The latest report of an inquiry looking at the saga lashed the government for not releasing information about legal advice regarding the scheme’s operation on the grounds of public interest immunity. “Despite numerous attempts to obtain the information, the committee has been prevented from thoroughly assessing whether the government knew of the insufficient legal basis of the program due to repeated and poorly articulated public interest immunity claims,” the fifth interim report said. It requested government services minister Linda Reynolds table in parliament by 1pm on Wednesday requested documents or explain her failure to do so. Government senators Wendy Askew and Hollie Hughes said the documents were exempt under freedom of information laws and public interest immunity claims should be respected. They said 98% of refunds had been made, with around 426,400 people getting money back or having their debts wiped. Peter Dutton has won his defamation case against Shane Bazzi. On Wednesday justice Richard White found: The tweet published by Bazzi did contain the imputation that Dutton excuses rape, and it was defamatory of Dutton; and that Bazzi has not established the defences of honest opinion and fair comment. White indicated he intends to enter judgment for Dutton, ordering compensation of $35,000. He refused Dutton’s bid for an injunction against Bazzi from future publications. But he’s asked both parties to make submissions on the form of orders and costs. For those keeping an eye on New Zealand’s borders, here is the plan for re-opening: The home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, has kept the door open to listing other groups as terrorist organisations, after announcing plans to designate both the Base (a far right group) and the entirety of Hezbollah. Andrews said Australia was built “on a broad fabric of many and varied experiences and cultures, and our nation’s character is better off for it”. The views of violent extremist groups such as these are a stain on that rich cultural fabric. There is no place in Australia for their hateful ideologies. Before today’s announcement, there were 26 terrorist organisations listed under Australia’s Criminal Code, which contains criminal offences such as being a member of a terrorist organisation or providing support to or associating with a terrorist organisation. Here’s what Andrews’ press release says about the two entities the government intends to add to the list: Hizballah’s External Security Organisation has been a listed terrorist organisation since 2003. The group continues to threaten terrorist attacks and provides support to terrorist organisations such as Palestinian Islamic Jihad and Hamas’ Izz al-Din al-Qassam Brigades. The Base is a violent, racist, neo-Nazi group known by security agencies to be planning and preparing terrorist attacks. The Base is currently proscribed as a terrorist organisation by the Governments of Canada and the United Kingdom, and is known to have organised paramilitary training camps overseas. The listings will enable the application of terrorist organisation offences to these groups, and align Australia with international partners such as the United Kingdom and Canada. Asked at the press conference why it had taken so long to list the Base, given longstanding calls to do so, Andrews said she did not take listings lightly and wanted to make sure the groups met the legislative tests. Q: Are you considering listing any other far right groups? I will continue to take advice from Asio in particular but also the Department of Home Affairs, and also from other agencies here in Australia. I am very open to the prospect of looking at any of the organisation that threaten to do Australians harm and where they meet the threshold, I will not hesitate to list. The chair of the parliamentary joint committee on security and intelligence, James Paterson, is happy with the decision to list the entirety of Hezbollah as well as the neo-Nazi organisation The Base as terror organisations. No matter what your ideology, if you engage in or threaten violence to achieve your political objectives you will face the full-force of the law,” Senator Paterson said in a statement. Labor will continue to prosecute Scott Morrison’s truthiness in parliament. The video team have put together the latest example of that (from yesterday’s question time): Karen Webb will replace Mick Fuller as NSW police commissioner, becoming the first woman in the role in the state’s history. Home affairs minister Karen Andrews has announced plans to add two more groups to the terror organisations list, under the criminal code: For further context for Penny Wong’s comments today in response to Peter Dutton, here is an exchange Dutton had with Daniel Hurst at a press conference yesterday afternoon: Q: So what exactly in relation to Aukus that Senator Wong said most concerns you? Dutton: There was no equivocation at the time from Anthony Albanese, and now we have this soft language, the diplomatic language that will excite some of Penny Wong’s supporters, but it’s clear that the Labor party has a very different position when it comes to the alliance. I think some of the comments today by Senator Wong need further analysis as well and I think it’s also important to point out that no such qualifications were provided by Anthony Albanese 68 days ago when he said that he signed up to Aukus. So I think the Labor party has demonstrated, just as they did on boats – I mean they promised the Australian public before the election that they’d be no different to the Howard government on boats and of course when they get into government, they go week at the knees – well Penny Wong’s demonstrated today already that the Labor party has gone week at the knees and we’re not even through the election, let alone through to the other side. Q: Minister, you said in parliament that Senator Wong doesn’t stand up for Australian values. What do you mean by that? And is that a dog whistle? Dutton: Well just give me the quote. What is the quote that I said? Q: I’ll get it up for you, but you said… Dutton: …you don’t have to quote, I’ll give it to you. So the statement that I made in question time was that the acting ambassador is attacking Australian values and that Senator Wong wasn’t standing up for those values. Q: So she doesn’t stand up for those values? On what basis do you make that claim? Dutton: Well, she should have been condemning those comments today by the acting ambassador. Q: Is that a dog whistle, are you engaging in a dog whistle today? Dutton: Senator Wong should have condemned the comments of the acting ambassador today. Instead, she didn’t; and I think that says a lot about Senator Wong, and it says a lot about her approach. I can’t recall in my 20 years of parliament an ambassador from any other country carrying on the way that the Chinese ambassador has ... The comments again today by the acting ambassador should be condemned by the Labor party, and they weren’t. Q: Senator Wong doesn’t stand up for those values, is that a dog whistle? Dutton: No, no, I’ve answered that and I’ve given you the context of the quote and what I said and what I said in relation to both the acting ambassador and her comments. New Zealand has announced it will reopen its borders to fully vaccinated visitors in the first months of 2022, for the first time since prime minister Jacinda Ardern announced their snap closure in the first month of the Covid-19 epidemic. The country’s borders have been closed for more than a year and a half. The border will initially open to New Zealand citizens and visa holders coming from Australia in January, then citizens and visa holders coming from the rest of the world in February, and finally opening to all vaccinated visitors from April. They will still have to self-isolate at home for a week and test negative for the virus – but most will no longer have to pass through the country’s expensive and highly-space limited managed isolation facilities. Covid response minister Chris Hipkins said: Closing our border was one of the first steps we took to keep our country safe from Covid-19 and it will be one of the last things we do in terms of opening up. We do know that the international restrictions we have had around our border have been tough for many people. He defended the government’s decision not to reopen the borders before Christmas. “There continues to be a global pandemic with cases surging in Europe and other parts of the world, so we do need to be very careful when reopening the border.” The border will open in stages. Hipkins said that fully vaccinated New Zealanders can travel to NZ from Australia without staying in managed isolation from Monday 17 January. They can come from all other countries from Monday 14 February 2022. After that, fully vaccinated people, including international tourists, will be able to travel to NZ from the end of April. Heading back to the senate for a little bit, Anne Ruston this morning confirmed she had correspondence from Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic that they would be paired with the government on procedural votes (so not legislation) That has come about after late night talks which included Josh Frydenberg and Greg Hunt over compensation for people who have had (demonstrable and proven) adverse effects from a covid vaccine. The threshold to access the compensation has been lowered for those who lost at least $5000 in income because of an adverse reaction (so lost work, business while recovering) to $1000 in income. Penny Wong was also asked if a new low had been reached with One Nation publishing Jacqui Lambie’s mobile phone number and said: Yes, I think we are. And yesterday, when this arose and Jacqui raised this before question time, I reminded people that when Senator Cormann left and in his valedictory, I talked about the importance of contained conflict, and that there are some things - we’re going to disagree with each other - but some things have to be off limits. And the problem at the moment, is that leaders in this place and senators and members in this place are not ensuring that there are boundaries to the contest. And this was an example of it. Publishing someone’s mobile number, in order to enable people who are very aggressive about vaccines to contact her and make threats, is simply inappropriate. Given it is an issue which is bubbling along under the surface, here is a bit more from Penny Wong defending herself against Peter Dutton’s recent comments (on China, national security and Taiwan). Wong told ABC radio RN: Let’s be clear, when he [Dutton] uses those words, “inconceivable” that Australia would not join a war, he is radically out of step with a strategy that successive Australian governments have long adopted, and the strategy and position that successive US administrations – our principal ally – have adopted, most recently confirmed by president Biden. So, I think the real question that Mr Dutton ought to answer is why is he amping up talk of war, rather than simply working to maintain longstanding policy to preserve the status quo? .... My point yesterday was I think his motivations do go to election tactics. And I think that is the most dangerous election tactic Australia has seen – to talk up the prospect of war against a superpower. Q: “Well, just to quote Peter Dutton again, he says it wasn’t anything other than a statement of reality, but just about your talk describing it as the most dangerous election tactic – what’s so dangerous about it?” Wong: Well, the reason people ... have chosen not to declare a definitive position on armed conflict is because we have to all work – the US, the Taiwanese, other countries of the region, US allies like Australia – to maintain the status quo. And we do so by the US maintaining what’s described as a position of strategic ambiguity, which is reflected in Australia’s position, and by ensuring that the Taiwanese do not declare unilaterally independence. Now, there is a fine balance here, in Taiwan. And the reason is that we all know as I said yesterday that war in and over Taiwan would be potentially catastrophic for humanity. So, it does require an approach that has been adopted under successive governments. It’s Mr Dutton who’s out of step. If you are within parliament house and are having email issues, you are not alone. There seems to be a slight issue with the server this morning, which has hit quite a few offices. Not all emails are going through, but people are working on it. The federal government’s religious discrimination bill is yet to be introduced, but there is already talk of high court challenges if it goes through the parliament in its existing form. Victorian independent state MP Fiona Patten said she would expect the Victorian government to challenge the federal legislation if it goes through as is: “If this bill passes in any form that overrides Victoria’s strong anti-discrimination laws, the State Government must launch a High Court Challenge,” she said. “Next week the Victorian Legislative Council will debate and hopefully pass laws that will bring religious institutions into line with all other organisations. “The laws will close the exemptions that allowed religious institutions to discriminate against someone on grounds such as sex, religion, sexuality, marital status or parental status. “The closure of these unnecessary exemptions is in line with the community attitudes of Victorians but the federal bill will overrule these changes.” The Daily Telegraph is reporting the NSW government is about to announce police commissioner Mick Fuller’s replacement as Karen Webb, who will become the NSW’s first female police commissioner. Mike Bowers ventured into the Senate as the government tried to work through the mess LNP senator Gerard Rennick created last night over pairings, votes and who was being counted (it says everything is fine, above board and there are no issues, despite Rennick claiming he didn’t want to be paired, but giving no explanation as to why he missed the vote he was complaining about). The Greens leader Adam Bandt has been told to isolate pending a Covid test, after being alerted by Victorian authorities of a possible contact. He is in Canberra, but will be in isolation until his test result is returned, and has asked for his vote to be paired. He is vaccinated. For what it is worth, the ABC remains one of the most trusted media organisations in Australia and is still producing acclaimed local content, which is then on-sold overseas. Just before 9pm in the Senate last night, after the Gerard Rennick mess over the ABC inquiry vote, LNP senator James McGrath gave this speech calling for an inquiry into how the ABC is funded, as well as a royal commission into the ABC: The Australian Broadcasting Corporation needs to be reformed to be saved from itself. The ABC is a $1.1 billion organisation funded by the taxpayer, yet the ABC, along the track, has wandered off course, leaving us in the unfortunate position we are in now, wondering what we should do with the ABC. We saw that today in the Senate where Labor and the Greens combined to stop an inquiry into something as innocent as the complaints process within the ABC. What we’re seeing is a grotesque, left-wing, back-scratching orgy of flatulent arrogance from the ABC and those on the Left. This ABC who sneers at us is led by an arrogant chair who sees the ABC as a country apart from Australia. And that is quite sad. The inevitable result of decades of free rein, of grossly excessive budgets and diminished accountability is that we’ve ended up with an inner-city hive of woke workers, hiring woke friends to do their woke work in their quest to wokify the world. But in conjunction with the first-night crowd, the chair of the ABC and her fellow first-nighters are at the opera, chinking their champagne glasses, sneering at middle Australia and at those who believe in a pluralistic, diverse media market. It is time for there to be reform of the ABC. It is time for the recruitment process to be opened up. It is time for their inner-city headquarters to be sold and for their staff to be shifted to regional Australia. It is time for there to be a proper review of the charter of the ABC. But it needs to go beyond that. I have written to the minister for communications calling for an inquiry into the future of public broadcasting in this country. We have the ABC model, which is essentially an old wireless trundling along, yet we have a pluralistic, diverse media market. And the ABC, this taxpayer funded monolith, is not fit for purpose in the 21st century. So we need an inquiry into the future of public broadcasting in Australia. We need to determine whether there is a need to fund Triple J and all these different TV and radio stations. I will say, as someone who lives and spends a lot of their time in regional Queensland, there is a place for a taxpayer funded broadcaster in regional Queensland and regional Australia because there is not a diverse media market there. But in terms of the rest of our country, it is time for a royal commission into the future of public broadcasting in this country. It is time that we stood up for the taxpayers of this country who are not getting value for money, and it is time that the board of the ABC—that most arrogant organisation—realise they are losing middle Australia because we have choice. There is so much diversity in our media market and it would be sad if the ABC were to fail and fall over. I want the ABC to be saved. I want it to be reformed so it can be saved from itself. In case you missed this from last night, Peter Dutton does not think Scott Morrison has ever told a lie in public life (and then weirdly pivots to social media, which was not the question, or the issue). Earlier on the parliament lawns, Greens senators accepted a petition signed by more than 110,000 people who oppose public funds being used to open gas fracking in the Beetaloo Basin. It was part of an event put together by GetUp, 350, Seed Mob and Lock The Gate. Lidia Thorpe spoke: We see these mining companies and parliament acknowledging Country, but you can’t acknowledge Country and stab us in the back at the same time. You can’t acknowledge Country and destroy our land, our water, our air, and our people. ... We’ve got a really important vote this afternoon to stop $50m of public money being given to private companies to wreck the land and poison the water of our First Nations Territorians. We’ve managed to get all of the crossbench to say they’ll vote with the Greens. We just need one of the big parties to stand on the side of First Nations owners, of protecting our climate, of clean water, and a liveable future for us all. The decision for Labor today is: will they stop $50m of public money being wasted to wreck the climate and poison the waters of this sacred land? Labor has sided with the government on previous votes on this issue. All in all, it’s a bit embarrassing for the government in the Senate. Anne Ruston is now trying to assure the Senate to say that the pairing arrangements are all above board. She says Alex Antic and Gerard Rennick have both written to say they seek to be paired with the government with all non-legislative votes. But this doesn’t explain why Rennick then came into the Senate last night to say he didn’t want to be paired, he wanted to vote. But he also didn’t say why he missed the vote (the bells rang). This is what he said last night (just after 7pm): I seek leave to have the question put again on general business notice of motion No. 1270 due to a confusion around pairing arrangements this afternoon. Now the government says there was no confusion around the pairing arrangements and all is fine. The Senate is trying to work through Gerard Rennick’s demand that he wants his vote counted in the Greens-Labor motion to end the Senate inquiry into the ABC complaints process until the ABC board ordered independent inquiry is completed. Rennick missed the vote. He was paired, which Simon Birmingham confirmed this morning, which means his vote was counted with the government. But Rennick entered the Senate last night and said he wanted the vote recommitted. Now the government is saying the vote will NOT be recommitted. So the vote from yesterday stands. And Labor and the Greens are trying to work out what it is Rennick was talking about, why there was a demand for a recommittal and what is happening with the pairing arrangements, given Rennick’s claim he didn’t want to be paired, he wanted to vote. Which, given his public statements that he will be withholding his vote until the federal government addresses state vaccine mandates, has everyone confused. So now the Greens want the pairing arrangements considered “in detail and in length”. Labor wants Rennick (and SA Liberal senator Alex Antic) to put their voting intentions in writing ahead of each vote. Penny Wong: I ask that you communicate in writing your intention to support oppose or abstain on each vote to all whips. It is consistent this requirement with the requirement for independent senators when they’re absent from the chamber and minor parties when they are not represented. Environmental activists have closed down the main highway into the Burrup Peninsula in Western Australia’s remote northwest in protest of Woodside’s decision to go ahead with developing the Scarborough gas field. Three activists have physically attached themselves to a car and a caravan parked across Burrup Road, a highway that provides the only access to industrial operations in the area including the Karratha gas plant, Pluto LNG plant, Yara fertilisers and the Port of Dampier. The protest comes as Woodside confirmed on Monday it would develop the Scarborough gas field, a project that will release 1.6b tonnes of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere over three decades of operation and risks damaging sacred Murujuga rock art. Analysts have warned the decision is a risky bet for the company as it relies on global gas prices to stay high until 2026, when the field is expected to enter production – a time when the world will also be moving away from fossil fuels. The International Energy Agency said in May that limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop this year. Anthony Albanese held a press conference a little earlier this morning. He was asked about the government’s religious discrimination bill and says: I haven’t seen it. I haven’t seen it. And I find it extraordinary that the prime minister hasn’t had the courtesy to do that ... I’ve met with religious leaders across the board since I’ve been leader of the Labor party and indeed, beforehand. And I’ve met with people of my own position, I’ve met with Catholic leaders for 50 plus years. I’m of the view that people should be allowed to, of course, practise their faith, that should be respected. That’s my starting point, that will be not to discriminate on the basis of faith, it shouldn’t be at the expense of discriminating on the basis of other people. So based on what Penny Wong had to say this morning, and what Albanese is saying now, Labor is firming its position on the statement of faith provisions – which would allow state discrimination laws to be overridden, if a comment or action was found to be within the parameters of a person’s faith. Tanya Plibersek stopped by doors this morning – which means Labor is ramping up its campaign messaging (you can tell because the opposition is sending more and more senior MPs out to deliver the daily messages). Asked what the next election would be about, Plibersek said: We will be fighting the next election on the things that matter to Australian families: a secure job with decent pay, wages going up when you work hard, a roof over your head, affordable cost of living – petrol, rent, groceries. That’s what matters to people. We’ve got policies out there already that are about bringing down the cost of energy, bringing down the cost of new cars, bringing down the cost of childcare, making sure we’ve got more affordable housing. That’s the ground we’ll be fighting on. Q: Do you think Scott Morrison’s in trouble at the next election? Plibersek: I hope so. Labor has released a new policy for a commissioner for family and sexual violence (as reported by Sarah Martin). A Labor government would appoint a new commissioner for family and sexual violence, and fund 500 new community sector workers, under a $153m women’s safety policy. The new family, domestic and sexual violence commissioner would act as an advocate for victim-survivors, coordinate national safety policies, provide reports that track progress against the national plan, and work with states and territories to gather data. The government has also released its plan for pretty much the same thing. From Anne Ruston’s release: The Morrison Government will invest $22.4 million over five years to establish a Domestic, Family and Sexual Violence Commission to oversee the implementation of the next National Plan to end violence against women and children. The Commission will support the Government in providing policy leadership, developing and fostering relationships across the sector and ensuring greater cooperation and transparency between the Commonwealth, states and territories in delivering the targets and objectives of the next National Plan. There is a new quality and safeguards commissioner for the NDIS. NSW and Victoria have released their daily Covid numbers. Victoria has recorded 1,196 new cases and three deaths, while NSW reported 248 cases and two deaths. Petrol prices are shaping up as an election issue – Peter Hannam has looked into what’s going on: The Wallerawang power station in Lithgow is to be demolished today, to make way for a renewable power grid. So fare thee well, smokestacks. Peter Hannam has visited the site: Remember the “Lithgow Flash”? Well there should be a couple of those later this morning when engineers demolish parts of the Wallerawang coal-fired power plant. The two 175-metre chimney stacks and one of the two big boilers will be brought down. Travellers on the nearby Castlereagh Highway and a couple nearby roads will have to wait for the explosions to happen, and for safety to be ensured, before they can drive on. The power plant shut in 2014 a year after EnergyAustralia bought it and the nearby Mt Piper power station from the NSW government. Mt Piper has about two decades of operations to go, but with falling prices for renewables and advancing storage technology, that finale might not be so far off. As for Wallerawang, a company named Greenspot has taken it over, and is planning to convert the 620-hectare site into a new technology, accommodation and tourism zone. More on this later today, but in the meantime, here’s what I wrote about it earlier this year. Personally, a visit inside a cooling tower is not to be missed, and it’s great Greenspot plans to keep that part intact. Who does Jacqui Lambie think has more to worry about when it comes to trust? Scott Morrison or Anthony Albanese? I think Scott Morrison has more to worry about than Anthony Albanese but Labor could do themselves a favour by getting their positions and policy out there a lot quicker than they are now. Jacqui Lambie also warned the government earlier this week it was in danger of losing its seats in Tasmania. She is asked what she knows about that from being on the ground: It is really worrying because I’m out there with my boots on the ground. I tell you what, very marginal seats, both those seats down there. It will be very, very interesting to see what happens. I am obviously running, I have runners in those seats as well, so that percentage most of the time we are on 10 or 15% and that will make a difference. So depending on where those votes go, after they’ve voted for me, will make a significant difference on who wins those seats and that’s the honest truth of it. The best thing that those candidates – the best that those members can do is get out there and actually start earning their seats, because it they think by spending a load of money down there in Tasmania will save them, I have news for them and it is not good. You may want to get out on the ground a little bit more and talk to the locals because they are not impressed. The Tasmanian senator says she wants an apology. Lambie said: I will be putting that in paper and addressing that over the Senate in the next day or so. I want an apology. Not even a phone call, you know, not even a phone call from Malcolm Roberts. It is just disgusting. You did the wrong thing, mate, you put my number up there. It is a really low act with what you’ve done with the heightened tensions going on out there and quite frankly you disgust me. (Jacqui Lambie accused Malcolm Roberts of publishing her number in a speech she gave to the Senate. Roberts didn’t apologise but said it was a One Nation candidate who had published her number.) Jacqui Lambie was on ABC News Breakfast this morning, speaking of the impact of a One Nation candidate having published her private phone number on social media. Lambie said she has had the same number for 17 years, and has now had to change it, after she was bombarded with abuse. She says that means veterans and constituents she has been in contact with will not be able to contact her as easy. She also hasn’t received an apology from One Nation. Here is some of what she told ABC News Breakfast about the abuse she received: Honestly, these right-wing nut jobs, and only a real small amount of them – most of those people were they want a vaccine or not, they are good, doing the right thing, peaceful, protesting, that’s it. But this really, really small fringe group out there and quite frankly you are disgusting, you are really disgusting. Swearing at me and calling me every word under the sun and that – seriously, are you serious? If you want to say something to me, then put it in a sentence, say what you’ve go to say, but all this swearing – where do they think it is going to get them? Lorraine Finlay also says she doesn’t believe her past political aspirations with the Liberal party will impact her job. Certainly my past political involvement doesn’t qualify me for the role, but it also isn’t a disqualification from the role. Now the human rights commission is an independent, apolitical statutory agency. And as the human rights commissioner, let me be very clear, I am not a politician. It is not a political role. And I fully intend to operate within the established framework of the commission. I think that independence is incredibly important. And that’s certainly something that’s at the front of my mind is that independence is so important. But again, none of her personal opinions, which are on the public record, have changed. What I can say is my personal views, haven’t changed, but my role has, and I’m very aware that as human rights commissioner I do need to take a broader perspective and there are a variety of views and opinions that need to be taken into account. So again, I don’t see this role as my personal soapbox. I’m not a politician by default, I am here to do a very specific job. And I intend to operate very squarely within the framework of the commission to perform these duties. The new human rights commissioner, Lorraine Finlay, commenced her term yesterday. Finlay, a former Liberal upper house candidate and member of the WA Liberal women’s council was handpicked by attorney general Michaelia Cash for the role. You can read about some of her history, and her positions, here: In an interview with ABC radio RN, Finlay says her personal positions on issues (such as religious freedoms, affirmative consent, Indigenous voice to parliament) have not changed. But she said she her personal opinions won’t impact her job: In my new role as human rights commissioner I recognise that this job isn’t a personal soapbox for me. What this job is about is bringing people together around human rights issues, listening to variety of perspectives, and hopefully achieving some really good outcomes. So I don’t expect that people will necessarily agree with me 100% of the time, but I also don’t think as human rights commissioner that my personal opinion, is the most important thing because the job is actually much bigger than that. And I’m very excited about being able to consult with a wide variety of people, speak to a wide variety of people and hear a wide variety of perspectives on these types of issues. Also happening today – the federal court will hand down its judgement on Peter Dutton’s defamation claim. Paul Karp has been covering the issue – here is a quick refresher. Matt Canavan was on the Nine Network a little earlier this morning, where he was again speaking about his opposition to vaccine mandates and made this comment about the protests, where death threats against elected officials were made: I think voting in our Australian parliament is something serious. I think that is absolutely my job and we have seen hundreds of thousands of Australians out on the street against this policy. We have seen them denigrated as some sort of far-right extremists and I have met them and they are average mums and dads in the street. Penny Wong did spend a bit of time talking about Peter Dutton’s comments on China though. He’s lying about what I said, he’s lying about Labor’s position and he’s making [these comments] because he wants to turn this into a domestic political fight.” Wong says she believes that is a dangerous line to be walking. Penny Wong was also asked about what Labor plans to do on religious discrimination. She said the party had not yet come to a decision. Religious freedoms was a fairly big issue for Labor at the last election, with the party accused of not doing enough to protect faith-based views. That has led to Labor so far playing dead on the issue, but Wong seems to suggest that might be changing: I support, Labor supports, protection against religious discrimination and that protection should not come at the cost of reducing protections for other forms of discrimination. Wong said she hasn’t looked at the bill as yet as she has had a “pretty busy 24 hours” (that’s a reference to Peter Dutton and his China comments, as well as the Senate mess). Our principle position has been that this right, the right to practice your faith freely, which is a human right, should not be protected through the reduction of protections that other Australians have against forms of discrimination. You can read more about the bill here: Scott Morrison will introduce the religious discrimination bill to the parliament (most likely tomorrow) but it will be heading straight to a Senate committee, as reported yesterday by Sarah Martin and Paul Karp. The Coalition party room signed off on the bill before seeing it – the legislation wasn’t released until after the meeting. It was signed off on though, because of the agreement to send it to a Senate committee. LNP MP Angie Bell was on ABC News Breakfast this morning speaking about that: I think it is important that we understand that all Australians need to be protected against discrimination, and that is my position, and that is the position of the party, and the party room, but also the position of the prime minister, and the attorney general. I’m sure all Australians would agree with that position, that there should not be discrimination to any minority groups or indeed any religious faith groups, and that’s what this discrimination bill is based upon. The government has taken out a couple of clauses, that minority groups were concerned about and indeed moderate Liberals were concerned about, and my position on this is that we are at a reasonable position to move forward with this bill, but I also put my concerns forward that it should go to a Senate inquiry to make sure that any stakeholders who have further concerns have the opportunity to put those forward. Daniel Hurst has been covering Peter Dutton’s escalating comments on Penny Wong and Labor when it comes to China, as well as Taiwan. Yesterday, Dutton accused both Labor and Wong of being “weak” against China. He said: I notice the acting Chinese ambassador has been out attacking Australian values and Senator Wong today doesn’t stand up for those values; instead, she folds in a fit of weakness. Wong is speaking to ABC radio RN and defended Labor and her own position, but accused Dutton of politicising national security for the purposes of the coming election. I think it’s about elections. Now, an interesting point – he has not been backed up by the prime minister. Speaking of the Senate, Greens senators Lidia Thorpe and Dorinda Cox have been working to disallow the $21m in public funding for gas fracking in the Beetaloo Basin. Labor has been in support of the project, and has previously voted with the government in these sort of motions, but this morning, GetUp, 350 Australia, Seed Mob and Lock the Gate are coming together to hand over a petition with more than 110,000 signatures asking that public money for the fracking project not be spent. That petition will be handed over to Thorpe and Cox on the parliament house lawns this morning. It’s the first hump day on the last sitting fortnight of the year, which means nothing other than we are all one day closer to this being over. Which no one seems to want more than the prime minister. It hasn’t exactly been the greatest of times for Scott Morrison. After launching the pseudo-election campaign, Morrison was hoping to come into parliament and tick off a couple of election promises, clearing the way for the actual election in either March or May next year. But his own party has other ideas. There is discontent in the backbench, in both the Senate and the house, with the rabble rousers who haven’t exactly been brought into line at any point in the term now realising they have just a few more days to create some havoc, make a name, and get themselves (or members of their factions) re-elected. So the Senate has gone rogue and now house MPs are threatening the same thing. George Christensen will vote on his “conscience”, whatever that means, and fellow Queenslander Llew O’Brien is once again considering his own options about withholding his vote/crossing the floor. That’s not a new position – O’Brien left the Nationals party room for a while (but stayed in the LNP) and has threatened to cross the floor on issues like the federal Icac. He also accepted Labor’s nomination to be a deputy speaker over the government’s endorsed candidate Damian Drum in 2020, with enough of his colleagues defecting from the vote to get him across the line. So, like I said, not new. But it is bad timing for the prime minister who spent a good chunk of yesterday’s joint party room meeting talking about discipline and unity. Meanwhile, the Senate is in disarray, with Gerard Rennick now wanting to re-commit his vote in the Greens-Labor motion to end the ABC complaints Senate inquiry. The motion got up, meaning the inquiry was stopped, at least until the ABC board ordered the inquiry had been completed (some time next year). The bells were rung for the vote, but Rennick didn’t make it into the chamber. He was paired instead, but is now saying he didn’t want to be paired. But he hasn’t explained why he missed the vote. So today, the Senate will consider whether it re-commits the vote, which if it does could overturn the decision to end the inquiry. It’s all a bit of a mess and no one is happy, so all in all it is shaping up as a great day in the parliament. Mike Bowers is already out and about and you will have Katharine Murphy, Paul Karp, Daniel Hurst and Sarah Martin keeping you updated. Amy Remeikis will be on the blog until the early evening. There doesn’t seem to be enough coffee this morning. Ready?On Monday, news photographers returned chuckling after an early assignment because the defence minister, Peter Dutton, had been seen smiling, spontaneously, in daylight, apparently without effort. Dutton smiling is a persistent Canberra in-joke. Back in 2018, when the right faction came for Malcolm Turnbull, and Dutton was the candidate, the hard man of the Liberal party thought – and said – he needed to smile more and “maybe show a different side to what I show when I talk about border protection”. This pitch, both calculated, and guileless, was so clickable and shareable BuzzFeed produced the definitive ranking of all Dutton’s smiles. Number one was the “just-joined-the-backbench-after-running-for-PM smile”. Dutton’s unprovoked smiling on Monday was clocked in the context of Scott Morrison’s fraught final parliamentary fortnight. With an election now in sight, Labor wants to pin the prime minister as a liar and is firing daily kill shots from Morrison’s back catalogue. Bookending Labor’s character test is internal disunity noisy enough to create the impression Morrison isn’t in full command of his troops. Morrison is battling an insurrection over vaccination mandates because some of his MPs are worried about bleeding votes to Clive Palmer and Pauline Hanson. To straddle internal and external pressure, Morrison has been positioning against his own interventionist record during the pandemic, which is unhelpful, to put it mildly, given that was the period when he was most popular. Moderates have also found their voices. MPs sick of Nationals dictating the government’s climate policy (and then pretending they oppose it to signal cultural affinity with voters in the Hunter and regional Queensland) are also disinclined to be quiescent boys and girls on religious discrimination to facilitate a culture war Morrison thinks he needs with Labor. If you watch politics from a distance, you’ll certainly hear the clamour. Up close, the impression is pervasive exhaustion. MPs are tired. Senior ministers – now running on backup battery power after grinding away on the pandemic response, the climate policy pivot, and the other pressing problems of the year – are now working flat out to neutralise feckless screeching about vaccine totalitarianism that stands between them and a brief Christmas respite. Morrison is always relentless. He’s a human bulldozer. On Wednesday, he fired up in question time. But he looks weary as well. Earlier in the week, the prime minister swung (and missed) at Anthony Albanese when Labor provoked him on his now infamous Hawaiian holiday in the middle of catastrophic bushfires. Morrison was forced to clean up his own mess. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning It’s bumpy enough for Morrison to have issued the pro forma disunity is death homily to government MPs during their regular party room meeting on Tuesday. Morrison also delivered what he hoped would be a mind-focusing comparison. The coming election could either be the contest in 2004, where the Liberals came from behind and smashed the “new sensation” Mark Latham, or it could be 2007, where the rout was so substantial John Howard lost his own seat. “It’s up to us,” the prime minister said. Actually, ultimately, it’s down to the voters. Speaking of voters, Labor’s truth and trust strategy is pitched predominantly at swinging voters inclined to be disenchanted with the prime minister and his rolling brinkmanship. But the trust sortie is also pitched at Liberals – because politics is a confidence game. This point might require a little unpacking. Morrison’s central pitch to any colleagues inclined to doubt is: Trust me, I know how to win. I won when you doubted me in 2019. If you back me, I’ll do it again. The prime minister is asking MPs to take him on trust. But if trust gets eroded, if he looks vulnerable to a kill shot, subordinates can begin to doubt the durability of Morrison and his electoral miracles, and in that environment, politics enters a period of every man and woman for themselves. We know there are a few iron-clad propositions in politics. The first is that existential doubt is an accelerant of ill-discipline in the major parties. The second involves the base. When Liberal leaders start signalling comity with the base in the way Morrison currently is – preaching the case for freedom and for government to get out of people’s faces when five minutes ago he said the opposite – it points to trouble, either internal or external. Polls suggest Labor is in the contest. So there’s a degree of external trouble. But if colleagues are plotting pre-election to replace Morrison with another frontman (which sounds like a wild killing season conspiracy theory until you remember this exact refresh has happened with brutal precision before the past two elections) – it is happening so quietly that people who should know about it profess total ignorance. Obviously, this is politics. All things are liable to change without notice, but right now these characters look too spent to plot. What is absolutely happening, however, is succession jockeying for whenever any leadership question becomes relevant – and that’s where we return to Dutton. The Queenslander had a fallow period after he lost the prime ministership contest to Morrison. There were complaints around the government Dutton wasn’t pulling his weight in times of adversity, seemingly content to leave Morrison out there. But the Queenslander in recent months has been back, assertive and present, with his loud hailer, picking political fights and looking generally content with his lot. Also busy busy busy is the Victorian Josh Frydenberg. The treasurer is genuinely loyal to Morrison and has worked to maintain a good relationship with him, which isn’t a given between prime ministers and treasurers. But when the moment presents, he wants to be prime minister of Australia. This is a core life plan. No ifs, buts or maybes. Given this is the reality, we can end by reminding ourselves of the third iron-clad rule of Australian public life. Politics, for the restless, for the ambitious, is always a game of opportunity.Samsung has said it will build a $17bn (£12.7bn) semiconductor factory in Texas, amid a global shortage of chips used in cars, phones and other electronic devices. The plant just outside Austin would be the South Korean company’s biggest US investment and is expected to be operational in the second half of 2024. Samsung had also considered sites in Arizona and New York for the factory, which will be much bigger than its only other US chip plant, also in Austin. Samsung said the new facility would boost production of hi-tech chips used for 5G mobile communications, advanced computing and artificial intelligence, and also improve supply chain resilience. The chip shortage has become a significant business obstacle and a serious US national security concern. Shutdowns during the Covid-19 pandemic have led to supply issues, hampering production of new vehicles and electronic devices for more than a year. National security has also become an issue because many US companies are dependent on chips produced overseas, particularly in Taiwan, which China has long claimed as its own territory. Nina Turner, a research analyst at the research firm IDC, said it was “a concentration risk, a geopolitical risk” to be so reliant on Taiwan for much of the world’s chip production. She added that the shortages were likely to ease but there would be a long-term demand for chips as more and more everyday products relied on them. Announcing Samsung’s new factory, the governor of Texas, Greg Abbott, said: “This is the largest foreign direct investment in the state of Texas, ever.” Samsung is one of the world’s largest chipmakers with more than 20,000 employees across the US. It said the latest announcement took its total investment in the country to $47bn. The company’s vice-chair, Kinam Kim, said it chose the site based on a number of factors, including government incentives and the “readiness and stability” of local infrastructure. Many chipmakers are spreading out their manufacturing operations in response to the shortages, which have taken a toll on sectors from the automotive to the video game industry. Angelo Zino, an analyst at CFRA, said: “It makes sense for the supply chain to be a bit more diversified geographically.” He added that another factorwas the expectation that Congress would approve federal subsidies for the semiconductor industry to build its factories in the US, in the hope it would bring jobs, lessen future supply concerns and give the US more leverage over economic rivals such as China. The Biden administration has been pushing for Congress to pass the $52bn Chips Act to increase computer chip manufacturing and research. Separate legislation also under consideration would create a tax credit for investment in semiconductor manufacturing facilities. Other countries have made similar pushes to get chips made closer to where they are used. The European Commission earlier in November said it could approve aid to fund production of semiconductors in the 27-nation bloc.Controversial comedians Dave Chappelle and Louis CK, who have both forcefully decried so-called “cancel culture”, have received Grammy nominations for recent comedy specials. Chappelle and the poet Amir Sulaiman are nominated in the best spoken word album category for the Netflix special 8:46, released in the summer of 2020. The 48-year-old comedian has drawn criticism for transphobia in his follow-up special, The Closer, in which he mocked gender identity and targeted trans people. After its debut in October, trans staffers at Netflix held a walkout to protest Netflix CEO and chief content officer Ted Sarandos’s handling of the special. Sarandos stood by Chappelle, but said he “screwed up” with two internal memos defending the special. Netflix, along with HBO, did cut ties with Louis CK and his film I Love You Daddy in 2017, in the wake of several accusations of sexual misconduct and accounts of how he exposed himself to female comedians. After a brief hiatus, the comedian and star of the auto-fictional FX show Louie returned to touring standup. His special Sincerely Louis CK, the first released since his admission to several acts of misconduct, is a surprise Grammy nomination for best comedy album. Chappelle has previously won three Grammys for best comedy album: in 2018, for The Age of Spin; in 2019, for Equanimity &amp; The Bird Revelation; and in 2020, for the Netflix special Sticks &amp; Stones. He faces tough competition in the best spoken word category, including Barack Obama, for the audiobook version of his memoir A Promised Land (Obama has two previous Grammys in this category, in 2006 and 2007, for books Dreams From My Father and The Audacity of Hope); LeVar Burton, for the audiobook of his 1997 novel Aftermath; and actor Don Cheadle for his narration of Carry On: Reflections for a New Generation from John Lewis. Louis CK is up against comedians Chelsea Handler, Nate Bargatze, Lewis Black, Lavell Crawford and Kevin Hart.The highly versatile, socially conscious pianist, singer and composer Jon Batiste has topped this year’s Grammy nominations, with 10 nods. Batiste’s nominations straddle everything from the top prizes of record and album of the year, to inclusions across R&amp;B, jazz, roots and classical categories. His score for animated film Soul, made with Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross of Nine Inch Nails, is also nominated, as are the directors of his music video Freedom. Over a decade on from his teen-pop breakthrough years, Justin Bieber demonstrates his ongoing star power and musical dexterity, nominated for album, record and song of the year in the top categories, and he also picks up nominations in four other pop and R&amp;B categories. His music video director, Colin Tilley, also earns one for Bieber’s single Peaches. Another versatile artist, the R&amp;B singer-songwriter HER, is nominated for eight awards, including album and song of the year. She also picks up nominations in R&amp;B and contemporary Christian categories, plus a nod for her contribution to the Judas and the Black Messiah soundtrack, Fight For You. The vivacious and frequently viral rapper Doja Cat earns seven nominations, including in three of the four top categories: record, album and song of the year. Billie Eilish earns six nominations, including in those three top categories. Olivia Rodrigo is likely to be the favourite for best new artist, after the huge success of her debut album Sour and its singles Drivers License and Good 4 U, which span piano balladry and pop-punk. The Californian star is nominated for six awards, and is the only artist to appear in the top four categories. The directors and producers of her Good 4 U video are also nominated. Lil Nas X, the pop-rapper who triumphantly transcended one hit wonder status with his acclaimed album Montero, is also nominated for record, song and album of the year, plus two more awards. Lady Gaga and Tony Bennett’s duets album Love For Sale was popular with academy voters, earning the pair four nominations, plus nods for their engineers and music video directors. It is the feelgood success of the year, recorded following Bennett’s Alzheimer’s diagnosis – the 95-year-old singer found he could perform swathes of his repertoire despite loss of other memories. Arlo Parks is the most notable British success, earning a nomination for best new artist, plus best alternative music album. The only other British artists in the top categories are Ed Sheeran, whose Bad Habits is nominated for song of the year, and pop band Glass Animals, nominated for best new artist. Abba are nominated for their first ever Grammy for their comeback single after 40 years away, I Still Have Faith In You, nominated for record of the year. Jay-Z is now the most nominated artist in Grammys history. His three nominations, including a songwriting nod for his work on Bieber’s Justice, bring him to 83 nominations overall (he has won 23). Grammy nominations are now decided solely by voting membership, rather than involving “nomination committees” behind the scenes who were able to tweak – to some controversy – the final nominee lists. The field in the “big four” categories have expanded from eight to 10 nominees. The academy chief executive, Harvey Mason Jr, said this was to help broaden stylistic diversity, acknowledge sheer amount of music being released, and “to embrace the spirit of inclusion”. While there are no snubs on the scale of the Weeknd in 2021, who announced he was boycotting future ceremonies, the year’s most commercially successful country star, Morgan Wallen, receives no nominations. The shut-out will be due in part to him being filmed shouting a racist slur in February this year. Canadian rapper Drake submitted his hit album Certified Lover Boy for album of the year, but it wasn’t included. The 2022 Grammy awards take place on 31 January. 2022 Grammy nominations: the major categories Record of the year Abba – I Still Have Faith in You Jon Batiste – Freedom Tony Bennett &amp; Lady Gaga – I Get a Kick Out Of You Justin Bieber – Peaches (featuring Daniel Caesar &amp; Giveon) Brandi Carlile – Right On Time Doja Cat – Kiss Me More (feat SZA) Billie Eilish – Happier Than Ever Lil Nas X – Montero (Call Me By Your Name) Olivia Rodrigo – Drivers License Silk Sonic – Leave the Door Open Album of the year Jon Batiste – We Are Tony Bennett &amp; Lady Gaga – Love for Sale Justin Bieber – Justice Doja Cat – Planet Her Billie Eilish – Happier Than Ever HER – Back of My Mind Lil Nas X – Montero Olivia Rodrigo – Sour Taylor Swift – Evermore Kanye West – Donda Song of the year Ed Sheeran – Bad Habits Alicia Keys &amp; Brandi Carlile – A Beautiful Noise Olivia Rodrigo – Drivers License HER – Fight for You Billie Eilish – Happier Than Ever Doja Cat – Kiss Me More (feat SZA) Silk Sonic – Leave the Door Open Lil Nas X – Montero (Call Me By Your Name) Justin Bieber – Peaches (feat Daniel Caesar and Giveon) Brandi Carlile – Right on Time Best new artist Arooj Aftab Jimmie Allen Baby Keem Finneas Glass Animals Japanese Breakfast The Kid Laroi Arlo Parks Olivia Rodrigo Saweetie Best pop solo performance Justin Bieber – Anyone Brandi Carlile – Right on Time Billie Eilish –Happier Than Ever Ariana Grande – Positions Olivia Rodrigo – Drivers License Best rock performance AC/DC – Shot in the Dark Black Pumas – Know You Better (Live From Capitol Studio A) Chris Cornell – Nothing Compares 2 U Deftones – Ohms Foo Fighters – Making a Fire Best metal performance Deftones – Genesis Dream Theater – The Alien Gojira – Amazonia Mastodon – Pushing the Tides Rob Zombie – The Triumph of King Freak (A Crypt of Preservation and Superstition) Best rap performance Baby Keem – Family Ties (feat Kendrick Lamar) Cardi B – Up J Cole – My Life (feat 21 Savage &amp; Morray) Drake – Way 2 Sexy (feat Future &amp; Young Thug) Megan Thee Stallion – Thot Shit Best R&amp;B performance Snoh Aalegra – Lost You Justin Bieber – Peaches (feat Daniel Caesar &amp; Giveon) HER – Damage Silk Sonic – Leave the Door Open Jazmine Sullivan – Pick Up Your Feelings Best country solo performance Luke Combs – Forever After All Mickey Guyton – Remember Her Name Jason Isbell – All I Do Is Drive Kacey Musgraves – Camera Roll Chris Stapleton – You Should Probably Leave Best global music performance Arooj Aftab – Mohabbat Angelique Kidjo &amp; Burna Boy – Do Yourself Femi Kuti – Pà Pá Pà Yo-Yo Ma &amp; Angelique Kidjo – Blewu Wizkid – Essence (feat Tems) Best dance/electronic recording Afrojack &amp; David Guetta – Hero Ólafur Arnalds – Loom (feat Bonobo) James Blake – Before Bonobo &amp; Totally Enormous Extinct Dinosaurs – Heartbreak Caribou – You Can Do It Rüfüs Du Sol – Alive Tiësto – The BusinessAround a year after the stunning announcement, in 2010, that the tiny, oil-rich Gulf nation of Qatar would host the 2022 football World Cup, the Guardian journalist Pete Pattisson began investigating why dozens of Nepalese workers repatriated from Qatar back to their families had never made it home alive. It was the beginning of nearly 10 years of reporting by the Guardian into the often brutal conditions faced by hundreds of thousands of migrant workers tasked with building Qatar’s state-of-the-art stadiums, as well as the roads, hotels and infrastructure needed to host the biggest sporting event on Earth. With a year to go until the tournament kicks off, Pattisson considers what has really changed for Qatar’s migrant workers, while David Conn asks what the most controversial World Cup in history will tell us about shifting global influence, power and wealth. A summer of record-breaking heat in Canada’s Pacific north-west has been followed by devastating floods, exacerbated in part by the impacts of global heating. Salmaan Farooqui and Ashifa Kassam report from British Columbia, a province battered by extremes of weather on the frontline of the climate crisis. Could Donald Trump and the Republicans be planning an American coup in 2024? That’s the chilling question posed by Guardian US chief reporter Ed Pilkington, who takes a forensic look at how Republicans are vying for critical positions in many states, from which they could launch a far more effective power-grab than Trump’s 2020 effort. On our Culture pages this week Charlotte Higgins meets Lubaina Himid, the first Black woman to win art’s Turner prize, and hears how she deals with the pressure of a trailblazer, and how her early life moulded her. Get the Guardian Weekly delivered to your homeJoint directors Siân A Williams and Harri Shanahan’s documentary is a smart, sprightly celebration of some of the punky, crusty, sex- and porn-positive outliers in the then-emergent lesbian scene centred mostly in London during the 1980s and 90s. In many ways the raddest of the radical feminists, many of the film’s interviewees either founded – or at least hung out at – London’s infamous SM and fetish club Chain Reaction, one of the few femme-centric and male-exclusionary club nights in the country at that time. (They did welcome trans women.) But Rebel Dykes throws out Catherine wheel-style sparks in all sorts of directions, touching on the culturally diverse squat culture in the UK capital back then, the subcultures around punk and fanzines and gay bookshops, the fight against the homophobic Section 28 legislation, Aids, and rise of gay and lesbian political activism. It’s all there and more, including an absolutely cracking anecdote told by historian Lisa Power about Sir Ian McKellen and a dental dam. Given the timeframe it covers it’s the perfect companion piece to Mothers of the Revolution, another British doc that looks back at the Greenham Common peace camp. As it happens, Rebel Dykes starts with some of the interviewees tranquilly recollecting their youth, getting both drunk and laid at Greenham between bouts of wire cutting and vandalism, in what for many was the first safe space in which they could come out. Rebel Dykes is actually more upfront than Mothers of the Revolution about the factionalism and splintering over identity and gender politics that went on at the camp, which then carried over to the London milieu on which the film primarily focuses. There are some fantastic archive clips, all shot on greasy looking VHS stock, of meetings where folk fought it out over what is the “right” way to have sex to escape patriarchal norms, all the while deploying talking points that will give viewers of a certain age flashbacks to kitchen-table arguments about penetration and phallocentric culture. Indeed, I knew some of the film’s participants back then when this stuff was all we ever talked about. A judicious mix of new-minted interviews, home video footage and charming animation by Shanahan makes for a delightful, well-tempered package. • Rebel Dykes is released on 26 November in cinemas and on digital platforms.Jobs are coming back, wages are rising, stock markets are hitting record highs. In many ways, the US economy is booming. And yet as we officially enter the holiday season, consumer confidence is at its lowest level in a decade. The reason? Inflation. The US inflation rate in October was the highest it has been since the early 90s, when Nirvana released Smells Like Teen Spirit and the Gulf war was just beginning. But should we really be worried? The Federal Reserve, and the Biden administration, think rising prices are “transitory” – caused by the hangover from the pandemic. Their critics are less sure. Inflation, especially during a global pandemic, is complicated. Here is what we know about inflation in the US. What is inflation? Inflation describes a general rise in the level of prices of all consumer goods and services. It is not specific to a particular good or service; rather it is a measure of when, broadly, things are more expensive than they were before. There are a handful of ways inflation is measured, though the Consumer Price Index (CPI) measured by the US Bureau of Labor Statistics is the most common system used to gauge inflation. The index looks at the prices of goods and services in cities and suburbs across the country, weighted depending on the proportion a good or service has in overall consumption. For example, food and housing is weighted more than clothing in the index. What’s happening with inflation? According to CPI numbers released in mid-November, prices in the US rose 6.2% in October compared with where prices were the same time last year. US core inflation, which does not include goods like energy and food whose supply is susceptible to external events, was 4.6% in October, its highest since 1991. Prices broadly increased in energy, housing, food, used and new vehicles and recreation. Price decreases for airline fares and alcoholic beverages were among the few price declines seen last month. The US is not the only country experiencing inflation – the UK, China and Germany have all also reported rising inflation in the last few weeks. The Fed has already taken steps to reduce inflation, ending some of its stimulus programs that saw it buying bonds to stimulate the economy. But the central bank has held off on its main tool to control inflation – adjusting interest rates – probably because doing so runs a higher risk of starting an economic recession. How worried should Americans be about inflation? Some economists have been pointing out that the inflation we are seeing now is just one piece of the pandemic’s impact on the economy, which overall has not been terrible. “There’s a lot of uncertainty. We don’t know what happens next. The past two years have been unprecedented and painful,” said Claudia Sahm, a senior fellow at the Jain Family Institute and a former Federal Reserve economist. “We’re going to have a bumpy ride.” Even though inflation was high in October, other figures like the strong increase in jobs and the surge in retail sales point to an overall good month for the US economy. “My baseline scenario is that as the pandemic is contained, which is happening as we get more vaccines out there, we will see inflation move back down to something that is very close to before Covid,” Sahm said. “I don’t think Covid has changed the underlying structure of the US economy. “I do take a lot of comfort that many people have the money to weather this storm, at least for now,” she said, citing the direct aid Americans got through stimulus checks and the child tax credit. “It really is upsetting to pay more for your groceries, but it’s really upsetting not to be able to walk home with the groceries in your cart.” Why is inflation happening? The pandemic has touched every inch of the US economy and has affected every American in some form, so there is no single reason inflation is happening. “When you look under the hood of the top-line numbers, there are a lot of stories,” Sahm said. The supply chain crisis has led to a shortage of cars, clogged shipping ports and overstuffed warehouses. Meanwhile, consumer demand has surged after plummeting in the early days of the pandemic. For example, a shortage of microchips has led to a slowdown in car manufacturing, which increased the sales – and ultimately prices – of used cars, Sahm said. Housing prices have gone up because renters feel comfortable moving again and rental owners feel comfortable charging higher rents. Some companies have not been hesitant to reap the benefits of increased consumer spending during the pandemic, raising prices and paying record compensation for the country’s top chief executives. Throughout the pandemic, the federal government boosted the economy through multiple trillion-dollar stimulus packages that gave money directly to families and employers, and the Federal Reserve policy lowered the interest rates and purchased bonds. What are the effects of inflation? The most obvious impact is that Americans are seeing higher prices whenever they go to the store, make investments in a house or car or pay their medical expenses. Some economists believe that the higher prices mean that some households will start slowing their spending as goods take up a larger portion of their budget. Inflation’s impact on people’s budgets will depend on whether wages can keep up with the rate of inflation. So far, it seems that wages are not keeping up with inflation, though industries that are recovering from severe pandemic losses, like hospitality, are seeing wage increases on pace with inflation. Inflation can also have a profound impact on politics as voters tend to blame the party in power for rising prices. So far, Republicans have been eager to blame Joe Biden for inflation, condemning him for overspending on government aid. “It’s a direct result of flooding the country with money,” the Senate minority leader, Mitch McConnell, told reporters in October. Democrats have taken the defensive, emphasizing that experts at the Federal Reserve believe the inflation will be short-lived and that pandemic assistance was necessary for the health and wellbeing of Americans during a crisis. “We are making progress on our recovery. Jobs are up, wages are up, home values are up, personal debt is down and unemployment is down,” Biden said the day October’s inflation numbers were released. “There is no question the economy continues to recover and is in much better shape today than it was a year ago.” How will it end? That’s the big question. Earlier this month the Fed chair, Jerome Powell, conceded that inflation had been “longer lasting than anticipated” and it was “very difficult to predict the persistence of supply constraints or their effects on inflation”. Economists expect the central bank to start raising rates next year in an attempt to tamp down price rises. But inflation is a psychological as well as an economic phenomenon. Fear of rising prices is already affecting consumers and could, perversely, lead to more price rises as consumers snap up goods fearing yet more rises in a market that is still constrained by supply chain problems. We will probably continue to be haunted by inflationary fears unless the price hikes do prove “transitory”. As the old economist joke goes: the best rate of inflation is the one no one notices.There are more than 200 dead bodies on Mount Everest. Some of these frozen corpses – of mountaineers who succumbed to hypoxia or exhaustion, or got caught in blizzards, or fell into ravines – are lying in plain view, and have to be stepped over by later climbers. One calculation suggests that there’s a one in 20 chance that, once you reach the top, you won’t make it back down. Why on earth do people take this risk? This question – of why people willingly choose danger and suffering in their life – motivates the psychologist Paul Bloom’s new book, The Sweet Spot. It’s not just mountaineering: he also covers more mundane, but still puzzling, choices. Why do people watch films that make them scared and disgusted? Why do people have sexual fantasies – and practices – that involve violence? Why do they have kids? These are all tricky to explain if you’re a pure hedonist and believe that people merely want to maximise the amount of pleasure they have in their life. Many of the things we find pleasurable involve a large dose of real (or imagined) pain. One way out of this paradox is to say that we value effort: if some outcome, such as climbing Everest, involves a struggle, it has higher value. If you were helicoptered to the summit, it just wouldn’t feel the same (OK, successfully flying a helicopter to the top of Everest is also extremely effortful, but you know what I mean). Bloom only obliquely references economics, but this discussion is redolent of one of the biggest historical debates in that subject. Is the worth of some product determined by how much work someone puts in to make it? Adam Smith thought so; Karl Marx made it the basis of his theory of capitalism. But modern economists aren’t fans of the labour theory of value: there are too many phenomena it just can’t explain (I’d be willing to pay a great deal for a can opener if I were starving and all I had was a tin of peaches, but not so much if there were already such a tool in my kitchen – the value of things is contextual and subjective). So too for the effort theory of pleasure. Not only does it fail to shed much light on horror movies or BDSM (for those, Bloom runs through a series of evolutionary-tinged rationales, which he admits are often tenuous – for instance, is watching scary films a kind of “practice” for encountering danger in real life?), but it’s also missing meaning. Meaningful pursuits – such as having children – often bring suffering “along for the ride”, and there’s not much we can do about it. Even if The Sweet Spot lacks the opinion-changing gravity of Bloom’s previous book, Against Empathy, it still throws up many questions. Bloom has a cheerful writing style that’s impossible to dislike – the opposite of academics who apparently believe in an effort theory that adds value to their impenetrable, jargon-filled texts. My own form of masochism is reading those academic texts, checking whether the studies cited in popular-psychology books stack up. The Sweet Spot weaves in studies to back up philosophical points, and little of it hinges on this or that result being solid. Nevertheless, there are some references I probably would not have used: the statistics in a study on people’s mood while listening to Stravinsky’s The Rite of Spring don’t look entirely convincing; and given the absolute pounding it has had over the past decade, I’d probably just keep away from the literature on ego depletion (the idea that willpower is a finite resource). But this is nitpicking – Bloom is clear that the evidence he cites varies in strength, and is hardly uncritical in general. Indeed, at one point he debunks the entire theory of post-traumatic growth. The idea – that those who suffer can not only bounce back but can improve themselves in unique ways – is both Pollyanna-ish and callous, and Bloom is rightly sceptical. He offers a reductio ad absurdum: would proponents agree we should punish criminals much more harshly, since the trauma might make them into better people? I rather doubt it. In trying to understand why people risk death by mountaineering, Bloom cites a classic paper by the economist George Loewenstein that lists potential motivations: winning prestige; completing goals; mastering the environment; adding meaning in an indifferent universe. Bloom endorses motivational pluralism: we’re all a tangled mess of complicated drives and enthusiasms, and finding the sweet spot that includes just the right mix of suffering and value and satisfaction is, as the book’s subtitle puts it, the “key to a good life”. We might, though, have to resign ourselves to never fully understanding people’s motivations: that Loewenstein paper takes as its title the ultimate non-explanatory explanation, given by the doomed George Mallory as to why he’d want to climb Everest: “Because it’s there.” • Stuart Ritchie is a lecturer at the Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience at King’s College London. He is the author of Science Fictions: Exposing Fraud, Bias, Negligence and Hype in Science. The Sweet Spot: Suffering, Pleasure and the Key to a Good Life is published by Vintage (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Four “trailblazer” universities will receive a funding boost of more than $200m for research hubs to advance Australian manufacturing, under a plan announced by Scott Morrison. The policy, set out in a speech to the Business Council of Australia on Wednesday, will give each university $50m to help commercialise research in the priority areas of defence, space, resources technology, food and beverage, clean energy and medical products. The funding was welcomed by the university sector, which has slashed jobs during the pandemic as falling international student arrivals cut into revenues used to cross-subsidise research. The four universities will be selected by a competitive process that will consider their “commercialisation readiness”, demonstrated through industry partnerships; co-funding; intellectual property arrangements; promotion for academics who focus on commercialisation; not just pure research; and appointment of an industry leader to oversee the hub. Each will also receive $8m in support from the science agency, the CSIRO. Morrison told the BCA that university researchers are “currently incentivised to publish and have their work cited as often as possible”. “And this publish or perish mindset is useful for getting tenure, but does little to spur innovation or create start-ups,” he said. In a statement Morrison said the government is “putting our best minds to the task” of commercialisation of research and advancing manufacturing. “We’re focusing our researchers and business leaders on Australia’s national priorities to help secure our economic recovery,” he said. “The trailblazer universities will be a platform for our best researchers to find business partners, invest in entrepreneurs and achieve extraordinary results for the country.” The education minister, Alan Tudge, said Australian universities “punch above their weight on pure basic research but lag in transforming research into breakthrough ideas, products, and new businesses”. Universities Australia chief executive, Catriona Jackson, welcomed the announcement as “clear recognition from government of the central role universities play in productivity, prosperity and boosting sovereign capability”. “Australian universities have a strong record of collaboration with industry partners, and the benefits this brings to the economy,” she said. “We know that for every dollar invested in research, $5 is returned to the economy.” The Business Council chief executive, Jennifer Westacott, said the policy would “help give us an edge in the global battle to turn our ideas into new industries, new jobs and new opportunities”. “Our businesses are world beaters and our universities are world class, better collaboration is a no brainer,” she said. Universities are estimated to have lost a total of 35,000 staff during the pandemic after government decisions effectively excluded them from the jobkeeper wage subsidy scheme. On Tuesday the shadow education minister, Tanya Plibersek, criticised the government for boasting of the contribution of the tertiary education sector while “standing by” as universities slashed jobs: In October 2020 the Coalition announced a $1.5bn fund to boost local manufacturing in a bid to fix vulnerabilities in supply chains and $1bn for university research to forestall damage to the sector caused by the drop-off in international students. Labor broadly welcomed the manufacturing initiative but later raised the alarm about ministerial discretion to allocate most of the funding.Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister, has defended Boris Johnson against accusations that he is losing his grip, saying he has a “great team” around him. The justice secretary, who is second in command of the government, said Johnson’s faltering speech to the CBI on Monday, during which he lost his place and made a long tangent on Peppa Pig, was an example of him being “ebullient”. Despite reports of a rift between No 10 and the Treasury, backbench discontent and a small number of MPs submitting letters of no confidence, Raab said the prime minister was “on great form”. He told BBC Breakfast: “The reality is people speak about speeches in the Westminster village, the gossip and all the rest of it. “It’s the job of Westminster commentators to pick up on one anonymous source from wherever they found it to criticise the government of the day; that’s fine.” He said the prime minister was “focused on the job at hand”, and was an “ebullient, bouncy, optimistic, Tiggerish character and he livens up his speeches in a way that few politicians past and present have done, but actually there is a steeliness to him as a prime minister and indeed his team, and we work as a team.” Asked on Times Radio whether the prime minister was losing his grip, Raab said he was not, adding that Johnson had a “great team” around him including the cabinet. The prime minister has undergone a tumultuous three weeks marred by repeated backbench revolts. There are also understood to be tensions between No 10 and No 11, with Rishi Sunak’s department thought to be concerned about the prime minister’s tendency to over-promise and the fumbled timing of decisions. The announcement of the integrated rail plan, originally scheduled for earlier in the autumn but delayed until last week, was among poorly executed announcements, Treasury sources believe. After a series of leaks, the final plan was greeted with fury – including by many Tory MPs – after it fell short of what had been promised by Boris Johnson. Some MPs are also blaming Johnson’s inveterate boosterism for the dashed expectations that led to a string of northern newspaper front pages condemning the plans. Details of the social care cap were also delayed until last week, months after the broader package was announced, focusing anger on the disproportionate impact on lower-income households. Scores of Conservative backbenchers voted against the plans or stayed away on Monday, reducing Johnson’s majority to 26. Some privately voiced growing concerns about Johnson’s competence before the vote and after a rambling speech to business leaders. On Tuesday, Johnson’s official spokesperson was forced to insist that “the prime minister is well” after the speech to the CBI in which he lost his place and digressed to praise Peppa Pig World. But many Tory MPs blame Sunak, who is understood to have had dinner with the prime minister on Sunday, for forcing the government to pare back its investment plans to save money. On Tuesday, some Conservative MPs urged Johnson to bring in a political heavy-hitter to help rectify the situation and bring an end to what are regarded as unforced errors by Downing Street. “He’s absolutely got to do something,” said a former minister. “All of us have weaknesses; it’s incumbent on us to put the right people in place to correct for those weaknesses.” A suggestion being mooted on Whitehall – including in the Treasury – is that Ben Gascoigne, Johnson’s former political secretary who was recently brought back in as deputy chief of staff, could help take more of a strategic oversight role. Rumours have also resurfaced that Johnson’s chief of staff, Dan Rosenfield, could depart – though he was closely involved in many recent decisions, including the prime minister’s ruthless September reshuffle. Rosenfield regards his role as building a machine to allow Johnson to govern effectively, though some Johnson allies believe he lacks political nous. Asked about Johnson’s CBI speech, his spokesperson said on Tuesday: “The prime minister briefly lost his place in the speech. He’s given hundreds of speeches. I don’t think it’s unusual for people, on rare occasions, to lose their place in space.” Asked about a potential shake-up in the No 10 team, a source said: “Downing Street is focused on delivering for the public and the team is united around that goal.”The Welsh music prize, awarded to the best album by a Welsh artist each year, has been won in 2021 by electronic artist Kelly Lee Owens for Inner Song. Owens, who is from the village of Bagillt in north Wales, said: “It feels amazing. As a Welsh artist to be recognised by your country, ultimately for me, is the greatest honour. I’m so passionate about Wales and I want everyone to know where I’m from.” Her album, which blends pounding techno with softer electronic songcraft – and includes a guest appearance from fellow countryman John Cale – astounded the panel of judges, according to the prize’s co-founder Huw Stephens. Owens wins £10,000, and she pledged to donate some of the prize money to Welsh charities. She beat shortlisted albums by Afro Cluster, the Anchoress, Carwyn Ellis &amp; Rio 18, Datblygu, El Goodo, Gruff Rhys, Gwenifer Raymond, Mace the Great, Novo Amor, Private World and Pys Melyn. Datblygu were awarded the Welsh music inspiration award, for their influence on Welsh-language music. The post-punk band’s frontman David R Edwards, celebrated for the social commentary of his lyrics, died in June. The Welsh music prize was founded in 2011, with former winners including Gruff Rhys, Gwenno and, last year, Deyah.‘Best album so far’ It’s so upfront and honest. You know exactly the story she’s telling, and even if you haven’t experienced divorce yourself, you feel every word of it. Her voice is sounding better than it’s ever done, using so much more of her range – just listen to Love is A Game. Gone are the lofty metaphors that hint at heartbreak, replaced with extremely raw and naked lyrics that welcome you in to her experiences. I think it’s much more poetic than before. Best album so far. I’ve listened to the album in full four times now, and I really like the order of songs, particularly the more upbeat, less typical Adele-sounding tracks at the end of the first half. Recognising that Adele put Strangers By Nature first, and Love is A Game last gives both more weighting and context, as I think the latter very much sounds like the resolution. However, I think it is absolutely fine for people to go and listen to their favourites off the album in whichever order you choose – if that wasn’t the case then you wouldn’t have singles! Joe, 24, student, Oxford ‘Boring – I switched to listening to 21’ Boring. It’s so slow with so many lyrics, the music feels mostly the same. I was disappointed so switched to listening to her 21 album. Aysin, 48, engineer, Istanbul ‘It’s really brave’ I think it’s wonderful and is Adele’s most raw and personal album. When I heard the voice note of Adele explaining her loneliness on My Little Love it made me cry. I think sometimes it’s easy to somewhat dehumanise famous people and I think this album really makes us understand that Adele is a real person with real feelings, real emotions and, like the rest of us, real problems. It’s completely candid, sincere, raw and so so powerful. Adele has always been a very private person (particularly about her son, Angelo) and the sharing of these voice notes in the album, which are actually really difficult to hear, is really brave. What I love most about this album though, is that it really communicates the journey that Adele went on throughout her divorce. I’ve been a huge fan of Adele since her first album, 19, and although I love the youthful innocence of her earlier music, I really recognise that Adele has ‘found herself’ with this album. Her voice sounds the best it’s ever been and To be Loved is a real showpiece for me. Please excuse the cliché but Adele is much like a fine wine - she gets better with age. I listened to the album in order and I think it’s great that Adele requested this of Spotify. As she explained herself, artists spend a lot of time deciding on the track lists for their albums and they often tell an important story, so dipping in and out of an album doesn’t really allow you to appreciate it fully in my opinion. Leyla Pinarbasi, 28, property manager, Altrincham, Cheshire ‘This album will go down in history’ I think it’s art – it’s different but gorgeous. It’s something special and feels like it’s going to kick off another great Gatsby era of music. It’s different and her writing is out of this world. This is going to be the album for people all around the world going through some sort of hardship especially with relationships. This one is going to go down in history. Jacob George, 18, student, Goodyear, Arizona, US ‘A step up from her previous albums’ Deeply personal, intimate and emotional are Adele’s musical trademarks, but this time she goes further. We all know the people and events involved and we have those voice notes of her conversations with Angelo. Listening to them feels almost intrusive, and I’m unsure about the ethics of recording and broadcasting these intimate moments with a nine-year-old child. I loved 30, though. The selection of music and collaborators works wonderfully well to showcase her vocal talents, which have never been better. Her ability to take us with her on an emotional journey remains unique and undiminished. I’m glad she waited six years for such an accomplished piece of work, rather than producing something that merely kept the pot boiling. It will be a long time before I have had enough of 30, and I think this is a step up from her previous albums. It tells a coherent story with a more grown up sound (or set of sounds) than her earlier work. Simon Anderson, 61, retired, Chester ‘The overall feel is way too morose’ I’ve listened to 30 twice now and I’m afraid it doesn’t do it for me. The “chat” that drops into some of the songs is a tad twee, and the overall feel is way too morose, even by Adele’s normal standards. I applaud her for pushing herself to create something different, but as is often the case with artists following a massive success with their last album, the “try too hard” vibe kicks in. I feel with a lot of artists who achieve incredible success that the pressure to stay fresh while appealing to their fan base proves too great, and the finished result tends to be incohesive. In this instance, I think the classic Adele sound works without the gimmicks. Of course I fully accept that this is easy for me to say as I have not had the challenge of following up a multimillion-selling album myself! Emil Mcmahon, 61, social media consultant, Edinburgh ‘Could have done with a bit of pruning’ It doesn’t start off great, My Little Love is awful and is the worse Adele song by far. The album gets going at song four, Cry Your Heart Out, but trails off towards the end. I think perhaps a bit of pruning would have helped instead, maybe making it around 45 minutes or so. From the high of 21 the albums are starting to get weaker. Robert Carty, 53, accountant, Dublin ‘There isn’t a single song I’ve disliked until this album’ I am a huge Adele fan, having loved her since the Chasing Pavements days. There isn’t a single song I have disliked until this album. I can understand songs tell stories, however, it is still a song to be sung along to and I don’t want to have to stop singing a belter out every 30 seconds to hear someone’s son’s voice. Listening to her songs, I can’t help but feel slightly detached from them; this is a woman singing about life events that most of us have to go through and should be relatable. I can’t see myself belting out any of these songs after a few glasses or when I fancy a pity party after my boyfriend has annoyed the hell out of me. Unfortunately I think it’s probably the weakest of all her albums. The idea of listening to her songs as if it were a novel unfolding is a really unique idea, however in this day and age, where you’re downloading songs digitally and not forced to listen to them in a particular order on a CD, or if you don’t particularly like tracks one to four then having an order to listen to the songs to is irrelevant and just a bit of a gimmick. Hannah, 27, farmer, Kent ‘There is no “lovely place” on this album’ On first play it was hard to listen to in full. Adele’s voice is in fine form, however it seems to be all or nothing – there is no “lovely” place on this album where you can wallow in the melody and poetry. I admire her for putting it all out there but I believe it comes at a price and I really don’t like the voice notes. I think 30 is a natural progression but after listening I immediately thought, I can’t wait to hear the next album. Like: “OK she’s got this out of her system now, let’s hear that voice sing to us in joy and fun.” Apart from a couple of tracks on 30, I think 25 will still be my go to album. Alex, 57, government worker, Melbourne, Australia ‘It feels like she wrote 12 magnolia tracks’ I have long been a fan of Adele, since she became part of a world where everyone fights to be the same, she beautifully played her true self. Of late she seems to have become a brand and I don’t believe it anymore. Whenever I listen to a new music album I start from the beginning and listen in order as there is often a story, and if you are a keen listener of lyrics it makes sense. I didn’t like the first words of Strangers by Nature – “I’ll be taking flowers to the cemetery of my heart” just seems all insanely doom and gloom. I liked Easy on Me because it started sad and turned into hope and that was powerful, but the rest doesn’t seem to flow for me. I found the sound quite dreary and with poor diction I struggled to make out what she was saying at times. I can’t put my finger on what it was that I expected, but when I heard it my heart sank with disappointment. I was just sucked into a depressive black hole. It feels like she just wrote 12 magnolia tracks. Harvey Pincay Novillo, 38, sales, WorcestershireShaun Murphy reacted angrily after crashing out of the first round of the UK Championship, saying his 6-5 defeat by Si Jiahui was “not fair” and that amateurs should not be allowed to play in professional tournaments. World Snooker chiefs later issued a robust response, saying they “strongly disagreed” with Murphy’s claims and insisting the opportunity for young amateur players to compete on the biggest stage formed a “crucial part” of their development. Murphy – winner of the tournament in 2008 and runner-up at the world championship earlier this year – had fought back from 5-1 down to force a decider against the 19-year-old Si, who fell off the main tour at the end of last season, but then spurned an opportunity to finally seal the match. The loss sparked a rancorous reaction rarely seen at the elite levels of professional sport. “I am going to sound like a grumpy old man but that young man shouldn’t be in the tournament,” Murphy told BBC Radio 5 live following his early exit at the hands of the Chinese teenager. “It is not fair, it is not right.” He continued: “I feel extremely hard done by that I have lost to someone who shouldn’t even be in the building. I don’t know why we as a sport allow amateurs to compete in professional tournaments. This is our livelihood. This is our living. We are self-employed individuals and not contracted sportsmen. We don’t play for a team. “The other 127 runners and riders in the tournament, it is their livelihood, too. It is wrong, in my opinion, to walk into somebody who is not playing with the same pressures and concerns I am. He played like a man who does not have a care in the world, because he does not have a care in the world. It is not fair, it is not right. “I am not picking on him as a young man, he deserved his victory. Amateurs should not be allowed in professional tournaments, the end. This is our livelihood. This is how I put food on the table. This is how I earn money. Since turning professional at 15, I have earned the right to call myself a professional snooker player. He hasn’t done that. He shouldn’t be on the table.” Si had earlier missed a golden chance himself to wrap up what would have been a comfortable 6-1 win after clawing back three snookers required only to then miss the blue with victory seemingly in sight. Murphy, world champion in 2005, continued his momentum to mount a fine recovery with breaks of 60, 87 and 85 to fight back and level the match in York at 5-5. The deciding frame saw a re-rack before Si produced a half-century break only to allow Murphy back to the table, who showed his experience to build a run of 44. Si then left the final two reds open, and Murphy sank a long pot – only to then miss a straightforward blue that handed the teenager an unexpected opportunity to finally wrap up a memorable victory just before midnight. World Snooker Tour responded in a statement: “Si Jiahui earns a place in ranking tournaments this season as one of the leading players on the 2021 Q School rankings. “While he may have amateur status, he deserves his place in our events, based on his results. Amateurs play under the same rules as professionals, they can earn prize money and places on the World Snooker Tour based on results.“Many elite amateur players like Si Jiahui train and compete full-time in the hope of earning a guaranteed tour place, therefore they are competing under significant pressure with no guarantees. Providing opportunities for the best amateur players is important for our growth as a sport and that is something that Shaun benefitted from during his early days as a player. “We have come a very long way as a global sport over the past decade and that has partly been down to the structures we have built both at professional and grassroots level worldwide. For the best young players, the chance to compete on the big stage is a crucial part of their development and the development of the sport as a whole. “We respect Shaun’s opinions, but in this case we strongly disagree with his comments.” The four-times world champion Mark Selby offered his backing to Murphy after he began his campaign in York with a 6-2 win over Ross Muir. “Because [Shaun] said it after he lost, people probably think it is sour grapes – but I totally stand by everything he said,” Selby told BBC Sport “There’s a reason there is a Q School to try to get on [the professional tour] and if you don’t get on, you should have to wait another year and play in the amateur events.” Elsewhere on Wednesday, Gary Wilson made his fourth career 147 on his way to a 6-2 win over Ian Burns, while Mark Williams made two century breaks as he defeated China’s Lei Peifan 6-3. Ronnie O’Sullivan made a superb 139 clearance in the opening frame of his victory over amateur Michael White. Ding Junhui made a break of 129 on the way to a routine 6-2 win over his Chinese compatriot Anda Zhang, while Thailand’s Thepchaiya Un-Nooh made five century breaks as he outclassed seven-time former world champion Stephen Hendry 6-1.After just four years on the Australian music scene, 23-year-old independent artist Genesis Owusu has dominated the country’s top music awards, collecting four Arias on Wednesday night. The Ghanian-Australian (real name Kofi Owusu-Ansah), who also performed a medley of his hip-hop/funk hits, collected album of the year, best hip-hop release and best independent release for Smiling With No Teeth – which was also the recipient of ABC’s J award last week. The album also won the Aria award for best cover art, co-designed by the performer and Bailey Howard. “This is insane,” Owusu-Ansah said, accepting album of the year. “I used to get side-eyed a lot when I was younger for the way I dressed and the things I did … But all the people I loved and respected always stood firm, immovable, unshakeable because we knew the power in who we were and what we created. I’m lost for words honestly. this means so much for me ... It’s not for us to change for people; it’s up to them to catch up, and see what they’ve been missing out on.” For the second year in a row, most speeches and performances were pre-recorded due to Covid-19 restrictions. The rest of the event was hosted and broadcast live on YouTube from Taronga Zoo in Sydney, in one of the most low-key ceremonies of the Aria’s 34-year history. Song of the year went to indie rock band Spacey Jane, for the single Booster Seat, which was voted number 2 on the Triple J Hottest 100 countdown last year. The Kid Laroi – real name Charlton Howard – also continued his extraordinary career trajectory on Wednesday night, taking out the Arias’ best artist and best pop release categories. “Wow I guess this is a great start to the night,” he said, winning best pop release, which was presented by Charlie XCX via video link. “A big shout out to my brother Justin Bieber for being a part of this record and helping make it so special.” In his second speech, accepting best artist, Howard said it had been an “incredible night”: “I feel so blessed and overwhelmed ... It’s incredible I’m getting so much love, especially from home, that means the world to me.” The Sydney-born Kamilaroi performer – described by Billboard as music’s next global superstar – also sent in a pre-recorded performance of his Bieber-featuring hit Stay (sans Bieber): the last performance his fans will see in a while. Last week, the 18-year-old announced he was stepping out of the spotlight for an unspecified period to work on his first album. “I’ll be back next year,” he said at the Arias. Earlier this month the Kid Laroi was named artist of the year at the 2021 National Indigenous Music Awards. Another First Nations artist, Bundjalung rapper Budjerah, won his first Aria on Wednesday, awarded the Michael Gudinski breakthrough artist gong for his self-titled debut EP, named for the music promoter who died in March this year. The award was presented via video link by Ed Sheeran, who paid tribute to the promoter: “Every time I would see him he’d have a new a band or artist that he would play for me,” Sheeran said. “In 10, 20 years when new artists are still coming through, his name is still going to be part of what he loved.” Budjerah accepted the awards through tears. “I only spoke to him twice, but he opened a lot of doors for me. I still can’t believe it, this is insane.” Favourite Kiwi-bred band Crowded House, now 36 years old, won best adult contemporary album for Dreamers Are Waiting. And more than a quarter of a century after winning the Aria for best country album with Beyond the Dancing, Troy Cassar-Daley won the category once more for The World Today. Archie Roach won for blues and roots. Rüfüs Du Sol was named best group, and performed their single Alive, which also won best dance release, via video from Los Angeles. Sydney trio Middle Kids won best rock album for Today We Are the Greatest, and Zimbabwe-born artist Tkay Maidza won best soul/R&amp;B release for her single Last Year Was Weird, Vol 3. Best live act went to Sydney sibling duo Lime Cordiale, who won best breakthrough artist at last year’s Aria awards. By public vote, Taylor Swift was named most popular international artist for the second time. She accepted via a video message, thanking her fans: “I can’t wait until I can come back and see you.” Despite being nominated across six categories, multi-Aria award winner of previous years, Amy Shark, walked away empty handed. The singer-songwriter performed Love Songs Ain’t For Us at Wednesday night’s ceremony. One notable absence This year’s awards had one notable absence: former Sony Music Australia boss Denis Handlin, who was also chairman of the Arias until his removal from Sony in June. Since the music awards’ inception in 1987, almost all Sony artists have paid special tribute to Sony’s longstanding chief executive, crediting Handlin in all their acceptance speeches. “Denis insisted marketing and promotions people instruct artists to thank him in speeches at special events, award presentations … especially the Aria awards,” a former senior Sony executive told the Guardian, during its investigation into allegations by former Sony employees of a toxic workplace culture at Sony Australia, published in June. “Charity, staff and artist awards were an opportunity to focus the spotlight on himself and there was rigour around the proceedings and wording.” Acceptance speeches by artists were vetted by Handlin or senior staff, and often the words “family man” were inserted to describe him, another former senior staffer told the Guardian. “At company events staff were told to clap and cheer loudly for his speeches and presentations, especially in front of visiting overseas Sony executives and staff. There were consequences if the room was, in his view, ‘flat’.” The consequences of Shark forgetting to thank Handlin for one Aria award in 2018 are well-known in the industry (she was summoned to Sony’s offices the next day to publicly apologise). “This was not an isolated incident, it was mandatory for decades,” the former executive said. The Guardian sought comment from Handlin for this story. On 15 October, Handlin was stripped of his 2014 Aria icon award– an award he actively lobbied to create a year earlier, with the inaugural gong going to Michael Gudinski. No icon award was allocated on Wednesday night.Women at a higher risk of miscarriage in England are to be offered a hormone drug under new NHS guidelines. The National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) has published updated guidance on miscarriage that says certain women can be offered progesterone to help prevent pregnancy loss. Pregnancy and baby loss charities welcomed the move, which they said would help save babies’ lives and spare parents heartache. However, Nice cautioned the drug would not be able to prevent every miscarriage and would only be appropriate for use by some women. Prof Gillian Leng, Nice’s chief executive, said: “It is devastating for a woman to experience a miscarriage, so we are pleased to recommend progesterone for those women who experience bleeding in early pregnancy and who have had at least one miscarriage as a new treatment option. “The research evidence is clear that progesterone will not be able to prevent every miscarriage, and therefore our committee has called for more research to be carried out in this area. However, it will be of benefit to some women and as an inexpensive treatment option can be made available to women on the NHS from today.” Nice said women who have previously had a miscarriage and have a pregnancy confirmed by scan who are bleeding can be offered 400mg of micronised progesterone twice daily. If a foetal heartbeat is confirmed, it is recommended treatment with progesterone should continue until 16 weeks of pregnancy have been completed. Nice estimates about 7,200 women with prior miscarriage and bleeding in early pregnancy could be eligible for treatment with progesterone each year. Its independent guidelines committee said the hormone should not be offered to women with early pregnancy bleeding but no previous miscarriage, nor in women with previous miscarriage but no early pregnancy bleeding in the current pregnancy. It called for more research in these two areas. Nice added: “There was no evidence of harm to the mother or baby from the use of progesterone, although the evidence is insufficient to rule out the possibility of rare events.” Welcoming the update, Jane Brewin, the chief executive of pregnancy and baby loss charity Tommy’s, said: “It’s great to see Nice taking our progesterone research onboard in their new miscarriage care guidelines, which will help save babies’ lives and spare parents heartache. Miscarriage is often dismissed as ‘one of those things’ we can’t do anything about – even by some healthcare professionals, who may not specialise in this area to know the latest evidence. “We hear from women who were denied progesterone treatment when they should have been eligible, simply because their doctor wasn’t familiar with it, so we hope Nice’s recommendation will help end some of these inequalities in miscarriage care that add more pain to an already unbearable experience.” Prof Arri Coomarasamy, the director of Tommy’s National Centre for Miscarriage Research at the University of Birmingham, said: “The miscarriage care guidelines from Nice include a very welcome change, after many years researching the use of progesterone and working to make treatment more accessible. “Our research has shown that progesterone is a robust and effective treatment option but we know it’s not yet reaching everyone who might benefit. This new recommendation from Nice is an important step in tackling the current variation in miscarriage services across the country and preventing these losses wherever possible.” Dr Edward Morris, the president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, said: “The advice in the new Nice guideline on ectopic pregnancy and miscarriage reflects what we are proposing in our draft green-top guideline on recurrent miscarriage, which is that women who experience early pregnancy bleeding and who have a history of one or more previous miscarriages be given progesterone for up to 16 weeks. “It is positive that Nice has acknowledged the latest evidence available from the Prism trial and how these findings can translate into tangible action for women experiencing recurrent miscarriage. We do, however, still have a way to go before understanding the best treatments for women experiencing unexplained pregnancy loss, and would welcome further research in this area.”Abbie Draper was so excited when she heard there was to be a big Tattle reveal that she set a reminder on her phone. On Friday, 1 October, at 7pm, Andy Malone was going to reveal the identity of the founder of the notorious website Tattle Life – the mysterious “Helen”. Founded in 2018, Tattle Life is a gossip forum dedicated to dissecting the lives of women in the public eye. Quietly, without mainstream recognition, Tattle has become one of the most-visited – and hate-filled – websites in the UK. There were 43.2m visits to Tattle in the last six months alone, mostly from British users. (Almost all the people discussed on Tattle are British.) While politicians of all parties fulminate about the social media giants, Tattle flies beneath the radar. This is due partly to the perception that its subjects – female influencers and media personalities with professional management and large Instagram followings, often working in the parenting, fashion, or beauty arenas – in some way deserve the anonymous vitriol, or should deal with it as the price of success. In her only known interview (with Lime Goss, a gossip site affiliated with Tattle Life), “Helen” said that the site was a space for reasonable critique of public figures. “It isn’t trolling as it gives people somewhere to comment about people that choose to become a public figure and broadcast their private life to make money,” she said. But influencers allege that Tattle users have contacted their brand partners, attempting to sabotage commercial deals; reported them to the police for imaginary breaches of Covid lockdown rules; and, most disturbingly, made baseless complaints to social services about their parenting. Browsing Tattle Life is like dipping a foot into an acid bath. “One ugly bitch,” reads a post about the television reality star Katie Price. Commenters eviscerate women’s appearances, parenting, relationships, and mental health. (“Her fake postnatal depression shit is disgusting,” reads a post about the influencer Melanie Murphy.) Draper, 31, a business owner and influencer from Glasgow, has been discussed on Tattle Life. “Thinking about how vile she is is making me vom,” goes one typical comment. When Draper gave birth to a baby boy, Blaise, in February, Tattle users mocked the name for its similarity to the word “blaze”, and began calling him Baby Spliff. “I didn’t call my baby his name for two months,” says Draper. “They tarnished the name for me.” In the end, Tattle paranoia seeped into every aspect of Draper’s life. If her kids misbehaved at the supermarket, Draper feared a Tattle user would spot her and post about it. “It makes the world feel a very small place,” she says. Sometimes, in a fit of late-night anxiety, she would confront Instagram users she suspected only followed her to discuss her on Tattle. More often than not, they would admit it. Many people have tried and failed to take down Tattle. A petition to close it has been signed by 63,000 people. The author and Guardian columnist Sali Hughes presented a Radio 4 File on Four documentary in October 2020, in which she met a woman who had been trolling her on Tattle. “It was a way of me trying to solve my problems,” the Tattle user told Hughes. In August, the influencer Em Sheldon gave evidence before a parliamentary committee, calling for the site to be taken down. Now, Malone fancied himself the man for the job. An influencer and motivational coach, Malone has a ready-meal business that sells £5 chicken chow meins with his face on the packaging. (After we speak, he texts, asking me to refer to him as “Ireland’s number one motivational talker and entrepreneur.”) On 28 September, he filmed himself in the front seat of his Lamborghini to whip up interest in his announcement. “Friday, baby!” he yelled, with a maniacal chuckle. “7pm! Be ready.” The first of October arrived … and 7pm. Draper rushed to her bedroom to watch. Malone sat in the custom-built studio at his office in Warrenpoint, Northern Ireland. He wore a three-piece suit and a grave expression. “Who is behind the Tattle Life,” Malone asked, over a stirring instrumental soundtrack. He leaned in for the grand reveal. The founder of Tattle, Malone announced, was the CEO of a mental health charity. Her name flashed on the screen. Draper was astonished. There was absolutely nothing to link the charity CEO with Tattle. “It was obvious this wasn’t the right woman,” she says. The great influencer fightback ended with a whimper. * Humans have gossiped since time immemorial. Before gossip forums there were gossip blogs and before that, gossip columns and before that, gossip pamphlets, and before that, handwritten letters filled with scurrilous scrawlings, and before that, rumours shouted in crowded taverns or whispered above steaming buckets of laundry about neighbourhood witches. “Gossip helps us reassert our social bonds,” says Dr Ruth Penfold-Mounce, a sociologist at the University of York. “It’s relaxed talk, typically between friends and family members, where we can vent what we feel, usually in an emotional, not rational way.” In the real world and online, it skews towards the negative. “When we listen to people gossip, they rarely say good things. Tattle reflects that. There is very little positive in what is being said,” says Penfold-Mounce. But this new iteration of the gossip forum is tech-enabled and optimised for cruelty. “This is an entire genre on the internet, unfortunately,” says Dr Crystal Abidin, a digital anthropologist who specialises in influencer culture at Curtin University in Perth, Western Australia. Tattle’s closest forerunner is the still-active Guru Gossip, founded in 2012 to discuss the lives and careers of prominent YouTubers. Analysis of 60 discussion threads by the British-American not-for-profit Center for Countering Digital Hate (CCDH) indicates that 75% were about women. Of these, 15% contained posts promoting hatred of women, 12% contained misinformation, while 10% suggested that they were bad parents. In 2020, Tattle was also embroiled in a bullying scandal, after parenting influencer Clemmie Hooper was found to be using a pseudonym to secretly criticise others; including an allegation that the author and presenter Candice Brathwaite, who is Black, was using her race as a “weapon”. “It’s insidious and very poisonous,” says Callum Hood, head of research at the CCDH. The experience of being abused on Tattle is profoundly anxiety-inducing. “Everything about me is twisted,” says the Dublin-based influencer Grace Mongey, 33. “When my cat went missing for four days, they said I hid it in my back yard for publicity.” Things got so bad, Mongey had to take a mental health break from social media in July this year. When she returned, she wrote herself a contract, which she signed and sent to a friend for accountability, pledging never to go on Tattle again. Hannah Farrington, 28, from London has a stark warning about the dangers of Tattle. “I think someone will kill themselves because of it,” she says. “It’s inevitable. People are nasty as hell on there, and reading that about yourself becomes all-consuming. I love gossip as much as the next person,” she says. “But I do it with my friends. Creating a forum to slag people off is deranged.” Users mock Farrington for gaining weight. “I can’t believe how much she’s glowed down,” reads one post – glowed down meaning someone is no longer as attractive. Penfold-Mounce explains that bad behaviour can spiral online. “It can start to become extremely harsh and bullying. There’s a liberty to being able to type what you are thinking, instead of looking someone in the eye. People go far beyond what they would say in a real-world setting.” She is sceptical about Helen’s claim that Tattle is an acceptable forum for critiques of public figures. “If you wanted to have a true social commentary site, there would be more balance,” says Penfold-Mounce. Despite the site prohibiting harassment and urging users to “keep it on Tattle”, real-world harassment is discussed on some threads. “Any companies she works with, email them. There’s a lot of pissed-off people here, she’s screwed,” reads a post about the YouTuber Mia Jeal. When Mongey’s agent, Max Parker, announced that he was taking her on as a client, he received emails from what he believes were Tattle users, urging him to drop her. “Clients have told us that they can’t renew Grace for campaigns because so many people are contacting them with abuse,” says Parker. Another agent tells me that his client, a Devon-based influencer, has been reported to social services repeatedly by Tattle users urging them to take her children away. A London-based influencer, who is 35 and prefers to remain anonymous, tells me her address was published by Tattle users. “If money was no object, I’d take them to court,” she says. But my lawyer says that, realistically, I’d need £30,000. I have nowhere near that much money – I’m a single mother.” She said it cost £1,500 in legal fees just to get her address removed. Katie Hayes, 29, an influencer from the Wirral, says Tattle users called the police on her repeatedly, accusing her of breaking Covid lockdown rules. When Hayes promoted non-alcoholic prosecco on Instagram, Tattle users accused her of drinking when she was pregnant. “I thought social services were going to take my baby off me,” she says. “I had to ring the local authority for advice on what to do. If it wasn’t for me being pregnant I wouldn’t be here today. I was suicidal.” * When I catch up with Malone a fortnight after he sent his 121,000 followers to harass a blameless charity CEO, he says, “I don’t know much about Tattle. I just know it’s a bullying and trolling website.” Malone is a flamboyant, self-aggrandising presence best known in his native Northern Ireland for a recent stunt in which he rented a private jet and pretended to be the subject of a Netflix documentary titled The Rise of Andy Malone. Afterwards, he said he donated £50,000 to a mental health charity, and launched Troll Busters, a web series in which he named and shamed people who had been rude about him online. Troll Busters, Malone says, caught the attention of an anonymous Instagram account, @the_detechtives, which began revealing suspected Tattle users earlier this year. The Detechtives was launched in mid-September 2021 with an online form urging users to submit details of suspected bullies for analysis. They declined to be interviewed, but said they were a collective of volunteers and that this was the “first time that anyone has stood up to” Tattle trolls. Many of the alleged trolls they exposed on social media were known to their victims, they said, adding that they “have been overwhelmed by the response” to their forms. Tattle users appeared to be spooked. In a 21 September post, Helen reassured them that “people on Instagram can’t use some app to find your home address”. Despite this , the Detechtives shared screenshots of panicked users deleting their Tattle accounts. The account grew to 18,200 followers. In influencer circles, rumours circulated that a mass exodus of Tattle users was imminent. Tattle was going down. And then, on 24 September, the Detechtives vanished in mysterious circumstances. Helen claimed responsibility. “This morning we sent an email that was written under careful advice, and shortly after the account disappeared,” she crowed. Enter Malone. After the Detechtives’ Instagram account was deleted, the people behind it asked him to be their spokesperson, he says. “Someone had to have the balls to put their face to it,” he says. The Detechtives fed Malone information, which he delivered in his bungled 1 October reveal. Afterwards, Malone claims, hackers crashed his website. Despite slandering an innocent person, Malone is unrepentant. “There was a mistake made,” he says. “We corrected that mistake.” (Malone donated £1,000 to the charity CEO’s organisation and deleted his video.) But on 8 October, he doubled down in a second Instagram video, naming the woman he claimed was Helen. “Get the website down!” yelled Malone, jabbing his finger at the camera over ominous music. “I know who you are and I will annihilate you!” The woman singled out this time has the same first and second names as the charity CEO, and Malone insists the confusion was a case of mistaken identity. But the woman that he identified in this second video, and again to me, is also indisputably not Helen. Her only connection to Tattle is that she once founded a company with the word “lime” in its title. When I contacted this woman, she told me she had moved out of her home for fear of reprisals against her family and had contacted the police and lawyers to get it taken down. (Malone refused to delete the video, insisting that the Detechtives’ research was accurate. It was eventually removed by Instagram for violating its terms of use.) As Helen put it herself on Tattle: “The troll hunters turned into the biggest troll of them all.” * So, who is this cartoon supervillain? Rumours swirl. These include: Helen is the best friend of one of the most-discussed influencers on the site. She has a beauty business. She works for the prime minister. She has friends in influential places. She lives in France. She has a toyboy husband. She has a tech-whizz husband. In Helen’s interview with Lime Goss, she says she launched Tattle “because so many people were just brazenly breaking the guidelines for adverts”. Anything else we know about Helen is gleaned from her posts on Tattle. In these, her tone is strident. When Sheldon gave evidence to the parliamentary committee, she bragged that it only increased traffic. “It’s all good publicity for Tattle … almost every month we get more daily logged in users,” Helen wrote. “And no chance of it going anywhere no matter how much they smear and lie.” But behind the scenes, there are signs Helen is nervous. She fields requests from users wanting to change their handles for fear of being exposed on social media. “Tattle has never given anyone’s IP address,” she reassures them. Tattle also appears more willing to take down content in the last few years, says Yair Cohen of the internet law firm Cohen Davis. He has represented multiple influencers seeking to scrub defamatory, personal, or abusive content from Tattle. “There was a time when it was flat-out refusal. They’d say that it constituted free speech,” Cohen says. Since the murder of the politician Sir David Amess in October, ministers are reportedly considering legislation to end online anonymity. “If you want to say something about someone,” Draper says, “you should have the balls to say it as yourself.” Not everyone agrees. “For people in marginalised segments of society, speaking anonymously may be one of their only places to air grievances or thoughts,” says Abidin. Google is under pressure due to its links to Tattle, which uses Google AdSense technology to place ads on the site. (Google did not respond to a request for comment.) The CCDH estimates that Tattle generated $371,347 (£276,770) in Google Ad revenue in the past six months. “Tattle is full of vile abuse aimed at public figures who are disproportionately women,” says Hood. “Google should not be funding that.” He points out that Tattle – a site set up to call out influencers who weren’t disclosing work on behalf of brands – is itself not transparent about its finances: “The irony is that Helen has her own financial interest in running this website. She’s making a significant amount of money.” As the dust settles on the great influencer uprising that never was, the clock might be ticking for this hate-filled corner of the internet. The vigilantes visited the wrong house, but justice may yet come via the law, if not the flaming torch and pitchfork. • In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. You can contact the mental health charity Mind by calling 0300 123 3393 or visiting mind.org.ukOne day in the weight room, Michigan State University basketball player Anthony Ianni couldn’t take any more ribbing from his teammate, future NBA champion Draymond Green. Although Green had intended it as a good-natured joke about Ianni supposedly needing extra conditioning, Ianni took it seriously. Green said if Ianni couldn’t take a joke, he shouldn’t be on the team. A shoving match ensued. That’s when the team’s strength and conditioning coach, Mike Vorkapich, explained to Green that Ianni is on the autism spectrum, which makes it hard for him to understand when someone is joking and when they are not. Ianni had kept his autism from most of his teammates. He was initially upset about the disclosure, but it cemented lasting understanding and friendship. The first college basketball player in Division I identified as being on the autism spectrum, Ianni is now a Michigan State graduate and a motivational speaker. He shares his life story in a new memoir, Centered: Autism, Basketball, and One Athlete’s Dreams, written with Rob Keast. “A couple days later, [Green] came back to me,” Ianni remembers. “He asked, ‘Why didn’t you tell me about it?’ I said I did not know how he was going to respond. So often, people in my life, they found out and treated me differently. He looked at me and said, ‘Kudos to you, look at how far you’ve come.’ From that day forward, it changed our relationship forever, not just as teammates but friends.” In the book, Ianni reflects on his childhood diagnosis of autism and a prognosis that he would finish high school but not be able to play sports or go to college, and that he would have to live in a group home when he grew up. Instead, he went on to play at the highest level of college basketball, alongside and against future NBA stars, with the Spartans from 2009 to 2012. He sees similarities between his journey to Michigan State and the football narrative of Daniel “Rudy” Ruettiger at Notre Dame. Today, Ianni is a husband and father of two who met his wife, Kelly, in a serendipitous moment during his college days. His six-year-old son is getting interested in the NBA and likes hearing about the unexpected family connection to Green. “[Green] and I always make sure to stay in touch about how our families are doing, how our kids are doing,” Ianni says. “It’s not just Draymond I’m in touch with, [but] all my teammates I had. One thing I learned, Michigan State’s a family, it really is – the same guys in the locker room for three, four years, we fight like a family would, joke around like a family would.” It’s that sense of inclusion that Ianni has looked for since childhood. He writes about difficult moments as a boy, with some classmates bullying him outright and one pretending to be his friend before setting him up for humiliation. Some of the bullying was because of his autism – classmates mocked him for things like continually repeating lines from the Three Stooges – and some of it was due to his height (he eventually grew to 6ft 9in). Nowadays, when he meets with youngsters as a motivational speaker, he discusses his experiences getting bullied: “The bigger goal is to let students know, show them they are not alone … you know what it’s like, you’re there for them.” As he explains, “I show people, tell people it was tough for me, but at the end of the day, I was like a much stronger individual.” Ianni thanks his parents, Greg and Jamie; sister Allison; teachers and coaches for helping him through the tough times. Michigan State coach Tom Izzo has been a longtime presence in his life. Ianni’s father – a longtime Michigan State athletic department employee who retired as deputy athletic director – introduced his son to the celebrated coach of the Spartans when the younger Ianni was a child. As a kid, Ianni unintentionally took Izzo’s place on the team bus. The coach chatted with his seatmate on the ride to a practice, then gently made the youngster atone by helping out the team at the gym. Ianni grabbed rebounds and threw them back to the players, heightening his early love of Michigan State and his desire to someday play basketball there. Of Izzo, Ianni says, “I probably learned more of life from that man than a lot of other coaches I had in my life – you treat people with respect, how you want to be treated, everywhere you go.” Ianni played for an Okemos High School team that went on a deep state-tournament run, but when it came time for college, his first stop was Division II Grand Valley State. Yet he grew frustrated and decided not to continue playing basketball there. Michigan State accepted him, but he would have to walk onto the team and follow NCAA transfer rules of sitting out his first season. He ended up not only earning a spot, but receiving a full scholarship, which made him think of Rudy. “I was officially here, officially part of the Michigan State basketball program,” Ianni remembers of the day he went into the locker room and saw his jersey. “The coach awarded me a full-ride scholarship. I went to my car … I immediately started to cry.” At Michigan State, Ianni became captain of the scout team and played the starters intensely in practices, which he says prepared them well for the challenges of the regular season and beyond. In his and Green’s senior season in 2011-12, the team got to meet US president Barack Obama and first lady Michelle Obama when the Spartans kicked off their schedule aboard an aircraft carrier, the USS Carl Vinson. That season, Green was the top player in the Big Ten conference and the team won the Big Ten tournament. The Spartans reached the Sweet Sixteen in the NCAA tournament, but lost to Louisville. However, Ianni left a lasting legacy on the program – including what happened after his unexpected run-in with Green. “My teammates asked more and more questions about what autism is,” Ianni says. “The coaching staff asked what autism is. They wanted to know more. They were probably going to end up talking to somebody with autism again down the road who’s a little bit different [from me]. There are differences inside the autism spectrum. I’m very high-functioning. Maybe [they will meet] an individual who’s either low-functioning or mid-functioning.” As he explains, his coaches and teammates wanted to know how autism “impacts my life. They wanted to be educated ... They did not really know what autism was when they first found out they were going to be around a teammate with autism.” Today, in addition to being a motivational speaker and author, Ianni also coaches kids with autism in the very game he used to play. He runs a summer basketball camp for autistic youth. In the book, he writes that individual sports such as running or swimming are often recommended for children with autism. He encourages their parents to consider team sports as well. “I’m a big fan of it,” Ianni says. “Individuals with autism want one thing in life – to be friends with somebody. You can be a friend with sports … be part of a team in basketball, softball, baseball, football, hockey, whatever the case may be.” As he reflects from his own life experience, “it was not just teammates that I got to be around, but a friendship bond I’m going to have forever.”In a new book, former Trump adviser Scott Atlas blames Deborah Birx and Anthony Fauci for “headline-dominating debacles” about quack cures for Covid-19 – but omits to mention the chief proponent of snake-oil treatments, including hydroxychloroquine and disinfectant, was the US president he loyally served. Atlas, a radiologist, is a fellow at the Hoover Institution at Stanford University, California, specializing in healthcare policy. He became a special adviser to Donald Trump in August 2020, five months into the pandemic, but resigned less than four months later after a controversial spell in the role. His book, A Plague Upon Our House: My Fight at the Trump White House to Stop Covid from Destroying America, will be published on 7 December. Its publisher is Bombardier Books, an imprint of PostHill Press, a conservative outlet that will also publish a memoir by Kayleigh McEnany, Trump’s fourth press secretary. Speaking to Fox News, Atlas promised to “expose the unvarnished truth” about Trump’s Covid taskforce, including “a shocking lack of critical thinking about the science … a reckless abuse of public health and a moral failure in what should be expected from public health leaders”. Birx, an army physician, is a longtime leader in the fight against Aids. Fauci has served seven presidents as director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases. Both were senior members of Trump’s Covid taskforce. Atlas’s book is replete with attacks on both. Describing the fight against Covid before he came to the White House, Atlas accidentally sideswipes Trump when he writes: “Birx and Fauci stood alongside the president during headline-dominating debacles in the Brady Press Room about using hydroxychloroquine, drinking disinfectant, ingesting bleach and using UV light to cure the virus. They were there as the sole medical input into the taskforce, generating the entire advisory output to the states.” Hydroxychloroquine, an anti-malarial, was touted as a Covid treatment by non-governmental voices including two billionaires, Elon Musk and Larry Ellison. Fauci said repeatedly such claims should be treated with caution. But Trump himself proved an enthusiastic advocate, disagreeing with his senior scientist and asking the public: “What do you have to lose?” Trump even took the drug himself, before the Food and Drug Administration revoked emergency use authorization, citing concerns about side effects including “serious heart rhythm problems” and death. Atlas’s reference to “drinking disinfectant, ingesting bleach and using UV light” is to the events of a memorable White House briefing when again it was Trump’s pronouncements that went wildly awry – not those of his officials. On Thursday 23 April 2020, William Bryan, undersecretary for science and technology at the Department of Homeland Security, discussed a study of effects on the coronavirus from sun exposure and cleaning agents – as applied to surfaces, not the human body. Trump said: “And then I see the disinfectant, where it knocks it out in one minute. And is there a way we can do something like that by injection inside or almost a cleaning because you see it gets in the lungs and it does a tremendous number on the lungs, so it’d be interesting to check that, so that you’re going to have to use medical doctors with, but it sounds interesting to me. “So, we’ll see, but the whole concept of the light, the way it kills it in one minute. That’s pretty powerful.” As the Guardian reported, Birx “remained silent. But social media erupted in outrage.” Trump asked if sunlight might work, saying: “Deborah, have you ever heard of that? The heat and the light relative to certain viruses, yes, but relative to this virus?” Birx said: “Not as a treatment. I mean, certainly fever is a good thing. When you have a fever, it helps your body respond. But, I’ve not seen heat or light as a –” Trump interrupted: “I think that’s a great thing to look at. OK?” The president subsequently claimed to have been “sarcastic”. In his book, Atlas treats Birx and Fauci’s work for a taskforce he says Trump “never once” met or spoke to with sarcasm, criticism and disdain. He accuses Birx of “volatile behavior” and “interrupting all who challenged her” but says vice-president Mike Pence decided removing her was “simply not worth the risk to the upcoming election”. Among criticisms of Fauci, Atlas echoes Trump in complaining about his profile. “Dr Fauci kept on interviewing, of course,” Atlas writes, “positing the ever-present, potentially negative turn of events that never happened.” A year after Atlas’s resignation, more than 772,000 Americans have died of Covid-19.For Jackie Speier, the growing threat of political violence in America is personal. Before becoming a member of the House of Representatives in 2009, Speier served as a staffer to congressman Leo Ryan. When Speier joined Ryan for a 1978 trip to Guyana to investigate the Jonestown settlement, she was shot five times. Speier survived the attack, but Ryan and four other members of their delegation did not. So when one of her Republican colleagues recently shared a threatening video about the president and another House member, Speier knew she needed to act. The Democratic congresswoman spearheaded an effort to censure Paul Gosar, who had tweeted an altered anime video showing him killing Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacking Joe Biden. The censure resolution passed the House last week, in a vote of 223 to 207. All but three House Republicans voted against the resolution, with the minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, condemning the measure as a Democratic “abuse of power”. The Guardian spoke to Speier to discuss the censure resolution, her coming retirement and the shifting dynamics of the House as lawmakers face more threats of violence. The interview has been edited for clarity and length. Why was it so important for the House to censure Gosar? The ramping up of vitriol on the House floor has been demonstrable for a number of years now. It was like a match got lit during Donald Trump’s presidency, and it was seen as benefiting members to be provocative and then fundraising off of statements they made on the House floor. It’s very clear that, if you are silent about a member of Congress wanting to murder another member of Congress, even in a “cartoon”, you are inciting violence. And if you incite violence, it begets violence. So that’s why I felt so strongly that we had to draw the red line. This has got to be a red line. And obviously my colleagues agreed, and we passed the resolution. We saw some of your Republican colleagues either trying to justify Gosar’s behavior or downplay it. Do you feel like some of your colleagues have not learned the lessons of the Capitol insurrection, when we saw that violent rhetoric can escalate to potentially deadly violence? The facts don’t matter. That’s the problem. The facts don’t matter. I heard one of the Republicans on a show this morning say she thought it was reprehensible, but she voted against the censure because it also stripped him of his committee assignments. So they always will come up with a rationale to allow them to continue to follow the lead of former President Trump or Kevin McCarthy. It’s not about doing what’s right any more. It’s about doing what’s going to give them power. Specifically in terms of Kevin McCarthy, do you think that his rationalization for this behavior makes it inevitable that this is going to happen again? He’s got a number of radical extremists in his caucus that are very effective communicators to the right fringe, and he can’t really rein them in because reining them in means they will attack him. So they have become the face of the House Republicans. You might as well put a brass ring in Kevin McCarthy’s nose because they’re pulling him around. Politics is politics, but we’re talking about taking the life of another member of Congress. How is that not appropriate for censure? Does it feel like there’s a disconnect between Republicans’ rationalizations and the very real violence we saw earlier this year [during the Capitol insurrection] that could have resulted in the death of a member? Not to mention the fact that they’re eating their young. They’ve got one member, one of these fringe rightwing members, who was giving out the telephone numbers of members who voted for their districts and voted for what is a bipartisan infrastructure bill, and [Republican congressman Fred] Upton gets death threats. You’ve got to have an alligator’s skin to do this job. We know that. I’ve been doing this for 38 years. I’m very accustomed to it. I’m also accustomed to getting death threats. And some are seen as credible, and some are not. So that happens. There has to be a repercussion for that. And, as someone said, if in corporate America, you put out an animated video killing one of your co-workers, you would be fired. There’s a lack of reality in Congress right now. And anything goes. The more hyperbolic you are, the more extremist you are, the more successful you are because it’s all about raising money. Raising money gets you clout and power within the caucus. They have made Minority Leader McCarthy impotent in terms of disciplining anyone in his caucus who strays, who crosses that red line. What is your response to suggestions that Republicans will strip Democrats of committee assignments when they come back into power? If one of my colleagues put up an animated video or a tweet that said they wanted to kill a Republican colleague, I would introduce a censure motion for that. You cannot excuse away that kind of conduct. Someone is going to get injured or be killed. That’s how serious that conduct was. You have been in and around the House for decades now. Do you think that the increased number of threats against members has changed the dynamics of the House in any way? I think it’s become a bloodsport. And if a bipartisan bill like the infrastructure bill that had bipartisan support in the Senate and has bipartisan support in the House is then turned on the members that worked in consensus-building, then that suggests that we don’t want to legislate any more. I know that you announced your retirement this week. As you prepare for your next steps, would you say that this resolution was one way to protect the House as an institution? I love this institution. It’s such a privilege to serve. And I think when you’re in the heat of doing your everyday job here, you might lose sight of the fact that this is such a privilege. We’re given the opportunity to fashion legislation to make lives better for the American people. And that’s what we should be doing. When we get sidetracked into wanting to just disparage each other, then we’re not doing our jobs. I introduced the resolution because it just hit me so dramatically. And it’s yet again another example of women becoming the subject of attacks – physical attacks, psychological attacks – women of color in politics even more. I’ve worked on this issue for years now. And I see it as a way of silencing women and discouraging women from running for office. So for all those reasons, it was really important to take action.Before the pandemic, I had to brace myself for trips home over the holidays. I’d spend the weeks preceding Thanksgiving reading popular holiday survival guides, praying I’d learn some trick to help me leave emotionally intact. I was not alone: the internet abounds with memes of people hiding in toilets or stuck between family arguing at the Thanksgiving dinner table, wishing the night would end. Now that travel is projected to substantially increase in time for this year’s holiday season and the CDC is no longer pleading for us to stay put during the holidays, many will be rejoicing. Some haven’t seen loved ones for years, finding themselves isolated, trapped in foreign lands or missing important life events – including being unable to visit ill and dying family members during global and national lockdowns. But others, like me, won’t be. It’s no secret that Covid – compounded by an era of divisive politics – offered much-needed distance for those in troubled relationships with loved ones. For some, the pandemic presented people with the opportunity to break familial ties. For others, the pandemic at least offered an alibi: social media platforms like Facebook and Reddit were replete with users sharing memes and articles containing pandemic-related excuses to avoid family gatherings over the holidays. That might leave some of us asking why, as adults, we don’t see it as our right to refuse. The expectation that families should spend the holidays together at all costs is built into the fabric of American culture. You’ll notice this in the many holiday season advertisements that fetishize the idea of a loving nuclear family rather than provide images of friends gathering in mixed groups. But feeling powerless toward an obligation to return home, regardless of the impacts on our mental health, has far-reaching consequences. It can affect peoples’ finances, their confidence and their relationships. Not to mention the fact that people overstate the importance of going home when it comes to maintaining a meaningful connection with our families. “Some people may go home for the holidays because they want to honor the family bond,” says Dr Lindsay Gibson, a licensed psychologist. That could be at cost to the actual relationship, because healthy relationships rely on connections defined by sensitivity, empathy and care rather than just proximity. Many, like me, have invested ample time going home just to honor that family bond (in the absence of deep emotional connection), but as the Virginia-based psychologist explains: “The person [may] begin to doubt whether they have what it takes to be loved. It’s a deep injury.” In other words: if going home makes you argue, fight and hate your family, maybe it’s not preserving the relationship as much as you think it is. A bonded relationship – especially within the context of a dysfunctional or toxic family dynamic – is not necessarily a healthy or loving one. In fact, sometimes, an unhealthy bond can keep us coming back for more, even if it’s not necessarily good for us. Bonds, Gibson says, “are extremely strong when the rewards of the relationship are intermittent … inconsistent and unpredictable. Lack of predictability sets up one of the most powerful bonds because you keep looking for the treat.” So if you’re one of the many people asking yourself “Why do I care so much?” the answer is likely: “You care because you don’t know what you’re going to get [from the person],” says Gibson. Up until recently, opting out of visiting for the holidays seemed akin to blasphemy for my family. That sense of guilt and obligation struck me annually, especially in my 20s and 30s when I’d bought into the belief that being a person worth receiving her family’s love was synonymous with significant self-sacrifice. Before long, I found myself craving a conversation about the holidays that resisted positioning those at the behest of dysfunctional dynamics as duty-bound to return home at all costs. So what might a new and improved holiday survival guide look like? “Stop trying to outrun regret,” Dr Ramani Durvasula, a clinical psychologist, said. If you regret not spending time with family over the holidays it doesn’t necessarily mean you made the wrong decision. “The healthy and loving people in your family system can and should respect your boundaries,” she says. She suggests asking a partner or friend to intercept reactionary emails, texts and phone callsfor those who do opt out of family obligations to avoid the ensuing drama. Don’t force yourself to look at them now, she says – or at all, if you don’t want to. The point is to engage (or disengage) on your own terms. We also have the right to be happy even if we upset others, but maintaining that happiness may require some practice. “It’s a radical thought that someone else could be upset and you can be as happy as you were before they got upset,” says Gibson, adding: “It’s a mindblower, because it breaks the paradigm that you can only be a good person if you’re self-sacrificing.” For those choosing to spend the holidays with tricky family members, it’s important to remember that your feelings are just as important as anyone else’s. Gibson suggests doing this actively, reminding yourself: “This person is not more important than me. I am just as important as they are.” In doing so, you can set boundaries that work for you, even if that’s uncomfortable to others – like settling on virtual visits, or only attending for part of the evening. While I certainly love my family, at 41, I am now finally able to put up and maintain reasonable boundaries with them. I’m also beginning to understand that family can be great – at a distance. While I love them and sometimes wish I lived closer, distance, punctuated by the occasional Zoom chat, allows me to better appreciate the time we have when I do choose to return home. When I do return home, if I find a family member behaving in a way that’s not conducive to a peaceful holiday, I tell myself that’s their decision. Hopefully we’ll have another occasion to celebrate, but if we don’t, I take tremendous comfort in knowing I am not in control of other people’s choices – only my own. In the meantime, if I find myself perusing guides for holiday survival, I’ll remember that most of them are best suited for Target commercials and not the real-life complications of dysfunctional family dynamics.Scott Morrison has told the country’s most senior business leaders he “did a bit of a jig” after hearing one of the biggest fossil fuel projects in Australia in the last decade had achieved final investment approval by the energy giant Woodside. The prime minister told the Business Council of Australia on Wednesday afternoon the government welcomed Woodside’s decision on Monday to green light the $16.2bn Scarborough gas development – a project that has been labelled a “disaster” by environmentalists. “I did a bit of a jig out of the chamber the other day when minister [Keith] Pitt came up and confirmed to me that had taken place and Richard [Goyder, chairman of Woodside,] had been in contact,” the prime minister said. “I just could not be more thrilled about that. It is such a shot in the arm for the economy and it will power us into the future, and it is an enormous vote of confidence about what is happening here in Australia.” The comments came in a section of the speech in which Morrison declared Australia needed to secure its place in the new energy economy, including positioning the nation “to become a world-leading producer and exporter of hydrogen”. But the prime minister assured business leaders while the government was pursuing new technologies to help Australia meet its new net zero by 2050 emissions reduction target – a commitment the prime minister outlined before the Cop26 in Glasgow – “of course we are not walking away from our established strengths”, meaning gas exports. Woodside said the project would be a source of low-carbon gas, but the Conservation Council of Western Australia said it represented the most polluting fossil fuel development in recent memory. The International Energy Agency said in May that limiting global heating to 1.5C, a goal set out in the Paris agreement, meant exploration and exploitation of new fossil fuel basins had to stop this year. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Morrison’s observation came as Mathias Cormann, Australia’s former finance minister who now serves as OECD secretarygeneral, told a foreign policy thinktank that all countries needed to be “more ambitious” on climate action. Addressing a Lowy Institute event, Cormann said he had attended Cop26 earlier this month “where the need to accelerate global policy action to match climate commitments was obviously very stark”. But when asked whether Australia should have taken a more ambitious 2030 target to Glasgow, Cormann avoided directly criticising the Coalition government, saying it was important “to have credible and realistic transitions” to net zero by 2050. “I think it’s always important to be more ambitious, but it’s even more important to be able to deliver the outcomes,” Cormann said as he delivered the Lowy Institute’s Owen Harries Lecture. “And the outcome that we need the world to deliver is global netzero by 2050. And in that sense, we’ve got to continue to make decisions that help reduce the global problem, that don’t just shift the problem from one jurisdiction to other jurisdictions around the world.” The EU has proposed carbon border adjustment charges in a bid to avoid “carbon leakage”, whereby emissions-intensive industry moves to countries with less stringent climate policies. Those sorts of tariffs have been strongly opposed by the Australian government, which has branded the EU proposal as a “new form of protectionism”. But Cormann appeared to sympathise with the rationale behind EU-style border adjustments. He said the OECD’s push for greater transparency about carbon pricing “would complement, not substitute, for other initiatives to address the risk of trade distortions and carbon leakage from the lifting of ambition in individual jurisdictions”. “The challenge is to ensure the level of ambition and effort in individual jurisdictions can be lifted to the level required while maintaining a global level playing field, avoiding counterproductive trade distortions, and carbon leakage,” he said. Cormann - who as a member of the Abbott government helped abolish the Gillard government’s carbon pricing scheme - also called for an “internationally more coherent and globally better coordinated approach to the pricing of emissions”. He gave a nod to broader structural reform. “It’s also important to remember that securing the transition to netzero emissions is not a job for climate policies alone. We need a carefully sequenced and coordinated fiscal, financial and structural reform package with the whole spectrum of public policy kicking in the same direction.”The Labour MP Stella Creasy has asked for urgent clarification from Commons authorities after being reprimanded for having her infant son in a sling as she spoke in parliament on Tuesday, saying this had not been a problem on other occasions. While Commons rules state that MPs should not have children or infants with them in the chamber, Creasy has taken both her children into the Commons before, without any complaints being made. The Walthamstow MP led a debate about buy-now-pay-later consumer credit schemes on Tuesday afternoon in Westminster Hall, a subsidiary chamber where MPs can raise issues of interest to them. She later tweeted an email she had received from Commons authorities. “We have been made aware that you were accompanied by your baby in Westminster Hall earlier today,” it read, from the private secretary to the chairman of ways and means, which is the formal title for the most senior deputy Speaker, currently the Conservative MP Eleanor Laing. The email pointed out that the latest edition of rules of behaviour and courtesies in the House of Commons, the handbook for MPs, says they should not take their seat in the Commons while with a child, adding: “I would like to draw your attention to the fact that this also applies to debates in Westminster Hall.” This edition of the rules, published in September, states that MPs can take babies or toddlers with them through the lobbies to vote, and if needed through the Commons to do so, but adds: “You should not take your seat in the chamber when accompanied by your child, nor stand at either end of the chamber, between divisions.” The same wording was also in the previous version of the rules. However, Creasy has taken her children into the Commons before without reprimand. On 23 September, with her then-newborn son in a sling, she asked Jacob Rees-Mogg, the Commons leader, if he would consider revising other rules which mean that MPs on parental leave must give up the proxy vote they are permitted if they want to speak occasionally in the chamber. Rees-Mogg defended the rules, but told Creasy he wanted to “congratulate her on the impeccable behaviour of her infant”. After Creasy’s tweet another Labour MP, Alex Davies-Jones, tweeted that the rule seemed “a complete contradiction” given that when she was breastfeeding her child the Commons speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, assured her “that if the need arose I would be able to feed my child in the chamber or Westminster Hall”. Creasy, who also has a young daughter, has battled to ensure MPs can have proper maternity cover, but without success so far. She has tussled with the Independent Parliamentary Standards Authority to get a locum paid near to her own salary rate to cover her constituency casework. The law prevents a locum from being able to cover the parliamentary work of MPs on parental leave. More recently, Creasy launched a campaign called This Mum Votes – originally named Vote Mama UK, after an existing US campaign – to help support parents in politics, saying she did not think her own party had properly backed her push for maternity rights. Creasy, who says she has been assured the email was not prompted by a complaint from an MP, told the Guardian she was baffled by what had happened. “Without maternity cover, the residents of Walthamstow would be denied representation if I didn’t keep working – but anyone with a three-month-old baby knows they are too young to leave on their own,” she said. “Having already taken my baby into the chamber previously without any complaint, I’ve asked for urgent clarification as to what would happen if I keep bringing the baby with me, and where they expect me to leave him – issues like this are why we have set up the This Mum Votes project so we can ensure that the mother of all parliaments ensured mothers can be seen and heard in our politics.” A House of Commons spokesperson said: “It is vital that all democratically elected MPs are able to carry out their duties in and around parliament. Members can at any time consult with the Speaker, deputy speakers, clerks and doorkeepers about their requirements while in the chamber or in Westminster Hall at any time. We are currently in communication with Stella Creasy about this matter.”It became an instant hit with viewers for its female vicar, quirky cast of village characters and the gentle fun it poked at the Church of England. Almost three decades after the first episode was aired, the Vicar of Dibley, starring Dawn French, is still a staple of Christmas specials and fundraising telethons. The Rev Geraldine Granger even made several broadcasts to the nation during lockdown. But the archbishop of Canterbury has cast aspersions on Dibley’s vicar and other television clergy, saying they portrayed vicars as “rogues or idiots”, whereas in reality they are “hard-working, normal people, caring deeply about what they do”. Such fictional depictions of vicars were “depressing”, Justin Welby told the National Farmers’ Union. Departing from the text of his speech, Welby said he had “got into” watching Clarkson’s Farm on television during the pandemic. He told the audience: “Maybe for you watching Jeremy Clarkson feels a bit like for me watching anything with a vicar in it. Either you can’t stand it or you get completely addicted. I generally find depictions of vicars on TV to be depressing – they are portrayed as rogues or idiots … the reality is very different – it is actually of hard-working normal people, caring deeply about what they do and working all the hours there are to do it.” Welby has said that being a parish priest, for seven years in rural Warwickshire, was the most stressful job he had done. He was ordained as a priest after 11 years working in the oil industry. “The hardest work I’ve ever done, and the most stressful, was as a parish priest – mainly because it was isolated, insatiably demanding and I was on the whole working without close colleagues – and that wears people down,” he told the Church of England’s General Synod in 2017. The Rev Bryony Taylor, rector of Barlborough and Clowne in Derbyshire and the author of More TV Vicar?, a book about the fictional portrayal of clergy on television, said characters had become “a lot more nuanced and more rounded since the 70s and 80s, when they were total stereotypes”. Scriptwriters used characters “to make interesting stories that are going to entertain people. It’s not that interesting watching TV shows about nice people going about their everyday work. And people that write TV shows are not setting out to try to make the church look good.” One of her favourites was the vicar of St Saviours in Hackney, played by Tom Hollander in the series Rev, which ran from 2010 to 2014. “He’s quite flawed, and you love him for it really. He’s just trying to get on with the job at hand, and I identified with that guy,” Taylor said. At the time the show was airing, Hollander said his character was the opposite of “the cliche of a country vicar, partly because we wanted to depict England as it is now, rather than having a sort of bucolicy, over-the-hills-and-far-away, bird-tweeting England – we wanted the complications of the multicultural, multi-ethnic inner city, where everything is much harder”. Taylor also highlighted a clergyman in the crime drama Broadchurch. “That was quite a balanced portrayal. It showed how the church can bring communities together in times of great crisis and grief.” Another crime drama, Collateral, had a gay female vicar among its characters. “That was quite juicy, although a lot of my colleagues were slightly irritated because the character was very naive and a lot of rules were broken. But it was good to see a gay priest.” Taylor, the rector of two rural churches, echoed Welby’s comment about hard-working priests. “It can be quite lonely, you don’t have a big team around you, you don’t get much banter like you do in an office. And you’re dealing with a lot of expectation all the time. It’s a tremendous privilege, I love being involved in people’s lives in really key moments, but we work very, very hard and trying to create boundaries is quite challenging.” Catholic priests have also had starring roles in television dramas and sitcoms, including Father Ted, Broken, and Fleabag.Scott Morrison is continuing to battle insurgencies within his own ranks, with Queensland National George Christensen sanctioning civil disobedience in response to vaccine mandates, and veteran Victorian Liberal Russell Broadbent declaring mandates “without reasonable exemptions are not only unconscionable, they are criminal”. Senior ministers on Wednesday persuaded two rebel Liberal senators, Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic, who have threatened to withhold support for government legislation, to support the government on procedural votes during the final sitting fortnight. The government has agreed to a tweak to the vaccine indemnity scheme. But divisions were on show in the lower house where Christensen and Broadbent used the opportunity of member’s statements before question time to ventilate their objections to mandates, with Christensen comparing the requirement to decrees by dictators like “Stalin, Mao, Hitler and Pol Pot”. Christensen contended the solution to the overreach was “the rediscovery of human dignity along with, and I don’t say this lightly, civil disobedience”. The Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, demanded Morrison “unequivocally and without reservation” condemn Christensen’s call for a public uprising. Morrison responded by telling parliament that, as “the son of a police officer”, he believed everyone should obey the law. Albanese returned to the dispatch box to invite Morrison “to directly condemn the member for Dawson for the very specific comments that he has made”. Morrison said he condemned “any encouragement, any encouragement whatsoever by any person in any place regarding acts of civil disobedience” and then attempted to return fire by drawing attention to a historical comment by the ACTU’s national secretary, Sally McManus, arguing if laws were unjust then there wasn’t a problem with breaking them. Morrison was chided by the new House of Representatives Speaker, Andrew Wallace, who told the prime minister to remain relevant to the question. But Morrison was aided by crossbencher Bob Katter who invited the prime minister to reflect more expansively on the comments by McManus. Later on Wednesday, Christensen crossed the floor to vote with Labor on a litigation funding bill. Broadbent, having signalled his objections, is not intending to join colleagues in refusing to vote for government measures. With a handful of MPs threatening not to support government legislation until Morrison intervenes on compulsory vaccinations, the government is battling to secure support for its controversial voter ID legislation. There are also ongoing skirmishes about the government’s religious discrimination laws. On Wednesday, Sam McMahon, the Country Liberal Northern Territory senator, warned she “might not be able to vote” for the voter ID laws, citing “concerns about how they’re going to impact, particularly Indigenous territorians”. “I think there’s very little, if any, evidence of voter fraud in the Northern Territory,” she reportedly told NITV. Senate support for the voter ID bill is finely balanced, with the Coalition needing to persuade its own hold-outs, One Nation, and either Jacqui Lambie or Stirling Griff for the measure to pass. The government wants that proposal passed before parliament rises for 2021, and extended sitting hours in the House of Representatives on Wednesday night to facilitate debate. Labor opposes the change. Assuming it can corral its own internal rebellion, the government will attempt to persuade Senate crossbenchers to pass the legislation expeditiously without subjecting it to a new Senate inquiry. But in a report tabled late on Wednesday, the parliamentary joint committee on human rights concluded the special minister of state, Ben Morton, had failed to demonstrate that cracking down on multiple voting is “pressing and substantial enough to warrant limiting human rights”. The committee had warned earlier in November that “no evidence” had been given to show how the bill would prevent fraud, an observation it repeated on Wednesday with respect to voter impersonation after it received Morton’s response to a request for more detail. It noted the bill’s safeguards to prevent people being excluded from voting but warned of a risk it could “impermissibly limit the right to participate in public affairs” especially for certain groups that would be “disproportionately” affected (such as Indigenous persons in remote communities, people experiencing homelessness and those fleeing domestic violence).When Kyle Rittenhouse was acquitted of murdering two men during anti-racism protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last week, the verdict was celebrated by far-right politicians and pundits across the US. Several Republican lawmakers offered Rittenhouse an internship and Fox News host Tucker Carlson called him “a sweet kid”. Kathleen Belew, a historian of American white power movements and author of Bring the War Home: The White Power Movement and Paramilitary America, argues that the fact that Rittenhouse’s trial is being read as a victory by more mainstream components of the right has the potential to serve as a rallying cry for increased militant vigilantism against US racial justice protesters. Belew spoke with the Guardian about how perpetrators of rightwing violent action in the US have been empowered by verdicts like Rittenhouse’s in the past, and how the outcome of the case should be read in the context of growing militant social movements. On Friday, when Kyle Rittenhouse was found not guilty of all charges, you tweeted: “It has never taken more than a whisper of approval to fan the flames of militant right action, and the Kenosha acquittal is a shout.” What did you mean by that? There have been many acquittals and partial verdicts that the white power movement and militant groups have taken as signs that they can continue their activities unabated. I’m thinking of the acquittals in the Greensboro trials at state, federal and civil levels, [when members of the Ku Klux Klan and the American Nazi party shot and killed five marchers in an anti-Klan rally organized by the Communist Workers party in 1979], the acquittals in the seditious conspiracy trial in 1987-88 [after an all-white jury acquitted 13 white supremacists who were charged with plotting to overthrow the US government and kill federal officials] and the partial prosecution of Timothy McVeigh after the Oklahoma City bombing, where we saw the conviction of just one of a few conspirators rather than a prosecution geared at a movement, which is what this was. I think Kenosha is a much more significant moment. It’s not my place to second-guess our judicial system. I believe in the rule of law. I believe in jury trial. But we know from the historical record that every time there is an incident like this, it has set off renewed activity by the white power movement, often with imminent casualties. Kenosha has not just been watched by extremists, but by a whole bunch of people on the right. It is a moment that animates not only the fringe, which is what we’ve seen before, but also components of the mainstream. On the topic of the fringe and the mainstream, I often find myself not wanting to use the word extremist any more because it seems like we’re seeing fringe beliefs increasingly become more mainstream. I’m a historian. The period I study is the 1980s and the 1990s and in that time period the white power movement really did not think it had any chance of making inroads in mainstream politics. But that’s clearly not the case any more. There was just a story going around about how at least 28 elected officials are current or former members of the Oath Keepers, which is an extrajudicial militia group, a private army. The idea that we can have elected officials from a private army is deeply, deeply concerning. To clear up for readers who may get snarled when we use the word militia: all legal militia activity was incorporated into state national guard units in 1903 in the Dick Act. Everything else is extralegal. There are laws in the books in all 50 states that limit having private armies. And yet here they are. We have elected officials who report to these groups. There are at least 10 people who participated in the insurrection on 6 January and have now been elected into office in the GOP. We’re not talking any more about one person with questionable quotes or one person who said something scandalous a long time ago. We’re talking about a movement of people who are acting in concert. This is a much different thing. We need to not only be thinking about the threat of mass casualty events, which has been imminent for the last several years, but also the threat to our democratic system. In 2019, there were mass shootings in Christchurch, New Zealand, El Paso, Texas, and Poway, California . In each of these cases, the alleged shooter posted a manifesto on the message board 8Chan. In October 2018, before the Tree of Life Synagogue shooting in Pittsburgh, the shooter posted on the social media site Gab. Kyle Rittenhouse used social media to find community in his militant beliefs. The use of social media is one connective piece between these shootings. As a historian, do you see these events as interconnected? We tend to treat acts of politically motivated violence by people affiliated with the militant right and the white power movement as carried out by individual or the work of a few bad actors. You’ll often see the phrase “lone wolf terrorism”, though I have not seen that used as much around Kyle Rittenhouse. This is a more complex story, partially because he was a child at the time of the shooting and partly, because the way that the organization worked was somewhat different than usual. It was a sort of flash mob called for via Facebook more than an organized action by a coherent group that met before. But that doesn’t mean it’s not ideological. The thing that we have to remember is that first of all, the idea of the lone wolf came from the white power movement in the 1980s with the express purpose of confusing everybody about what this movement was. It follows an action called “leaderless resistance” that is effectively cell-styled terror and both of those things are meant to direct public attention away from what it is, which is just an interconnected social movement. So when we think about Charlottesville, Charleston, El Paso and Pittsburgh and the other communities that have been impacted by this violence, what we usually see is El Paso branded as anti-Latino violence, Charleston as anti-Black violence and Pittsburgh as antisemitic violence, but they’re all acts of white power violence. And by putting these stories together, I think these communities can link more effectively in efforts to combat this problem. What is the role of social media platforms, both as curators of news and as gatherings places for the communities that can foster violence? One thing to remember, that people often don’t, is that white power activists have been using social network activism since the early 1980s with pre-internet computer-to-computer message boards. They had a network called Liberty Net, which they established by distributing millions of dollars in stolen money to groups all around the country and then instructing them to get Apple computers and then directing them in how to set up and use this network. And the network, in 1983-84, had not only things like assassination targets and ideological content, they also had things like personal ads. This is tiny compared to the juggernaut that is social media in all of our lives today, but it’s important to remember that these activists are decades, if not generations, into using technology. They were early adopters, if not pioneers, of this kind of work. It would be a mistake to think that they won’t be able to, or ready to, manipulate this kind of space. We’ve talked about how the acquittal of Rittenhouse creates a backdrop of permissiveness for people with hateful beliefs, but how does that play out looking forward? I would say that there are two main components. One is what is happening with legislation and court action around gun ownership, where we really do see the needle move further and further toward unfettered access to weapons with absolutely no barrier every time there are decisions that increase permissiveness. The other part of it has to do with white power and militant right groups that are essentially opportunistic. They are looking for a window and this is a big window. Because what it does is, it allows them to not only mount similar shootings like the one carried out in Kenosha to see if they could do it elsewhere, it also lets them mobilize in a sector of the rightwing mainstream that is sympathetic to the Rittenhouse story. This is kind of a bonanza of a case. And we should be attuned as well to the verdicts that are coming out of the Ahmaud Arbery shooting and in Charlottesville with the Kessler civil action, which I’m sure will be read along the same lines. Editor’s note: On Tuesday a jury found the key organizers of the deadly 2017 Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville, Virginia, responsible for $25m in damages to counter-protesters under state law. The jury remained deadlocked on whether the organizers violated federal civil rights law.A week ahead of what may be Honduras’s most consequential election since the country’s return to democracy in 1982, the leading opposition candidate for president delivered her final address to an audience of fervent supporters. “Today we are united as an opposition to say enough! Enough of so much theft, corruption and drug trafficking,” said Xiomara Castro, 62, as she addressed the crowd in Tegucigalpa on Sunday. “Enough suffering for the Honduran people.” There has been plenty of suffering. In the four years since the last election was marred by allegations of fraud, Honduras has been battered by two major hurricanes and mauled by the pandemic. Human rights groups have catalogued a litany of abuses including a clampdown on protests and targeted attacks against journalists, human rights activists and environmental defenders. Meanwhile the ruling National party of President Juan Orlando Hernández have played starring roles in a string of drug trafficking and corruption allegations. One of Hernández’s brothers was convicted of drug trafficking in a New York federal court. Prosecutors have accused the president himself of overseeing state-sponsored drug trafficking. Hernández has vehemently denied the accusations, but appears likely to face indictment by US prosecutors on leaving office in January – a fact that, combined with the unprecedented flow of Honduran migrants to the north during the past four years, underscores the stakes of the election for the US and the region as a whole. Hondurans desperate for change are betting on Castro to alter the nation’s course. “She’s the only option we have to get rid of this narco-government,” said Edwin Cruz, 29, on a recent afternoon in Tegucigalpa’s central park. Castro would be the country’s first female president, but to win undecided voters she may have to overcome her own baggage from the past. She first became a household name in 2005 when her husband, Manuel “Mel” Zelaya, won the presidency for the center-right Liberal party. After he took office, Zelaya shifted to the left and allied himself with governments that had come to power as part of Latin America’s “pink tide” – including Venezuela’s late socialist leader Hugo Chávez. Such associations prompted the country’s conservative political and economic elite to oust Zelaya in a 2009 military-backed coup. In the ensuing political crisis, Castro led the largest protest movement in the nation’s recent history. “She did it bravely, with talent, she never let her speeches be guided by feelings or emotions, she was always very rational,” said Edmundo Orellana, who served in Zelaya’s cabinet. “From then on, Honduras identified her as a political figure with her own personality. Very different from Mel’s political personality,” he added. Castro first ran for president in 2013, as candidate for the newly formed, center-left Libre party, which emerged from the protest movement. This time, she is backed by a coalition of parties across the political spectrum. Nevertheless, the conservative National party has launched a fierce campaign reminiscent of the effort against Zelaya before the coup. Red billboards have popped up across the country painting Castro and her allies as communists. Campaign spots on television and radio mention Chávez so often that one would think he was on the ballot. (He died in 2013.) But the country’s precarious economic situation means that the cold war-style campaign often falls flat. “They say that we are going to end up without work, without houses, but we’re already worse off than under communism, there is no work,” said Cruz, who like many in his generation is unemployed. Castro’s announcement that she intends to establish diplomatic ties with China has also raised some eyebrows. Honduras is one of only a handful of countries that still recognizes Taiwan, but the proposal is more likely motivated by the hope of Chinese economic largesse than ideology. The fear campaign has also attempted to capitalize on Castro’s pledge to loosen the country’s draconian abortion laws. Honduras is one of only four countries in Latin America that prohibits abortion under any circumstance, and Castro has proposed legalization in the case of rape, when the pregnancy threatens the life of the mother and when the fetus isn’t viable. But earlier this year, the government passed a constitutional reform that makes it virtually impossible to modify the country’s total abortion ban, and Castro would find little support to change the law – even within her own party. Castro’s main opponent, the National party candidate Nasry Asfura, has attempted to stay above the fray. A two-term mayor of Tegucigalpa known popularly as “Papi a la Orden”, or “Daddy at Your Service”, Asfura, 63, has focused on job creation and highlighting infrastructure improvements in the capital. “If he were to run again for mayor, I know that many people would vote for him,” said Melissa Elvir, director of the Democracy Without Borders Foundation. “But to govern from the mayor’s office isn’t the same as to govern from the executive branch.” As the candidate of a party which has been tarnished by countless allegations of criminal wrongdoing, Asfura has run under the slogan “Daddy is different” – a phrase which appears equal parts a recognition of the thirst for change among voters and an attempt to distance himself from Hernández. But Asfura himself was accused in a corruption case involving the misappropriation of roughly $1m in public funds for which he suspiciously avoided indictment, and members of his party all the way down the ballot have been embroiled in scandals of their own. Asfura has denied the accusations. The race between Castro and Asfura could end up dangerously close. If the latter comes out on top by a thin margin, there could be a repeat of 2017 when a large portion of the population questioned the results and protests were at times brutally repressed, resulting in the deaths of at least 23 people. Many of the roughly half a million migrants who have left Honduras in the past four years have cited a lack of opportunity, corruption and electoral fraud as reasons why they lost all hope for change at home. If a scenario similar to 2017 were to play out this year, it could contribute to an even greater exodus over the next term. “I’m waiting for the elections to see if the National party commits fraud,” said Cruz. “Then [if they do] I’d have to emigrate – because I have to survive one way or another.”Here is a likable and easygoing comedy from actor turned film-maker Reggie Yates. It’s a period piece set on New Year’s Eve 1999, featuring flip phones and someone frowning over a copy of the London A-Z, muttering how good it would be if someone invented a navigation screen like the ones planes have. It’s also a playful homage to the one-crazy-night ensemble pictures of the 90s (although Yates avoids the freezeframe-voiceover character introductions that became a key cliche of Britfilm around that time), and there’s a clubbing theme that recalls Justin Kerrigan’s Human Traffic, which came out in 1999. Three lads from London are preparing to enjoy themselves: Cappo (Elliot Edusah), Two Tonne (Jordan Peters) and Kidda (Reda Elzaouar); they’ve actually set up their own pirate radio station which has become successful enough to get them into clubs to play sets. But there’s a problem. Cappo has just started university, and he has plans to get away and see the world and do other things with his life. Meanwhile, Two Tonne has to find a way of impressing Sophie (Kassius Nelson) on whom he has a major crush. And all the while they have to figure out a way of getting into a certain club on the other side of the Thames for the millennial night of their lives. There are some nice lines: I liked the lads’ pedantic row with Princess (Shiloh Coke) about the correct way to pronounce “plantain”. The film pinballs cheerfully about the place, from crisis to crisis, from losing the tickets to getting back the tickets, with no great narrative purpose other than fun. • Pirates is released on 26 November in cinemas.Two Norwegian journalists investigating conditions for migrant workers in Qatar ahead of the 2022 Fifa World Cup were arrested and detained for 36 hours as they tried to leave the country, Norwegian media have reported. The VG newspaper reported that Halvor Ekeland, a sports journalist for the public broadcaster NRK, and Lokman Ghorbani, an NRK cameraman, were picked up by police late on Sunday as they were preparing to leave for Doha airport. Hours earlier, during a live broadcast for the Sportsrevyen news show on conditions for labourers working on World Cup venues, Ekeland had told viewers there were “stark contrasts”, with some workers “doing awfully”. Asked during the broadcast what had struck him most strongly, he said: “The encounters we had with workers, those who did not wish to speak with journalists on camera. When I asked them for an interview, you see the fear in their eyes.” The journalists said they were arrested outside the hotel and taken to a police station, where they remained until they were released on Tuesday morning. They are now back in Oslo. A spokesperson for the Qatari government said they were detained “for trespassing on private property and filming without a permit”. “We were questioned, but first and foremost we are happy to be back in Europe,” Ekeland told the newspaper. “We’ve had a hard time. We will have a number of meetings with NRK and find out a number of things, then comment more.” The public broadcaster’s managing director, Thor Gjermund Eriksen, said NRK had not been informed of the reasons for the detention, which he considered an attack on freedom of the press and free speech. “It is unacceptable for the media to be prevented from practising free and independent journalism at one of the world’s largest sport events,” Eriksen said in a statement. “We will be discussing how this should be handled with Fifa.” Ekeland and Ghorbani had been in Qatar since 14 November and were due to meet Abdullah Ibhais, the former communications director for the 2022 World Cup organisers, who has since publicly criticised the Qatari regime. However, Ibhais, who is appealing against a five-year prison sentence for corruption, was arrested hours before the planned interview. A spokesperson for the Qatari government said: “An NRK crew were taken into custody in the early hours of 22 November for trespassing on private property and filming without a permit. The authorities arrested the crew in their hotel after responding to a complaint made by the owner of the private property on which the crew had illegally accessed. The crew were released without charge early on 23 November after completing the necessary legal procedures. The Norwegian embassy and NRK executives were updated on the situation as it progressed.” The Norwegian football magazine Josimar last month published an extensive article on Ibhais’s trial, arguing that he had been convicted largely to protect the reputation of the Qatari regime after criticising the treatment of migrant workers in Qatar. The magazine later received a letter from a law firm representing the organising committee alleging the article was “defamatory and in violation of several laws”, and demanding the removal of WhatsApp messages and voicemail from the piece.Britain is facing a Christmas alcohol shortage unless the government does more to address the lack of HGV drivers, a group of 48 wine and spirits companies have told the transport secretary. In a letter to Grant Shapps, businesses including Pernod Ricard, Moët Hennessy and the Wine Society said rising costs and supply chain “chaos” had held up wine and spirit deliveries, raising the risk that supermarkets will run dry and festive deliveries arrive late. Members of the Wine and Spirit Trade Association (WSTA), which coordinated the letter, have reported it is taking up to five times longer to import products than a year ago, with two-day orders taking more than two weeks to process. Freight costs have increased by about 7%, the WSTA said, as delivery firms have had to raise HGV drivers’ wages to retain them, causing particular difficulty for small businesses that struggle to compete on salaries with larger rivals. Drivers and vehicles are increasingly unpredictable in their arrival times, according to WSTA members, meaning goods are either not ready or are left waiting for collection. The drinks companies called on Shapps to extend a temporary visa scheme for HGV drivers, which expires in February 2022, to a year. They also want the government to step in to help smooth congested freight routes from ports, and to provide more regular updates on how many HGV driver licences are being processed by the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency (DVLA). Miles Beale, the WSTA chief executive, said: “There is mounting concern amongst our membership that unless urgent action is taken, we will fall deeper into delivery chaos. “We are already seeing major delays on wine and spirit delivery times which is pushing up costs and limiting the range of products available to UK consumers. “Government needs to be doing all it can to ensure British business is not operating with one hand tied behind its back over the festive season and beyond.” The alcohol industry is the latest in a long line of sectors to warn of possible Christmas shortages amid supply chain difficulties, with concerns also raised about deliveries of turkeys, trees and toys. On Wednesday the chief executive of the Cold Chain Federation, a trade body representing the temperature-controlled logistics industry, told MPs to expect a reduced range of food items available to buy this festive season. Shane Brennan told the Commons transport select committee: “It’s not about shortages, it’s about simplifying. Having less range obviously is one of the key decisions you can make in trying to make supply chains more efficient. “And it’s about reducing the amount of goods you’re expected to put on the shelves and then working with the customer base to actually make that clear. “We are very good at piling high and selling cheap at Christmas time. What we have to do is strategically scale that back in order to meet the promise that there will be the stuff you expect to see on the shelves, but not necessarily all the extras.” The supply chain is facing a number of pressures, such as drivers leaving the industry and difficulties recruiting new ones, border issues and delays with the movement of shipping containers. The Department for Transport was contacted for comment.Ask members of one Covid mutual aid group in Whalley Range, south Manchester, about what they feel most proud of and two things crop up: the hardship fund and the epic street clean. It’s not hard to see why. Transforming the once rubbish-strewn alleyways that run between the neighbourhood’s back-to-back terraces was an act of collective power. Meanwhile the fund, which relies on everyone chipping in, allows any member to access £50 cash each month, no questions asked. Both of these projects have forged trust and a sense of responsibility among this group of 100 neighbours. Spread across just three streets in south Manchester, this group is as hyper-local a version of mutual aid as you can get. Members are all from different backgrounds: renters and owners, ranging from their early 20s to late 70s. The area is home to a Pakistani community and a Sudanese family also belong to the group. Its flyers are translated into Urdu, Hindi, Arabic and Gujarati, while members use online translation to participate in the group WhatsApp chat. The group was originally focused on providing necessities during the early months of the pandemic, such as help with shopping, collecting prescriptions or providing reliable Covid information. Its remit has since expanded – members now share food and festivals, pool DIY tools, brainstorm measures to tackle unscrupulous landlords and speeding cars, and tend to a community garden. When I met some of the group recently, one member, Helene, 50, told me: “It’s a gazillion unplanned micro-miracles that happen when neighbours talk to each other.” As researchers and campaigners survey the mutual aid phenomenon that took hold during the pandemic in the UK, a question hangs over its political significance. Within weeks of the first lockdown in March last year, Britain became home to one of the world’s largest mutual aid efforts, with more than 4,000 groups springing up nationwide. This development was itself political, reflecting a terrible vacuum of state support that volunteer groups rushed in to fill. The pandemic devastated those with no stocked cupboards, no savings and no support systems. Rees Nicholas, one of a small group that set up the Mutual Aid UK website to support local organising, told me that in the early days of the pandemic, the website was receiving 600 messages each day from people in distress and need. Mutual aid is, by definition, political. The 19th-century Russian anarchist Peter Kropotkin coined the term to describe the phenomenon of communities helping each other. Such collectivism is how societies thrive. Mutual aid volunteering is often accompanied by the slogan “solidarity not charity”. In contrast to the charity sector model where there is a giver (the charity) and a taker, mutual aid involves horizontal, two-way support. Particularly in the US, the tradition of mutual aid is rooted in Black and minority ethnic, LGBT and migrant groups, marginalised communities that have not been able to rely on state support. When Emma O’Dwyer, a political psychologist at Kingston university, started researching Britain’s Covid mutual aid groups, she found volunteers more likely to be middle class, female and leftwing. But across the country many groups avoided political discussion altogether, in a bid to foster more inclusion. Big P politics can seem alienating and is perceived negatively by many. Some of the group members in Whalley Range insisted it was not at all political. One 39-year-old woman told me that, in contrast, the group was “about kindness and love and supporting each other”. But the trouble with dialling down the politics is that the right readily co-opts mutual aid as a cover for dumping more of the state’s responsibilities on to the voluntary sector. Last year, Danny Kruger, the Conservative MP for Devizes, launched the New Social Covenant Unit, attaching the government’s “levelling up” rhetoric to the blossoming of Covid mutual aid. Last month, the unit published a report about “community-powered Conservatism” that was championed by the new secretary for levelling up, Michael Gove. The report portrays the millions of people who joined mutual aid groups as part of a “civic core” whose empowerment is “the logical conclusion of Brexit”. With Labour remaining silent on the issue, the government appears to want to turn this surge of collectivism into a Conservative force. Mutual aiders I speak to say that instead of plugging the vast holes left by a neglectful state, they want to pressure the government to alleviate these gaps. But what would turn Britain’s extraordinary mutual aid network into a force that was capable of doing this? As a first step, mutual aid needs to thrive beyond the pandemic. Nicholas says that many of the Covid groups that haven’t wound down have adopted a charity model, such as a London-based lottery-funded venture that sources laptops and phones for migrants. Others have started to meet longer-term needs; one Newcastle group runs a continuously stocked community larder providing free food. But the survival of the group I met in Whalley Range suggests a sense of community is self-sustaining, and a need in itself. If the left is struggling to find a foothold in regions decimated by de-industrialisation and economic disadvantage, perhaps these new communities could provide more favourable ground. Whether articulated politically or not, volunteers often say mutual aid has changed them. Taking part in collective action is powerful and creates its own momentum. As Emma O’Dwyer told me, it isn’t any particular measure that matters, so much as the act of doing it. Harnessing mutual aid as a progressive force that could renew the left, though, is another story. • Rachel Shabi is a journalist and broadcaster, and the author of Not the Enemy – Israel’s Jews from Arab LandsLike the unnamed woman Drake sings about in his 2015 hit Hotline Bling, I’ve been wearing less – at least metaphorically – and going out more. Apparently she started to behave that way ever since Drake left the city. Before that, he laments, she “used to always stay at home, be a good girl”. I started to behave that way ever since Covid-19 left the city – except, of course, it didn’t. The pandemic is very much with us, and on top of that, it’s cold and flu season. Of course, most New Yorkers are vaccinated and masked, and restrictions on our work and social lives have eased massively. I need to go to work, and I need to live my life. So I’m trying to take the train, meet friends, eat in restaurants and see shows. I should enjoy this moment while I can – but I can’t. I can’t relax because of those aforementioned pathogens still out and about, those tiny horrors looking for a new home in our bodies. I’m doing my best to act normal, but I’ve become incredibly aware of other people’s snuffling, wheezing and sighing. It feels like I have microphones in my ears that amplify every little sniff and cough. When someone clears their throat before they launch into a story, are they simply trying to seem more important, or are they diseased? And I fret about my health too, of course. Is that a harmless frog in my throat or a virus that has sickened so many and killed more than five million people since last year? “The big picture is that it’s more complicated this year as we’re out there mixing with each other more than we were last year. It’s also something that we have to get used to; it’s not going to get any simpler over time.” That’s what Dr Denis Nash, a professor of epidemiology at the City University of New York Graduate School of Public Health and Health Policy, told me. “We’re always going to have to try to figure out what’s going on because it could be one of many different pathogens that are circulating.” The flu, Covid-19, and a cold share several symptoms, so how best to figure that out? There’s a helpful guide to differentiating between the three illnesses here. Nash reminded me that the more people, including children, get vaccinated against both the flu and Covid-19, the better off we will all be. If you do develop symptoms, he recommends isolating and testing as soon as possible. “The hope is that a culture of trying to protect one another from the things that we might be carrying, especially when we have symptoms, is something that is growing in the US.” Nash wants people to stay home when they are sick but points out that not all have that choice. “Many people have to go to work or they won’t get paid, or they won’t be able to keep their job. There are many incentives that are not aligned with public health.” That’s the sad and profound truth of it, but back to my subterranean jitters when someone coughs on the subway: justified, or over the top? I asked Dr Timothy Scarella, a psychiatrist with Beth Israel and Harvard Medical School, and he told me that his profession has the same question. “This is one of those things where we’ve really been learning about it with everybody else. We don’t have research studies and things about how to adjust the way we think about the threshold between typical worry and pathologic worry in the context of a pandemic.” Scarella said that he hasn’t seen more cases of illness anxiety disorder, the condition formerly known as hypochondria, during the pandemic. He has, however, seen general anxiety shoot through the roof – anxiety about reopening, about unsafe practices in workplaces, about losing even more than we have lost in the past two years. He pointed out that this anxiety is to be expected because there are still risks, which makes me feel a little better about being on high alert. We continue to live through a strange and scary time, relying on each other for protection as best we can. Toward the end of my call with Nash, the epidemiologist, I was seized with a sudden and fierce hatred of these pathogens – colds, flu, Covid-19. When I asked rather stupidly what their purpose is, Nash was unfazed. “I think they just want to have a good time and live a long life like we do.” Demons! This winter, and on into the future, it’s up to us to do everything we can to ruin their party. Maeve Higgins is a Guardian US columnist and the author of the forthcoming book Tell Everyone on This Train I Love ThemEvery year there are new immersive shows trying to shepherd big audiences around a story. Few of them manage to create something with as much raucous energy and emotional integrity as Redemption. Made by the Big House, a venue that nurtures talent in young adults who have spent time in the care system, this immediate and ambitious promenade performance is a powerful journey of hope, grief and music. Renaya Dennis is exceptional as our lead and narrator, Maz, who has run away from a volatile situation at her care home. Vulnerable and stand-offish, Dennis is angular and harsh against the softness of Tayo (Shaquille Jack), a shy boy with an angelic voice who Maz meets in a recording studio. At first it’s awkward when they’re left alone, but music helps them find their way together, her grime blending beautifully with his soul. The music that threads through the whole piece (text and lyrics by James Meteyard, music by the Last Skeptik) has such range, from pumping club sets to a gentle melody sung on a bed, one person crying on the lap of another. As tensions rise and characters storm out, we follow them through the sprawling building of dusty brick, chipboard, dangling wires and graffitied walls. The design (Zoë Hurwitz) uses the already atmospheric space artfully, creating a music studio downstairs, up to a littered attic living room where Call of Duty is playing, then back down to the neon glow of a nightclub. The queues for the narrow staircases can be clumsy and slow, but the actors hold the moment, waiting for us all to squeeze in. Tonight, director and head of the Big House, Maggie Norris, waves us in, while her golden retriever plops himself down and waits to be ushered into the next scene. As we’re rooting for Maz, who’s starting to carve her place in the music scene, everything is threatening to give way beneath her. Richly told by a cast who understand first-hand the heart of the story they are telling, Redemption ends on a note of hope. But rumbling underneath is a reminder of where the power doesn’t lie; talent isn’t enough if you don’t have the money, the security, the second chances. At the Big House, London, until 11 DecemberThe shadow social care minister, Liz Kendall, is expecting to be the first serving MP to have a child through surrogacy. The Leicester West MP said the baby was due in the new year via a surrogate mother after she and her partner had struggled to start a family. In a statement to the Leicester Mercury she said: “My partner and I are delighted to announce that we will be having a baby in the new year through surrogacy. It has been a really difficult time getting here, so we feel unbelievably lucky and happier than we ever imagined.” She added: “We will be eternally grateful to our surrogate for making this possible.” Kendall confirmed she would be taking maternity leave in the new year. She said: “I’ll be taking leave from work to make the most of this precious time with the newest member of our family. But I want to reassure my constituents that my office will remain fully open throughout, and my whole team will continue to provide the very best help and support to local residents.” After announcing the news she told the Spectator of her fertility struggle, which included two miscarriages. She said: “We have been through a lot to get here but it really is happening now, and we’ve been telling people this week.” Last month during a Commons debate on free hormone replacement therapy (HRT), Kendall, 50, described experiencing the pain of the onset of the menopause. She said she had “no idea what was going on” after being exhausted and aching overnight. The former Labour MP for Bethnal Green and Bow Oona King had a baby through a surrogate in 2013 when she was a member of the House of Lords. It is believed Kendall will be the first sitting MP to have a child through surrogacy. Politicians from all parties congratulated Kendall, including the former health secretary Matt Hancock and the former leader of the Scottish Conservatives Ruth Davidson, who said the Labour MP would make a “brilliant mum”. Kendall, who is from the centre right of the party, rose to prominence in the Labour leadership contest of 2015 after the resignation of Ed Miliband. She came fourth with 4.5% of the vote, well behind the winner, Jeremy Corbyn.Before taking flight as indie-rock heartbreakers the Wrens, Kevin Whelan and Charles Bissell were an awkward, prickly pair who met at a graduation party in an abandoned house. “I never had any friends or girlfriends,” the affable Whelan, 51, says with a self-effacing laugh from the New Jersey home he shares with his wife and sons. “My Saturday night was watching Doctor Who on PBS.” Whelan’s frontman confidence was still a work-in-progress in 1988, so Bissell, a guitar whiz and jazz fiend six years his senior, took him under his wing, lending the nerdy keyboardist an amp to join the party jam. Before long Whelan was paying visits to Bissell’s New York apartment, where he heard his future bandmate debut his first song. “I can even remember it,” says Whelan, grabbing an acoustic guitar to recite his friend’s 33-year-old riff. “From that, we started really getting into what songs could be.” In Whelan and Bissell’s ensuing decades as the Wrens – up to and including the revelation this year of a bitter schism – the beloved band’s perfectionism and obstinacy made them underground martyrs. In a post-grunge era when majors coveted scrappy underdogs, the Wrens snubbed the Flaming Lips’ manager, alienated a DreamWorks A&amp;R (later to sign Elliott Smith) and rejected a seven-figure deal with the music retail multimillionaire Alan Meltzer, who shrugged and made Creed rich instead. Having blown a last-ditch trial with Interscope, they resigned themselves to obscurity, toiling away on a farewell album for what remained of their fanbase. After seven years of label drama, disappointment and meticulous tinkering, the Wrens released that third album in 2003. Though played at the pitch of teen anguish, The Meadowlands swapped punk fervour for cobwebbed curios about thwarted dreams and the romantic, perilous pursuit of adolescent ideals into your mid-30s. Whelan bellowed breakup anthems and midlife pep talks. Bissell crammed funny details and dialogue into novelistic scenes (“Where’s Ann been? She pours herself a don’t-ask gin”). Critics swooned. As the years passed, fans bestowed the album with a mythic status akin to My Bloody Valentine’s Loveless. A follow-up was imminent, the band promised – first in 2007, then more or less annually for the next 14 years; it has never been released. If The Meadowlands spun beauty from disenchantment with idealism, then Observatory, Whelan’s solo debut as Aeon Station, spins beauty from disenchantment with the Wrens. He spent much of the last decade sitting on his half of a Meadowlands follow-up that Bissell inadvertently thwarted, trapped in recursive fine-tuning. That’s Whelan’s story, anyway – the pragmatist foiled by the quixotic perfectionist – some of which his former friend dismisses as “press points and nonsense” when I speak to him separately. Although Whelan plays most of the instruments in Aeon Station, his Wrens bandmates – guitarist brother Greg Whelan and drummer Jerry MacDonald – play on alongside him. Observatory revisits the Wrens’ pet topic: how to cling to faded hopes while negotiating with adult life. This time, though, the context is pointed. Whelan says the name reflects the aeons-long wait to release his music. On the cover, a half-built office block signifies that “projects sometimes just don’t get finished”. Whelan threads these motifs into tender writing about raising his neurodivergent son. “He’s blessed, the way he looks [at things], but the reality is that he’s not complete in that way,” he says. “That same theme kept coming over: you look to achieve something and you’re just shy of it all the time. But is there beauty in that?” The Wrens, too, romanticised their near-misses, Whelan admits. “Other bands that we saw go be successful, whether it was Bright Eyes or Arcade Fire, always said yes. They would say yes to fucking anything. Their DIY side was in better check than ours.” The Wrens formed in 1989, when the band moved into a cramped New Jersey house, scrambling together two albums of alt-rock ephemera. After The Meadowlands, work on what was supposed to be their fourth album began around 2007. MacDonald and Greg had moved out, leaving Bissell and Whelan, then 36 and 42, alone together after 15 years. Determined to move forward, Whelan went on hiatus from his girlfriend and rattled off 100 demos. Then he moved out and got on with his life: married, had children and began climbing towards his current day job as a Johnson &amp; Johnson executive. When the Wrens signed to Sub Pop in 2014, Bissell, who had also married and had children, posted on Facebook that the Meadowlands follow-up was complete. But he cautioned fans to temper expectations. “My best years and work are clearly behind me,” he wrote. “Which is sad, because I’ve pretty much burned every available moment of the last four years at least doing this.” The post rankled Whelan, and during the subsequent fallout, the album slid back into purgatory. “That moment was exponentially low and bad,” Whelan says. “You’re gonna bring people on the journey like you’re Kim Kardashian? It’s repulsive to me. We can throw it in the garbage and start again, but we don’t need to tell the Joneses.” Whelan says his songs have sat untouched since that 2014 episode – and this is where his and Bissell’s stories splinter. In a series of wounded, footnoted emails that read like exposition from an epic postmodern novel, Bissell contends he logged “hundreds of hours” on the Observatory singles, conceiving arrangements and composing guitar lines that either remain intact or were rerecorded, uncredited (his sole credits are as an engineer). “His story is that I worked on the album for too long, but that simultaneously somehow I also had nothing to do with [the Aeon Station] songs,” Bissell writes, in a 4,000-word statement that he intends to make public. “I suddenly found myself being portrayed as often as not as the baddie, as if I had somehow held him back, intentionally or at least thoughtlessly and selfishly even, which I’ve gotta say, was really confusing and weird.” To illustrate his input, Bissell sends a segment of the Observatory single Queens in its tinkered-with phase: a Wrens track called Sophie. The Aeon Station record, to be clear, is wonderfully rendered: anthemic without being over-polished. But I have to admit that my stomach somersaults upon hearing this mothballed labour of love. With just a few Bissellian flourishes – eerie harmony, close-miked guitar filigree – there’s an uncanny transformation to the song: this is the Wrens, with all their atticky magic. For his part, Whelan thinks the magic came at too great a cost. With his half of the album purportedly finished by 2014, he and the band paused when Bissell was diagnosed with a plasma cell cancer in 2015 (he has recovered, and recently ran a half-marathon with his wife). But early last year, formal calls between members began to resurface tensions. Whelan characterises the talks primarily as pleas to Bissell to release the album. Bissell says he just wanted more recognition for his creative and business roles. Did that include money? Whelan suggests as much. Bissell denies it. Far from holding the Wrens hostage, Bissell says he approved the “final” album in 2019 pending just a handful of tweaks – at which point, crucially, Whelan was proposing just as many. (“That’s not true,” says Whelan.) Bissell’s most alarming claim, which Whelan again rejects, is that Whelan was requesting production edits even while secretly readying Aeon Station for Sub Pop. Each of them claims to have presented pathways to a Wrens release that the other ignored. When talks collapsed, Bissell called Sub Pop to apologise for wasting their time on a band of “fiftysomething white men” that had just imploded. The label’s somewhat miffed response, Bissell says, was that they already had a release date for Whelan’s solo record. “If this was an early-aughts indie film,” Bissell writes, “the camera would’ve done that telescoping dolly zoom thing to show the character’s world inverting.” Bissell and Whelan have not spoken since. Whelan says he gave ample warning about the split, including a February 2021 deadline. “Ultimatum is sometimes seen as a bad word, but if you waited from 2007 until 2021, I think you were pretty generous,” he says. On the matter of credit, he adds: “If you hire someone to paint your walls and it takes 10 years, how should you pay him?” After a 17-year stretch that yielded just six completed songs, Whelan wrote and recorded four more in late 2020. He tackles the conflict with Bissell on veiled confessionals like Everything at Once, which weaves Wrens backstory into a spangled, heartrending kiss-off. The saddest insight into the band’s disintegration, Alpine Drive, had improbably been set for the Wrens record. “One thousand night shifts all end with the sun / Still breaking rocks into songs we never get done,” Whelan sings. “Where are the memories to the plans that we made?” Bissell, convinced of a calculated betrayal, rules out the prospect of a reunion, and plans to release his own solo album next year. Whelan says he hopes for an eventual return to the band’s punk-rock roots, with “just four of us standing in a basement”. But their views on who abandoned whom cannot, for now, be reconciled. “I let my dreams sit on the bottom shelf for a long time,” Whelan says. “It’s a betrayal that I let a decade of my life go by and did nothing.” • Aeon Station’s debut album Observatory is released 10 December on Sub PopGood morning. Brian Laundrie, whose disappearance sparked a nationwide manhunt in September after his fiancee, Gabby Petito, went missing and was later found murdered, killed himself, an autopsy report released yesterday revealed. Laundrie’s remains were found in a Florida wilderness area in October, a month after Petito, 22, was found strangled to death on the edge of Wyoming’s Grand Teton national park, where the couple had been travelling together in a van. The 23-year-old was named a person of interest in the case after he returned to his parents’ home in Florida alone in early September, then disappeared himself. Petito’s parents reported her missing on 11 September, three days before Laundrie’s family said he left their house in North Port with a backpack but left behind his wallet and cell phone. Did he leave a suicide note? The FBI has been searching for clues among belongings found near Laundrie’s body, including a water-damaged notebook, but is yet to release a statement on the progress of its investigation. What have his parents said? “Chris and Roberta are still mourning the loss of their son and are hopeful that these findings bring closure to both families,” Steven Bertolino, the attorney for Laundrie’s parents, said. US hospitals prepare for influx of Covid patients as millions travel for Thanksgiving As cases begin increasing once more in the US, millions of people are expected to travel for the Thanksgiving holiday, and health workers and hospital systems are now preparing for an influx of Covid patients after having little time to recover from the summer surge. Last year, there was a jump in cases around the holidays. But this year, new tools could blunt the spread – if they are taken up quickly. US scientific agencies on Friday recommended boosters for all adults six months after receiving an mRNA vaccination, and children over the age of five recently became eligible for vaccines. How many people have Covid? More than 92,000 Americans are now testing positive for Covid-19 each day, and more than 1,000 people are dying from the virus every day, according to the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Which parts of the US are most affected? Cases are rising in a majority of states, with hotspots in the midwest, north-east and parts of the south-west. What is happening with US inflation, and how worried should you be? Jobs are coming back, wages are rising, stock markets are hitting record highs. In many ways, the US economy is booming. And yet as we officially enter the holiday season, consumer confidence is at its lowest level in a decade. The reason? Inflation. The US inflation rate in October was the highest it has been since the early 90s, when Nirvana released Smells Like Teen Spirit and the Gulf war was just beginning. But should we be worried? The Federal Reserve – and the Biden administration – think rising prices are “transitory”, caused by the hangover from the pandemic. Their critics are less sure. What is inflation? Inflation describes a general rise in the level of prices of all consumer goods and services. It is not specific to a particular good or service; rather it is a measure of when, broadly, things are more expensive than they were. What’s happening with inflation? According to CPI numbers released in mid-November, prices in the US rose 6.2% in October compared with the same time last year. A child injured in the Waukesha parade has died, bringing the death toll to six A child has died after suffering head injuries when an SUV was driven through a Christmas parade in Waukesha, Wisconsin, bringing the death toll to six, said prosecutors. The child was one of 16 children admitted to the Children’s hospital of Wisconsin, officials said in a news release. He has been named on a Go Fund Me page as eight-year-old Jackson Sparks. His 12-year-old brother was injured. A member of his family said: “Tucker, by the grace of God is miraculously recovering from his injuries and will be being discharged home. This afternoon, our dear Jackson has sadly succumbed to his injuries and passed away.” Has the suspect been charged? Prosecutors in Wisconsin charged Darrell Brooks Jr yesterday with intentional homicide in the deaths of five people. More charges are pending. Did he appear in court? He made his initial appearance in court yesterday. He could be heard crying during the proceedings. In other news … The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack on Tuesday issued subpoenas to the leaders of the far-right Proud Boys and Oath Keepers militia, directly focusing for the first time on the instigators of the violence at the 6 January insurrection. A jury has awarded more than $25m in damages against white nationalist leaders for violence that erupted during the deadly 2017 far-right rally in Charlottesville. Nine people who were physically or emotionally injured during the two days of demonstrations will receive payment. China’s government has accused Joe Biden of “a mistake” in inviting Taiwan to participate in a democracy summit alongside 109 other democratic governments. Taiwan was included in a list of participants for next month’s Summit for Democracy, published by the state department yesterday. Seven anti-vaccine doctors fell sick with Covid-19 after gathering earlier this month for a “summit” at which alternative treatments were discussed. The doctors tested positive or developed symptoms “within days” of the conference in Florida but organisers deny it was a super-spreader event. Stat of the day: The Weeknd’s Blinding Lights dethrones the Twist as all-time No 1 Billboard single The Weeknd’s hit single Blinding Lights has officially been crowned the all-time No 1 song on the Billboard single charts, ousting Chubby Checker’s 1960s hit the Twist. The song, an instant synth-pop classic, had its debut in late November 2019 and topped the weekly Billboard Hot 100 for four weeks in April and May 2020, going on to spend a record-shattering 90 consecutive weeks on the chart. That stint has now earned Blinding Lights the title of No 1 song on its Greatest Songs of All Time Hot 100 Chart. Don’t miss this: No, you don’t have to see your toxic family on Thanksgiving It’s no secret that Covid – compounded by an era of divisive politics – offered much-needed distance for those in troubled relationships with loved ones. For some, the pandemic presented people with the opportunity to break familial ties. For others, it at least offered an alibi. The expectation that families should spend the holidays together at all costs is built into the fabric of American culture. But feeling powerless toward an obligation to return home, regardless of the effect on our mental health, has far-reaching consequences. It can affect people’s finances, their confidence and their relationships. … Or this: How wild turkeys’ rough and rowdy ways are creating havoc in US cities There’s a violent gang stalking urban America. In New Hampshire, a motorcyclist crashed after being assaulted. In New Jersey, a terrified postman rang 911 after a dozen members attacked at once. And in Michigan, one town armed public workers with pepper spray for protection. The culprits? Wild turkey. Booming populations are a conservation success story, but not all terrorised residents are happy about it. In September, the Daily Messenger in upstate New York had had enough and published a tongue-in-cheek call to arms: “Wild turkey all over America are rioting, rising up in rebellion against the influx of people into their habitat.” Climate check: UK will press governments to stick to climate pledges, says Cop26 president The UK will continue to press governments around the world to cut greenhouse gas emissions urgently in the next year to limit global heating to 1.5C, after the UN climate talks that concluded last week, the president of the summit has pledged. Alok Sharma, the cabinet minister who led the Cop26 talks, said the world had shown in Glasgow that countries could work together to establish a framework for climate action but the next year must focus on keeping the promises made there. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: NFT beats cheugy to be Collins Dictionary’s word of the year In a year that has seen the musician Grimes sell a collection of digital artworks for almost $6m (£4.4m), and the original photo behind the 2005 Disaster Girl meme go for $473,000 (£354,000), Collins Dictionary has made NFT its word of the year. The abbreviation of non-fungible token has seen a “meteoric” rise in usage over the last year, said Collins, up 11,000% in the last year. Any digital creation can become an NFT, with the term referring to a certificate of ownership, registered on a blockchain, or digital ledger of transactions.David Cameron lobbied a director of Lloyds Banking Group, whom the former prime minister had given a peerage, to reverse the bank’s decision to withdraw support from Greensill Capital, which it later did. Cameron appealed to James Lupton, a Conservative peer who had served as party treasurer and donated more than £3m to the Tories, to urge the bank not to withdraw funding from Greensill’s supply chain financing of NHS pharmacies. After his lobbying of Lord Lupton in January, the bank reconsidered its decision and agreed to continue providing financial support to Greensill, according to the Financial Times, which first reported the story. Greensill, which paid Cameron millions of pounds as an adviser, collapsed into administration two months later. A spokesperson for Lloyds said: “The decision to continue this facility in January 2021 was made on the usual commercial basis and in recognition of the importance of maintaining this facility for the NHS during the height of the pandemic. “This programme ended following the administration of Greensill, with the bank repaid in full. There were no losses to the NHS, the pharmacies supplying them or Lloyds Banking Group.” Cameron’s evidence before MPs investigating the collapse suggested he was aware Greensill may have been in financial trouble at the time of his appeal to Lloyds. He told MPs on the Treasury select committee that he first “became concerned that the company might be in serious financial difficulty” in December 2020. Cameron and Greensill did not respond to requests for comment. Lupton could not be reached for comment, and Lloyds declined to comment on his behalf. Lupton was party treasurer from 2013 to 2016, and donated more than £3m to the Tories. He was appointed to the House of Lords in 2015. The FT said Lupton was transparent with Lloyd’s board about his relationship with Cameron in making the case for continuing the relationship with Greensill. However, the newspaper quoted bank insiders describing the intervention as “surprising and unwelcome”. Cameron’s lobbying of members of the cabinet and government officials on behalf of the bank, in which he held a large financial interest, has tarnished his career since leaving Downing Street in 2016. Earlier this year MPs on the Treasury select committee said his text message and WhatsApp lobbying campaign had “demeaned” the position of the prime minister and left his “reputation in tatters”.It’s risky for me to boldly state that technology news has quietened down in recent weeks. For one thing, confidently saying that nothing much is going on is the best way to summon up a news event breaking 15 seconds after I hit “send” on this email. Also, though, I’m currently sitting at home up to my eyeballs in parental leave. While I’m still compulsively keeping up with every tiny news story that breaks in my sector (if I could simply switch off that instinct, I wouldn’t be doing this job), I’m aware that my connection to many of them is less vivid than it used to be when I was desperately trying to find a new angle to move the story on for that day’s paper. My daughter’s just reached the age where she’s noticed that screens exist, and have moving images on them, and sometimes (too often, if I’m honest) occupy her beloved father’s attention that could be better focused on her. As with everything in a baby’s life, the solution is simple: chew it. Which is why the story that most caught my eye this week was the news that Apple is, for the first time ever, going to let users repair their own iPhones. From the company’s press release: Apple today announced Self Service Repair, which will allow customers who are comfortable with completing their own repairs access to Apple genuine parts and tools. Available first for the iPhone 12 and iPhone 13 lineups, and soon to be followed by Mac computers featuring M1 chips, Self Service Repair will be available early next year in the US and expand to additional countries throughout 2022. Customers join more than 5,000 Apple Authorized Service Providers (AASPs) and 2,800 Independent Repair Providers who have access to these parts, tools, and manuals. Apple’s devices are infamously hard to repair. The company decided decades ago that customers like sleek, beautiful devices without a visible screw in sight – even if that means that they have no ability to repair it at home. In 2021, that’s par for the course among consumer technology companies, but once upon a time it was a uniquely Apple proposition: iFixit, a company which provides repair kits and manuals for a host of consumer electronics, got started in 2003 when the site’s founders discovered there were no instructions on how to repair a broken iBook. Since then, the trade-off has become ever-more stark. That 2003 iBook may have been missing a manual or two, but the computer was largely assembled using open technologies and off-the-shelf parts: if you could work out how to access the hard-drive, RAM or screen, you could probably fix it by swapping them out with another part bought online, or at least cannibalised from a similar machine. But as technology has progressed, that’s become less and less true. Home improvements The screen on a top-end iPhone isn’t just an incredibly small, high-resolution display that simply isn’t for sale to normal people; it’s also part of a single unit that includes the front-facing camera, FaceID scanner, microphone and speaker. And if you can, very carefully, separate out those parts, you may still find that your repair fails, as security solutions implemented in the phone’s software reject your new part for fear of tampering. Over the years, there’s been understandable cynicism about Apple’s motivations. Every person who buys a new iPhone rather than repairing an old one is more money in Apple’s pocket, after all. And every person who is forced to take their phone to the company and pay for the repair directly is an opportunity for it to charge an eye-watering mark-up on the parts and labour. You don’t become the world’s most valuable company by being nice. For what it’s worth, I think some of the cynicism is probably unfair. For years, consumers really did vote with their wallets, buying smaller, sleeker hardware even if it was held together by superglue rather than screws. Elsewhere, Apple seems to do the right thing when it comes to keeping older hardware working – for instance, iOS 15, the latest version of the company’s operating system, runs on a six-year-old iPhone 6s. For comparison, Google’s Pixel, released the same year, received its final ever update almost two years ago. The reality seems to be that Apple just doesn’t care about at-home repairability, for good or ill. It may not go out of its way to hinder it, but it certainly hasn’t gone out of its way to help it in the past. So what’s changed? Why is Apple suddenly willing to ship parts and manuals to users? There’s a simple enough answer, I think: it’s the threat of regulation. You’ve got to fight for your right … to repair Apple isn’t the only company to steadily chip away at repairs. Where the iPhone has led, others have followed, in such numbers that “repairable phone” is now a viable niche market for smaller companies such as Fairphone to compete in. And it’s not just tech: tractor company John Deere has become infamous for the restrictions it puts on its vehicles, sold to farmers who are used to being able to tinker with a machine long enough to pass it on to their own children and suddenly find that they can barely even pop the bonnet without a laptop provided by an authorised repair centre. And so lawmakers around the world have started to propose legislation enshrining a “right to repair”. Those laws run the gamut from mild restrictions preventing companies from actively hindering attempts to repair their products, all the way to strong requirements that companies not only allow repairs, but support and design around the need to be able to fix things at home. If Apple and its peers want to avoid being hit by those laws, they need to release some of the pressure on lawmakers. Hence the self-repair programme, which is perfectly targeted to quiet the loudest voices. Most people, even with these kits, will be unable – or unwilling – to attempt a repair of an iPhone at home. It’s fiddly work, and for most pressing repairs, such as the screen or motherboard, the parts will still be well north of $100. But if you’ve heard of the “right to repair” movement, you’re probably one of the subsection of society that’s willing to get a “spudger” out in a time of need. And there will be real benefits for some. If you can’t do without your phone or laptop for even a day, the ability to repair it yourself, rather than drop it off at a centre and get it back 24 hours later, could be meaningfully transformative. And, of course, repairing your own machine also means you don’t have to hand over your password to anyone else – avoiding horror stories like this, from June: The unnamed woman sent her iPhone for repair on 14 January 2016 to an Apple-approved repair contractor called Pegatron Technology Service in California. Technicians there then uploaded “extremely personal and private material” to the woman’s Facebook account and other internet locations, the documents said. The videos were uploaded to appear as though the woman herself had shared them on purpose, according to the documents, causing the woman “severe emotional distress”. The woman was made aware of the incident when friends saw the videos and images on Facebook. Weak constitution News from cryptocurrency land is at its best when it’s dumb fun, and there’s no dumber fun that the failed attempt on the part of more than 10 thousand people to buy a copy of the US constitution: The document, one of 13 original copies dating from 1787, sold for almost three times its lower estimate of $15m, and more than 260 times the amount it achieved when it last sold for $165,000 in 1988. The bidding at Sotheby’s in New York took eight minutes. “ConstitutionDAO” had amassed more than £47m, or 11,600 of the cryptocurrency ether, in a few days on its online crowdfunding page. The group, which had committed to putting the document on public display “in the hands of the people”, promised to refund its 17,437 contributors after deducting transaction fees. The caper was effectively a Twitter meme or Reddit shitpost brought to life – and given a multimillion dollar budget. A small group of crypto fans spotted that the copy of the constitution, the only one in private hands, was about to be sold off, and the instituted a plan to raise funds to buy it and display it in public. The project was dubbed ConstutionDAO, a spin on a popular form of crypto project called a “decentralised autonomous organisation”. Those projects can be thought of as automated hedge funds, where shareholders have the ability to directly influence the direction of the funds’ activity using contracts built directly into the code that set it up. But ConstutionDAO had little in common with those. In reality, the project was fatally flawed from day one, by virtue of the simple fact that it had to interact with the real world. In order to buy the copy of the constitution, the plan stated, a limited company would need to be set up, since a DAO can’t legally own conventional property. That company would then need human directors, and while it could offer shares, they would need to be conventionally allocated, since a cryptocurrency can’t legally act as a security in the US. And then, since the body was in receipt of millions of dollars with a clear and stated aim, even the DAO itself was recentralised, with the original eight founders keeping direct control of how its funds were used in order to prevent someone simply taking control of the organisation and redeploying its cash elsewhere. When your DAO is DOA What the thousands of people who crowdfunded the attempt to buy the constitution were actually buying with their money is unclear: minority ownership of an organisation that would not in fact own the constitution, but was controlled by some people who also owned a limited company that hoped to buy the constitution at auction. The parallels with the wider NFT bubble should be clear. The world of cryptocurrency is great at producing a tangled web of interrelated products and services, but terrible at interacting with anything outside that network: an NFT isn’t ownership of anything but itself, a record on the blockchain proves nothing except the fact that someone wrote it on to the blockchain, and an organisation expressly set up to buy the constitution would not, in fact, own the constitution. That is, if it had managed to buy the document in the first case. What actually happened is that the group learned that going into an auction with a clear and obvious budget that you are functionally unable to exceed is probably bad strategy: they were outbid by Ken Griffin, the chief executive of the hedge fund Citadel, who went into the auction knowing to the dollar the amount he had to spend to gain a victory over the upstarts. “The U.S. Constitution is a sacred document that enshrines the rights of every American and all those who aspire to be,” Griffin said in a statement. “That is why I intend to ensure that this copy of our Constitution will be available for all Americans and visitors to view and appreciate in our museums and other public spaces.” He’s placing it in … a museum founded by Walmart heiress Alice Walton. As a poetic ending to an attempt to overturn the power structures of the American state, it’s hard to beat. … until the coda came along. On Tuesday evening, ConstitutionDAO announced it was shutting down entirely. “We know that everyone is eager to hear what the next steps for ConstitutionDAO are, and we’ve been deeply exploring several options for this over the last four days,” the project’s leaders posted. “While we would very much like to have been able to do so, we have determined that building and maintaining an ongoing project is not something that we as a core team are able to support, given the technical and administrative requirements of doing it properly.” The team encouraged everyone who’d funded the project to apply for refunds, a request that’s easier said than done: for many of the small-dollar donations to the fundraiser, the transaction fees on the ethereum blockchain dwarf the actual amount refunded. Anyone with less than around $100 in the project is likely to see nothing refunded at all. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday. • This article was amended on 30 November 2021 to correct a description of the hedge fund Citadel and a misspelling of Ken Griffin’s name.From 1 February 2022, Austria will be introducing compulsory vaccines for all, with exemption for those unable to receive a jab on medical grounds. The decision comes after a low uptake of the vaccine and the rise of Covid-19 cases in Austria. Germany is set to tighten rules for the unvaccinated as cases rise, while the Greens are pushing for a vaccine mandate for individuals who work in care homes or hospitals. A growing number of leaders in federal and state politics are now in favour of a vaccine mandate for the general population. Also, in Switzerland, there will be a referendum on 28 November to decide on the use of the Swiss Covid-19 certificate, which would have to be shown on entry to some public venues based on vaccination status or proof of a negative test. We’d like to hear what people from these countries think of the plans. What’s your view on mandatory vaccines? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The French international footballer Karim Benzema has received a one-year suspended jail sentence and been fined €75,000 (£63,000) for his involvement in a sex tape extortion scandal that shocked French sport. A Versailles court on Wednesday found Benzema guilty of complicity in attempted blackmail against his French teammate Mathieu Valbuena over a video thought to have been stolen from Valbuena’s mobile phone. Benzema’s lawyer said the Real Madrid striker would immediately appeal against the sentence, calling it “unfair and based on no proof”. Benzema, who denied wrongdoing, had been absent from court due to sporting commitments, but his lawyers said he would be present if a second trial took place on appeal. The scandal shook French football in 2015 and the investigation and court case had cast a shadow over the national team ever since. An investigation opened in July 2015 when the midfielder Valbuena, who then played for France and Lyon, went to the police after being contacted by an unknown man claiming to be in possession of an incriminating sex tape apparently recorded on a mobile phone. The caller did not specify a sum of money but said they should come to an arrangement. Benzema, 33, was one of five people put on trial last month over the extortion attempts against Valbuena. Benzema was accused of encouraging Valbuena, 37, to deal with the blackmailers and to pay them. One intermediary was a childhood friend of Benzema’s. Benzema’s lawyer denied in court that he was complicit in blackmail, saying he had intervened only to try to help his teammate find a solution, not to blackmail him. The court found Benzema guilty of complicity in targeting Valbuena, who now plays for the Greek club Olympiakos. The judge said on Wednesday that Benzema had “personally got involved, with insistence, to try to convince Mathieu Valbuena to meet his trusted man”. The court found Benzema showed “no kindness” to Valbuena and “very much to the contrary” had acted “with a certain excitement, even jubilation”. Both Benzema and Valbuena lost their places on the national team in 2015 when the scandal broke and preliminary charges were filed. Valbuena was described at the time by his coach as not being in an emotional state to play. Benzema was recalled this year for the European Championships. State prosecutors had told the court that Benzema had a duty to be exemplary as a national footballer, carrying “an image of hope” and “moral values”. They told the court he had acted as a kind of middleman to ensure the blackmailers got the money they wanted. Valbuena told the court he had been in fear for his career. “I knew if the video came out, it would be complicated for me. I felt in danger and my first instinct was to go to the police,” he said. The court decision is unlikely to affect Benzema’s immediate sporting future. The forward is regarded as one of the favourites to win the Ballon d’Or award on 29 November in Paris after an impressive season with Real Madrid. The French Football Federation president, Noël Le Graët, has already said Benzema would be allowed to keep playing for France even if found guilty. Four other men received guilty verdicts in the case on Wednesday and were given penalties ranging from suspended prison sentences to two and a half years in jail.The world may have gone mad for spiced speculoos this year, but, for me, Christmas will always be all about two biscuits: gingerbread, for decorations, and shortbread, for actual consumption. Easy to make and a genuine crowdpleaser, shortbread will keep well for several weeks, which makes it the gift that keeps on giving well into the dark days of January. Not that it’ll last that long. Prep 15 min Chill 20 min Cook 30 min-1 hr Makes About 24 230g unsalted butter, at room temperature 110g caster sugar (see step 2) 1 good pinch salt 260g plain flour 80g ground rice (see step 3) Demerara sugar, to finish (optional) 1 Soft butter is essential You can make shortbread in a food processor, but it’s so simple that I generally just use a bowl and a wooden spoon – less to wash up. You do need the butter to be at room temperature, though; if your room is cold, or you’ve forgotten, cut it into large cubes, put in a bowl of lukewarm water for 10 minutes, then drain. 2 Beat the butter, then add sugar and salt Put the butter in a large bowl (or the bowl of a food processor), beat until very soft, then beat in the sugar and salt. I like to use golden caster sugar for flavour, but white or granulated work fine, too. (Salt, for me, is mandatory, just as in porridge, but they’re your biscuits, so leave it out if you prefer.) 3 Mix in the dry ingredients Sift the flour and ground rice into the butter, then mix to a smooth dough. Ground rice, which is coarser than rice flour, gives these biscuits their characteristic grittiness; it’s usually found alongside semolina in the supermarkets, or among the speciality Asian ingredients. You can substitute coarse cornmeal or, for a smoother texture, just make up the weight with extra flour instead. 4 To make large rounds … If you’d like to make traditional shortbread rounds, line two 15cm cake or tart tins with baking paper. Divide the dough into two equal pieces, roll into balls and put one in each tin. Use your hands to pat it down until it covers the base of the tin in an even layer. 5 … or little biscuits To make individual biscuits, on a lightly floured surface, roll out or pat the dough until it’s about 1cm thick, then cut it into your desired shapes. Arrange these, well spaced out, on two lined baking trays. Re-roll any scraps and repeat until all the dough is used up. 6 Chill to firm up Put the tins or baking trays in the fridge, cover and chill for 15-20 minutes, until the dough is firm: this will stop the biscuits spreading too much in the oven (you can also chill them overnight, if you want to get ahead). When you’re ready to bake, heat the oven to 170C (150C fan)/325F/gas 3. 7 Bake, sprinkle with sugar and leave to cool Bake the shortbread rounds for an hour or the individual biscuits for about 30 minutes, until cooked through but not browned. Leaving them in the tin, cut the rounds into slices while they’re still warm. Sprinkle with demerara sugar (unless you’re going to ice your shortbread) and leave to cool completely. 8 Alternative flavourings Try adding one or several of the following to your dough in step 3: 75g chocolate chips; the grated zest of two lemons or one large orange; half a teaspoon of ground cinnamon, a pinch of cloves and a quarter-teaspoon each of ground nutmeg and ground ginger; three-quarters of a teaspoon of ground ginger and 75g finely chopped crystallised ginger; 50g dried fruit and 25g candied peel. 9 Optional finishing touches I love shortbread plain, but you might like to half-dip the biscuits in 75g melted chocolate (this gives a neater finish than dipping the whole things). Alternatively, ice them with 225g sifted icing sugar mixed with just enough warm water to give a thick, but runny consistency, perhaps flavoured with lemon juice and zest, or vanilla essence or flower water. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoLooking back at the 70s, and at my own bookshelves, I realise what a fertile time this was for fiction, especially for novels and stories written by women. The feminist movement led to a burgeoning of books about female experience, and some male writers seemed to be focusing more on the turmoil and joys of household life. Of course, as in any other period in literary history, all writers were driven by the personal, singular impulses of the imagination. When the following books were first published all those years ago – like some of my stories – I was often torn between domestic responsibilities and writing. Somehow I was fortunate enough to also find time to read, and the various voices of these writers were in my head, guiding and inspiring me as I tended to my real and fictional families 1. God on the Rocks by Jane Gardam (1978) Eight-year-old Margaret Marsh observes the brackets of mortal life – her baby brother with his lolling head, and an elderly woman in an oversized pram – and opines that the world would be better without people. Her mother argues unconvincingly in favour of humankind while Margaret’s father, the leader of a fanatic religious sect, peppers her with biblical quotes. Margaret has other influences: Lydia, her lax, outspoken nanny; adult siblings Charles and Binkie, who have some mysterious link to Margaret’s mother; and the inhabitants of a decaying asylum into which she wanders. The surprising connections among all of these characters are gradually and brilliantly revealed. God on the Rocks is a masterwork of comedy and tragedy in which fallible people inhabit an imperfect world. 2. Will You Please be Quiet, Please? The Stories of Raymond Carver (1976) The lives of Raymond Carver’s working-class characters are conveyed in brief tales of longing and misery. Carver’s language is deceptively simple, as in this opening line: “Bill and Arlene Miller were a happy couple.”The reader, drawn in as if eavesdropping on strangers, is rewarded with startling psychological complexity. The mother of a violently disturbed boy tries to escape her frightening reality. A man overhears customers of his waitress wife ridicule her body, and compels her to lose weight. The “happy” Millers start to occupy their vacationing neighbour’s apartment, leading to a disastrous reckoning. The stories in this collection remain an unsparing depiction of how we live. 3. Final Payments by Mary Gordon (1978) When Isabel Moore’s demanding and devoutly Catholic father dies after a series of strokes, she’s released from caring for him into the terrifying freedom of independence. Isabel was 19 when she first became his carer after her mother’s death, and now she’s an unworldly 30. Two female friends offer advice and support, and two men become her lovers. Isabel, who struggles with the meaning of Christian love, has to choose between the pleasures of an unfettered life and doing penance for an act that contributed to her father’s fatal illness. Final Payments was Mary Gordon’s debut novel, and it is remarkably insightful and accomplished. 4. The Living End by Stanley Elkin (1979) Dickens, with his wit and compassion, may be Stanley Elkin’s literary forebear; this triptych in which much of the action takes place in Heaven and Hell, also brings Dante to mind. Elkin’s narrative begins in an earthly American city, where the saintly Ellerbee is murdered in a holdup. After glimpsing Heaven, he finds himself deposited in Hell, where he challenges God for forsaking him. Like many of Elkin’s characters, his wisecracking God could moonlight as a stand-up comic as he damns Ellerbee for the pettiest of trumped-up charges. Two others consigned to Hell – Ellerbee’s murderer’s sidekick and a cemetery groundskeeper – also protest their eternal fate in this rousing, irreverent, and hilarious novel. 5. Mrs Palfrey at the Claremont by Elizabeth Taylor (1971) Attentive relatives, especially grandchildren, are the chief currency at the Claremont, a retirement hotel in London. But the proud, recently widowed Mrs Palfrey’s only grandson Desmond has not responded to her numerous invitations to visit. Through an accident in the street she meets Ludo, an insolvent young writer with an indifferent family, and a mutually satisfying arrangement ensues. He pretends to be Desmond, and as she treats him to meals in the Claremont’s dining room, they form a deep and affectionate bond. Yet even harmless, joyful deception must come to an end. This is a darkly funny, unsentimental look at the loneliness of old age and the vicissitudes of human attachment. 6. Corregidora by Gayl Jones (1975) Toni Morrison was the editor of this powerful first novel, which opens with a scene of violence related in an almost detached first-person voice. Ursa Corregidora, a blues singer and the descendant of slaves raped by their masters, is thrown down a flight of stairs by her jealous husband, causing her to lose the baby she’s carrying and her ability to fulfil the family mandate to “make generations”. Ursa’s story is interspersed with a competing narrative, in italics, about her great-grandmother’s brutal experience of enslavement to a man also named Corregidora. Ursa first heard these reminiscences when she was a five year old sitting on “Great Gram’s” lap, and was slapped for disbelieving them. The dual narratives continue and coalesce, with the past haunting and informing the present. Together they form a visceral work of fiction and a harsh and necessary history lesson. 7. Foreigner by Nahid Rachlin (1978) Feri, an Iranian-American woman, visits her father in Tehran, and is dismayed by how uncomfortable she feels in her rigidly patriarchal homeland. She discovers that her mother, who’d abandoned her as a child, ostensibly for religious pursuits, had actually gone off with a lover. Feri’s American life, including her own marriage, is tenuous. She reunites with her now deserted and destitute mother and experiences unexpected happiness. When Feri’s husband comes to claim her, she’s caught between two cultures, two contending loyalties. Rachlin beautifully depicts the urgency of Feri’s dilemma, and the peace her decision brings her. 8. Tuck Everlasting by Natalie Babbitt (1975) First published in 1975 as a novel for children, this has all the ingredients – fantasy, adventure, and young romance – that a youthful audience enjoys. The four members of the Tuck family drink from a rural spring and discover that none of them ever ages or dies. Eighty-seven years later, when (perpetually) teenage Jesse Tuck meets Winnie Foster, an overprotected girl who both craves and fears excitement, endless life becomes a dubious gift. This wonderfully imagined story about the dream of immortality and the certainty of death still rivets readers of all ages. 9. Desperate Characters by Paula Fox (1970) Sophie and Otto Bentwood lead privileged lives. But there are outer and inner encroachments on their happiness and safety. Their lovely urban street abuts a destitute area, Otto and his law partner are bitterly embattled, and Sophie is still consumed by an affair that ended years before. Then she’s bitten by a feral cat she’s been feeding, and keeps delaying treatment for the festering wound. The narrative suspense of this compressed and exquisitely written novel is matched by the mounting emotional tension between its quietly desperate characters. 10. Grendel by John Gardner (1971) Grendel, in the Old English poem Beowulf, is descended from the biblical Cain. In a kind of reversal of evolution, he’s a serial-killing, man-eating monster, with feelings limited to rage and vengefulness. His death – after his arm is ripped off in a battle with the heroic Beowulf – is cause for celebration. In John Gardner’s novel, we hear Grendel’s side of things, and he has a few more human qualities, such as curiosity and wit. He still crunches the bones of his victims – he’s a monster, after all – but in Gardner’s soaring, poetic prose, he’s both villain and anti-hero, reminding us uncomfortably of ourselves. Today a Woman Went Mad in the Supermarket by Hilma Wolitzer is published by Bloomsbury. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Boris Johnson once again flouted official requests to wear a mask as he watched a performance of Macbeth at a busy theatre in north London on Tuesday night, witnesses say. The prime minister was in the audience to see the Shakespearean tragedy at the Almeida theatre in Islington, after a torrid few days in which backbench Tories have accused him of losing the plot. Three fellow audience members said Johnson was not wearing a face covering during the performance, despite the theatre’s requests for visitors to wear one at all times when not eating or drinking. He was photographed in the auditorium with a mask around his chin and again inside a public area of the theatre without a mask on at all, alongside someone believed to be a member of his family. One audience member sitting near him in the auditorium said Johnson had “coughed and spluttered” during the performance without wearing a face covering and was “talking throughout” which had added to an impression of “arrogance”. Ticket-holders were emailed before the performance, saying: “Remember to wear a face covering at all times throughout the building unless you are exempt.” The theatre has a message on its website saying it was asking all patrons to wear a mask in the theatre, including during the performance, to protect “all our staff, cast and other audience members from Covid”. Theatre goers were told to wear masks as they went in and there were signs up around the building requesting mask wearing. A second witness sitting in a different part of the room said most people in the theatre were complying with the rules but the prime minister only slipped his mask back on at the end as the lights went up. And a third audience member on the other side of the auditorium said she had seen him not wearing a mask through the first half, and while he was in the bar area with his fellow guest. It is believed he had his mask round his chin during the first half, and off completely during the second half. The government’s guidance on face coverings defines it as “something which securely covers the nose and mouth”. It adds: “You are expected and recommended to continue wearing a face covering in crowded and enclosed spaces where you come into contact with people you don’t usually meet.” Downing Street did not deny that Johnson had not worn a mask at the theatre but said he “follows all Covid rules”. Johnson’s apparent decision not to wear a mask at the Almeida comes after he was previously criticised for not wearing a mask while sitting next to 95-year-old David Attenborough at the Cop26 summit, while with medical staff in a corridor at Hexham hospital and on a train in Manchester. The prime minister apologised over the hospital incident, although said it was for “barely 30 seconds”. He has recently been wearing one while seated in the House of Commons chamber, in common with other frontbenchers. Johnson has been in hot water over recent days over his handling of various policy areas, from rail to social care, as well as his chaotic speech to the CBI on Monday. During the speech, he lost his place in the text for about 20 seconds, saying “forgive me” three times, and then went into a lengthy diversion about Peppa Pig World, which he visited on Sunday with his wife and young child.Are we still surprised that comedians and comic actors can turn their hands to drama? Or are we sophisticated enough to know now that if you can do comedy, you can do anything. It’s trying to go the other direction that generally holes performances below the waterline. True Story (Netflix) is here to add to the mountain of evidence that comedy-to-drama is a road worth travelling. The hugely successful US standup and comedy film star Kevin Hart plays a fictionalised version of himself – a hugely successful comic called the Kid riding high after a part in a billion-dollar superhero film – who returns in triumph to his home town, Philadelphia. The first episode opens with him speaking to an unseen therapist. “People think that they know me because I made them laugh or because they’ve been to a show. But they don’t know what I did to get here. Or what it takes to stay here.” We flash back to one week earlier, where the hour-long episode (the rest are around half that length) properly begins. The Kid is finishing up his 20th appearance on The Ellen DeGeneres Show, and he and his entourage are dealing with intrusive fans in Pennsylvania as they settle into the Four Seasons ($5,000 a night, “but I haven’t paid for a room in years”) in advance of concerts he will give in the city. The setup – and the marketing and publicity – have been clearly aimed at encouraging the viewer to think of Hart and the Kid as one and the same (in real life, Hart is a frequent guest on DeGeneres’s show, and was born and raised in Philadelphia) and of the series as autobiography-with-plausible-deniability. So it comes as a surprise that things develop quite so rapidly into a wholly implausible crime caper. Waiting for the Kid in his hotel room is his beloved but burdensome older brother, Carlton. He is played with matchless intensity by Wesley Snipes, who gives him a simmering rage at the Kid’s success that looks a lot like sheer malevolence. It’s a barnstorming, scene-stealing performance from the get-go and Hart – in, remember, his first dramatic role – does phenomenally well as both the actor and the brother who has to avoid being annihilated by the mere force of Carlton’s presence. It is Carlton who tempts the Kid off the wagon on a night out, and who calls in “a friend” to help dispose of the dead body with which the Kid is confronted the morning after. The friend – Ari – is brilliantly played by Billy Zane, with a Larry Hagman-esque lightness and brio. Suddenly, with Snipes alongside, it feels as if we are in an alternative reality, where the now-faded talents of the 90s got their due and are now entering their rightful place as character actors in the latest phase of their golden careers. From there, the rest of the episode – and indeed the series – is mostly about disposing, increasingly desperately, of dead bodies, near-misses with curious cops (most of them infinitely distractable from their jobs upon sight of the Kid’s famous face), evading mobsters and generally playing Whac-a-Mole with the proliferating problems that keep emerging. It’s all well-executed and has some nice touches – the question of just how you pay a criminal a vast sum without it being detected has always bothered me and is confronted here. Plus, Hart is a presence you want to stay with, while Snipes is so compelling you don’t really have a choice but to follow him. It just feels – a little, but inescapably – unnecessary. The points of connection between Hart and the Kid, which might have led to an examination of the power of fame and money to corrupt, are too minor to add any tension or wonderment (did he really …? Could he have possibly …?) amid such a baroquely exaggerated plot. The real strength is perhaps in the opening few minutes. Hart and his team have to negotiate a fan’s overtures – aggressively well-meaning? Intentionally or unintentionally racist? – work out the material for a show (with the writer’s contributions lightly devalued at every turn), and try to find some grace under pressure, lucrative though that pressure is. I have seen less of that on screen than I have of unwieldy bodies being stuffed into suitcases, and it’s a truer story more worthy of following.With home working now an established reality for many, and the social whirl less busy than pre-pandemic , it’s going to be an expensive winter if we have the heating running all day. Earlier this year, the writer and Guardian columnist Frances Ryan asked people on Twitter to share tips on how to keep warm and keep the bills down, and the hundreds of replies were ingenious and helpful. Here are a few ways you can keep warmer, cut down on fossil-fuel consumption and keep costs down. Get to know your central heating system With a bit of free time, you may as well busy yourself with the intricacies of your boiler and thermostat. “If you are taking advantage of not having to commute by getting up later, set your heating to come on later in the morning,” says Laura McGadie, group head of energy at the Energy Saving Trust. “If possible, get a smart meter installed, which is estimated to help reduce a household’s electricity use by 2.8% and gas use by 2%.” Stop draughts “Draught-proofing windows and doors, and blocking cracks in floor and skirting boards, can save around £20 a year on energy bills,” says McGadie. “You can seal the gaps between floors and skirting boards to reduce draughts with a tube of sealant bought from any DIY store.” Other simple fixes include getting a cover for your letterbox and keyholes, fitting self-adhesive foam strips to draughty windows or using a chimney balloon in unused open fireplaces. As noted by some of those replying to Ryan’s Twitter post, a draught excluder for the door could simply be a rolled-up towel or made from an old pair of tights stuffed with fabric. Layer up You’re probably not wearing enough clothes. Instead of thinking about putting on another pair of socks or wearing fingerless gloves at your desk, you’re “far better putting on a sweatshirt”, says JohnEric Smith, assistant professor in the department of kinesiology at Mississippi State University. “If you can keep the core – the chest and all – warm, you will keep the peripheries warm.” When your body gets colder, blood is diverted from the extremities, which then feel colder. Smith likes clothing such as fleeces, “because it creates this really thick area without much weight”, but several layers of any kind of top can create the same effect. Some people swear by thermal undergarments, and a hat will also help, but not if you’re sitting topless at your desk. “Any time you’re looking at reducing the skin’s contact with the environment, it is going to be beneficial. The idea that most of your heat is lost through your head is an old wives’ tale.” People with a lot of hair will benefit less, he adds. Get curtains “Close your curtains at dusk to stop heat escaping through the windows,” says McGadie. The ideal would be to install heavy, lined curtains but these can be hugely expensive. (Look for secondhand ones.) A curtain across the front door can be improvised with an old blanket. Avoid cold feet If you are in the mood and able to undertake a bigger DIY job, insulating wooden floors can be fairly straightforward. “Timber floors can be insulated from below if you have access or by lifting the floorboards and laying mineral wool insulation supported by netting between the joists,” says McGadie. Otherwise, she says, “rugs and carpets are a quick fix that will help your feet feel warmer”. Socks and slippers are a given. One Twitter user suggested changing your socks: “You might think you’ve got them warmed up by being on your feet, but in fact they hold the moisture you sweat, and that cools you instead.” Go DIY If moving all the furniture and lifting floorboards isn’t an option – likewise, insulating the loft – there are smaller jobs that could help. “Installing radiator reflector panels are a low-cost option that reflect heat from the radiator back into the room, instead of letting the heat out through an external wall,” says McGadie. The Energy Saving Trust says it can’t comment on individual products, such as installing plastic film on leaky windows, but others swear by it – one of the replies to Ryan’s Twitter post said it “genuinely has made a difference”. Eat and drink yourself warm “If you’re eating harder-to-digest foods – that are higher in fat and have more protein – the body is going to have to work harder, which is going to increase the body’s temperature to [fuel] those metabolic processes,” says Smith. And there’s nothing much more warming than a cup of tea. Avoid alcohol, though – the “warming” effect of a nip of whisky is temporary and counterproductive. Alcohol causes the blood vessels to dilate, resulting in the rosy-cheeked look, which makes the skin feel warm while also causing you to lose that heat, and cool your core. So you’ll end up colder. It is also, points out Smith, “in the depressant family of drugs, so it’s going to make you more inactive and just kind of in that restful state, you may actually lose more heat from being stationary and not having as much metabolic activity”. Move around If you’re physically able, doing a bit of exercise will warm the body and pump blood around. Don’t do too much, though. “One thing that you have to be careful of is that, if you start sweating, you’re going to be losing your body heat faster and it will make you cold faster,” says Smith. “So you need to find that happy balance between being physically active enough that you’re generating heat to stay warm, but not to the point that you’re going to sweat to try to cool down.” Embrace blankets Again, this is about layers. “You’re just adding more layers between you and the environment, so it’s helping keep the heat that your body generates close to you, not having it lost into the room,” says Smith. Several people, replying to Ryan, praised their electric heated blankets or mattress covers, but they can be expensive. Focus warmth Maybe you need the radiator where you work to be whacked up, or a hot-water bottle or heating pad and extra blankets in bed, or a spare duvet on the sofa. Many of the replies to Ryan’s Twitter thread recommended heating only one room (keep the door closed and eliminate other draughts as best you can). Steal heat If it’s sunny, make sure your curtains are open, particularly in south-facing rooms, to warm the room. At least one person on Twitter said they left the oven door open after cooking to allow heat into the kitchen (be careful if you have small children, obviously). Finally, train the cat to sit on you at all times.Michael Vaughan faces being completely excluded from Britain’s radios and television screens during this winter’s Ashes series because of his involvement in the ongoing investigation into racism at Yorkshire, after the BBC confirmed they had dropped the former England captain and BT Sport said they were looking into whether they could remove him from their commentary team. Vaughan was accused by Azeem Rafiq of making a racist comment before a Yorkshire game in 2009, and though he has strongly denied doing so two other players, Adil Rashid and Rana Naved-ul-Hasan, have corroborated Rafiq’s version of events. “While he is involved in a significant story in cricket, for editorial reasons we do not believe that it would be appropriate for Michael Vaughan to have a role in our Ashes team or wider coverage of the sport at the moment,” the BBC said in a statement. “We require our contributors to talk about relevant topics and his involvement in the Yorkshire story represents a conflict of interest.” Earlier this month the BBC dropped Tuffers and Vaughan, the radio show Vaughan co-presents with Phil Tufnell, after the 47-year-old used his Daily Telegraph column to admit that he had been accused by Rafiq. However BT Sport’s task in removing him from their Ashes broadcasts is complicated by the fact that he is contracted to Australia’s Fox network, whose commentary they had planned to use. They could now put together their own commentary team, or attempt to switch from Fox to the other Australian broadcaster covering the series, Channel 7. “As a result of Covid and travel restrictions BT Sport had made the decision to take our commentary feed from the Australian host broadcaster,” a BT Sport spokesman said. “The recent report presented to UK Parliament uncovering institutional racism within cricket and specifically Yorkshire County Cricket Club is extremely disappointing and a concern for all. Given these recent events we are reviewing and discussing our commentary plans with Cricket Australia.” Vaughan has been accused of telling a group of Asian cricketers that there were “too many of you lot, we need to do something about it”. “This hit me very hard,” he wrote in the Telegraph. “It was like being struck over the head with a brick. I have been involved in cricket for 30 years and never once been accused of any remotely similar incident or disciplinary offence as a player or commentator. That the allegation came completely out of the blue and more than a decade after it was alleged to have happened made it all the more difficult to process. I completely and categorically deny that I ever said those words.”There’s the damage you can see, and the damage you can’t. A new study by the UK rugby health project at Durham University has shown that professional rugby players are more likely to have mental health issues in retirement than athletes in non-contact sports, and that those who suffered multiple concussions during their playing career are at even greater risk of depression, anxiety, sleep and anger issues. The study suggests a strong association between head trauma and mental health in both codes of rugby, and provides evidence of what many people working in the field already believe to be true: rugby has a mental health crisis. The research, which is entirely independent of the governing bodies of each code, found that players who reported suffering from three or more concussions during their professional careers scored significantly worse for psychological signs of depression and anxiety and for sleep disruption. Around half the players who reported suffering five or more concussions were suffering with symptoms of depression, and two-thirds of them with covert anger and irritability. The study found no difference in the levels of alcohol consumption between the retired rugby players and the other athletes, which means that can be discounted as an explanation for these findings. “We know acute concussion is associated with confusion and depression and irritability and mood changes,” says the study’s lead author, Dr Karen Hind, “and we know post-concussion syndrome, which is three months afterward the event, is the same, but these cases we’re looking at are years after the event.” Hind says the findings are “in line with what we see in head trauma victims in other fields”. Alarmingly, one in 10 of the 83 elite rugby players who took part in the study said that they often felt “life is hardly worth living”. The researchers allow that their findings could be because many of those elite players were forced into retirement through injury, an outcome that has been associated with depressive symptoms in other studies. But of course that happens in all sports, and they are also clear that they believe another factor among the elite rugby group in particular is the repeated exposure to concussive and subconcussive impacts during their playing career. More worryingly, those players were also the group least likely to seek help. One in five respondents said they “would not turn to anyone if they had a problem or felt upset about something”. The findings may startle the hundreds of thousands of fans who follow union and league, but they will come as no surprise to the small band of people with first-hand experience in the field. In the last two years the Guardian has run interviews with a handful of retired players who spoke about the effect the sport had on their mental health, but there are hundreds more who haven’t felt able to talk about it publicly. For Hind, who enjoys playing and watching rugby, the conclusion is clear. “There clearly needs to be better care for players in retirement,” she says. “We had over 100 players come into our clinic. Among the ones I spoke to, the consistent feedback was that they felt very well looked-after when they were playing, because they had access to all the medical support they needed, but once they hit retirement there was nothing there for them.” The reason many of those players signed up for the study in the first place, she explained, was because they felt like it was the best way to “get an MOT” on their bodies. There are 150 former union players and 75 league players involved in legal actions against the governing bodies, all of them showing symptoms of brain damage, many of them struggling with depression, anxiety and anger. There are many more, some of them currently working in the game, who are suffering symptoms but feel unable to speak openly about them, sometimes because they are worried about their job security. Among this network, there have been instances when former players have had to arrange emergency clinical interventions for others after private cries for help. This is one reason why Alix Popham, the former Wales international who spoke openly to the Guardian last year about his own diagnosis of early onset dementia and probable CTE, has since set up the Head For Change foundation. It is designed to be a safe space for athletes and families who need support. As always, the question is why a charity should have to take on the work that ought to fall on sport governing bodies. Hind has offered to share her work with the rugby authorities but so far nobody has taken her up on it. “We have blood samples, cognitive tests – all sorts. We’re sitting on a lot of data, and while we’re very well-supported by Durham, we are working on a bit of a shoestring budget,” she says. “I’d be very happy to share our findings with the governing bodies, of course I would, but we have not received any requests, any interest even in what we are doing. “We feel we need to get this research out. I hope this paper will help to open the conversation and get the dialogue going. This is not OK, and people suffering need to know that they’re not alone, and that they can seek help.”The prime minister’s plan to mandate electric car chargers across all new homes in England from next year risks making access to charge points “exclusive”, leaving behind motorists from poorer areas, industry leaders have warned. Senior voices in the energy and motoring sectors said the plan for all new homes and buildings to be fitted with car charging infrastructure risks benefiting wealthier areas with space for off-street parking and leaving “blackspots” in areas where homes have less space. Instead, they argue, the government should be doing more to make convenient, high-speed car charging more accessible to the public to help give all motorists a realistic opportunity to switch their fossil fuel cars for electric versions. Guy Jefferson, the chief operating officer of Scottish Power’s energy network business, warned that the burgeoning electric vehicle market was “less likely to provide for all in our society” without deliberate action to ensure a fair energy transition. “It’s essential that [electric vehicle] chargers are available not just in new homes, private driveways, wealthy high streets and motorway service stations, but in remote, rural and socially disadvantaged areas too,” Jefferson said. “That’s why we’ve set out plans to build on our existing work with local councils to ensure fair access for all to [electric vehicle] charging,” he added. Under the government’s plans, set out by the prime minister Boris Johnson at the CBI business leaders conference on Monday, new homes must be equipped with charging infrastructure from next year. Ross Easton, a director at the Energy Networks Association, added that while the plans for more home chargers was “great news for those living in new homes” the government “must make sure access to charging points is not exclusive”. “Charging points must be accessible to everyone. To truly ‘level up’ charging point access and deliver on the Cop26 electric vehicle pledges requires strategic planning at all levels of government, nationally and locally,” he said. Many modern homes do not have car parking spaces, and the number of new homes built each year in the UK is so small it would take decades to make much difference by this measure alone, according to industry sources. Sarah Winward-Kotecha, the director of electric vehicles at RAC, said it was “important to remember that a lot of new housing stock, especially in cities, doesn’t even come with any car parking at all, let alone provision for electric charge points”. The motoring group has called for the government to make high-speed car charging available to more motorists by focusing on the roll out of rapid chargers in public areas so that “By supplementing [charge] points already installed in places like forecourts and supermarkets with rapid chargers, drivers without off-road parking will have a realistic opportunity to go electric [and] those needing to recharge on longer journeys [will have] greater flexibility to do so,” Winward-Kotecha said. Paul Reeve, a director at the ECA trade body for electrical and engineering firms, added that with most plans for public charging points “centred around London and the south-east” there was “still a real danger of charging blackspots in many parts of the country”. ECA research in September found two-thirds of local authorities in the UK had no plans for public charging points. More than half said they were prohibitively expensive, and more than a third cited other constraints such as a lack of energy network capacity. The government’s plans also overlook the fact that many new buildings are deliberately built without or with few car parking spaces, to encourage people to travel by public transport, which is better for the environment than driving electric cars. The government faces growing pressure to address the UK’s emissions from transport and homes – which have barely budged in the past decade – in order to cut emissions and improve air quality. The efforts should includes steps to make homes more energy efficient and reduce driving overall, according to green groups. Agathe de Canson, of the Green Alliance thinktank, said: “To cut air pollution and tackle congestion more widely we need to encourage more walking, cycling and journeys by public transport. This should be factored into planning rules to ensure new homes are not car dependent.” Ed Matthew, of the green thinktank E3G, added that putting charging infrastructure in new homes did little to cut energy use which could lower bills and reduce the carbon associated with housing, which makes up 14% of the UK’s emissions. “Developers make about £50,000 profit per home and they have used the threat of not building homes to slow down desperately needed regulation to build zero carbon homes that can slash emissions and cut energy bills,” he said. A government spokesperson said: “We are committed to ensuring all parts of society can make the switch to electric vehicles, and these new regulations apply equally across residential and non-residential buildings. This means that, from 2022, whenever new homes and businesses are built or undergo major renovation, charge points will be installed. “We are also working with councils to expand on-street charging infrastructure and providing grants to help landlords install charge points.”Rights activists in El Salvador said they will not be pressured into silence after prosecutors raided the offices of seven charities and groups in the Central American country. “They’re trying to criminalise social movements,” said Morena Herrera, a prominent women’s rights activist. “They can’t accept that they are in support of a better El Salvador.” Officials said the raids, which took place at the offices of charities working on education, human rights and women’s rights on Monday, were part of an inquiry into the embezzlement of public funds. Prosecutors claimed to be investigating several non-governmental organisations (NGOs), with $4.9m (£3.7m) under review, but the groups said the raids represented a crackdown on civil society by President Nayib Bukele’s increasingly authoritarian government. “They don’t like social criticism, they think it’s all against the government, which isn’t the case,” Herrera said. “They think El Salvador didn’t exist before they came into government, but this is a society that has had to fight for its rights, even to be able to stand in the street and speak its mind.” Azucena Ortiz, director of Las Mélidas, a women’s rights and health NGO that was raided, said that rights groups, rather than cash, were the targets. “We think this is a rigged procedure, specifically aimed at criminalising us.” At the offices of Pro-Vida, which monitors water quality in rural El Salvador, authorities seized five computers in a raid. “These questionable raids have affected scheduled activities in the most vulnerable communities that we accompany,” the organisation said. Bukele – a charismatic strongman with a mastery of social media – has come under increasing criticism for using the judiciary to stifle dissent. Earlier this month, his government proposed a bill that would require journalists and civil society organisations (CSOs) that receive overseas funding to register as “foreign agents” with the interior ministry. Transparency International said the draft bill was, “a blatant attempt to control and limit the work of CSOs, which benefit citizens with access to basic rights including healthcare, education, fight against corruption, prevention of violence, among other issues”. But Bukele has doubled down on his populist style and rhetoric, recently calling himself “the world’s coolest dictator” on his Twitter profile, which has since been changed to “CEO of El Salvador”. His promotion of bitcoin, which he made legal tender in El Salvador in September, has also seen him trade in populist tropes. “These raids – coupled with the ‘foreign agents’ bill – are yet another example of Bukele’s intolerance with dissent,” said José Miguel Vivanco, director at Human Rights Watch’s Americas division. “Unless the international community puts a stop to his attacks on critics and the rule of law, El Salvador is likely to become yet another Latin American dictatorship.” The targeted groups said they will continue to speak out. “They’re not going to silence us, we’ll keep going, fighting for justice and a life free from violence,” said Herrera. “But it’s vital that the government feels that it cannot keep acting like this with impunity, it must understand that the eyes of the world are on it.”Tens of thousands of self-employed women who took maternity leave were indirectly discriminated against by the UK government during the pandemic but will be unable to claim rebates from a government Covid scheme, the court of appeal has ruled. The speed at which civil servants had to create a safety net for workers justified the way they they set out calculations for payments, three judges found. About 75,000 women who took maternity leave between 2016 and 2019 lost out on earnings because payments from the self-employment income support scheme (Seiss) – introduced after the furlough scheme last year – are worked out using average profits. The campaign group Pregnant Then Screwed brought a publicly funded judicial review – supported by the Musicians’ Union, the Federation of Entertainment Unions and the union Community – against the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, arguing that giving birth could not be compared to taking a holiday or other planned work breaks and fell foul of equality laws by only affecting women. The payments, calculated by taking into account 80% of self-employed profits averaged out between 2016 and 2019, did not exempt periods when self-employed women were not earning because they were on maternity leave, or take into account statutory maternity payments. Earlier this year the high court ruled that Seiss was not discriminatory, but this was partly overturned by the court of appeal on Wednesday. Thousands of women will be unable to claim rebates, however, after three judges ruled that the nature of the pandemic meant it would have been impossible to amend the scheme without affecting its speed, simplicity or verifiability. Kerry Chamberlain, a self-employed energy analyst who acted as a claimant in the case, took maternity leave in 2017 and 2018. She estimates that she missed out on £7,000. “The biggest frustration was that this was a calculation that was supposed to compensate fairly for your actual loss of earnings. But it wasn’t fair because they didn’t count in the last full tax year when my earnings had returned to normal.” Zoë Challenor, the founder of the children’s opera company B’Opera, said her self-employed household lost all work and income overnight in March 2020. Challenor, whose children are six and four, had been working four days a week in 2020 but her Seiss payment was based on earnings in 2016-19 when she was on maternity leave and then looking after a small child. Under the furlough scheme she would have received 80% of her wages but instead she got £29 a week, about 5% of her income when the pandemic hit. “That didn’t come close to covering my mortgage or basic bills like food,” she said. “And this is in the context that many self-employed mothers will have already taken a huge financial hit and career setback to take unpaid time off to have children in the first place.” Joeli Brearley, the chief executive and founder of Pregnant Then Screwed, said she was delighted at the ruling of indirect sex discrimination, and said it should act as a reminder to the government of its legal obligation to ensure no policies disproportionately affect any group, unless it can be justified. “The fact that women who have taken a period of maternity leave to do the most important job in the world – raising the next generation – are then subject to a lower payment is quite clearly discrimination,” she said. Brierly said there was a “blindness at the heart of government” to women’s needs, with ministers only considering the impact of the scheme on new mothers in late April 2020 after the charity raised it in parliament and through a legal challenge, supported by Doughty Street Chambers and the law firm Leigh Day. Asked about the issue in parliament, Sunak said self-employed people had “ups and downs” in their earnings “for all sorts of reasons … whether through maternity, ill health or others”.Keir Starmer has called Boris Johnson’s social care plan a “working-class dementia tax”, accusing the prime minister of breaking the Conservatives’ manifesto promise that no one would have to sell their home to pay care costs. Challenged by the Labour leader about whether anyone would have to sell their home to pay for social care, Johnson gave a carefully worded answer. “We are saying to the people of this country that we will disregard your home as part of your assets if you and your spouse are living in it; and No 2, you can have a deferred payment agreement if you move out of it, and you are living in residential care,” he said. The prime minister added that the £86,000 lifetime cap on social care costs would mean “we are allowing the people of this country to insure themselves against the otherwise catastrophic costs of Alzheimer’s and dementia”. Starmer accused the prime minister of describing the existing broken system: the value of a patient’s home is already disregarded, if they or their partner are living in it, and deferred payment schemes already exist in many areas. Starmer repeatedly pointed out that under the plans, which were narrowly passed by MPs on Tuesday, individuals with assets worth just over £100,000 would ultimately lose much of the value of their property, whereas those with more valuable homes would be able to hand over a larger proportion to their families. “He’s picked the pockets of working people to protect the estates of the wealthiest,” Starmer said, calling the scheme a “working-class dementia tax”. Johnson was cheered by his own MPs at the start of his appearance, after a turbulent three-week period that included several backbench rebellions and some senior Tories expressing concern about his grip on government. Starmer ribbed him about the disquiet of Tory MPs, asking: “Who knows if he’ll make it to the next election?” At another point, he quipped: “I think he’s lost his place in his notes again,” referring to Johnson’s rambling CBI speech on Monday. “Is everything OK, prime minister?” the Labour leader added, prompting the prime minister to reply: “I tell you what is not working, is that line of attack,” to noisy cheers from his backbenchers. Before responding to Starmer, the prime minister told the Labour MP Chris Bryant that the government would shortly announce a new cross-departmental strategy on acquired brain injuries – something Bryant has been campaigning for. The Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, intervened to urge MPs to behave calmly, warning that “shouting each other down doesn’t do you, or your constituents, any good”. He urged them to show the qualities of “kindness” and “decency” that he said were on display on Tuesday at the memorial service for the MP David Amess, who was killed last month.A decision by the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and its member states not to revise its emissions reduction strategy until the spring of 2023 has been criticised as “dangerous” by environmental campaigners. At the Marine Environment Protection Committee (MEPC) meeting, convened by the IMO, one of the first global green summits after Cop26, Kitack Lim, the UN body’s secretary general, told delegates: “The world is watching us.” And on Tuesday, the meeting chair, Hideaki Saito, spoke of the “urgency” of all sectors accelerating their efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in light of the Glasgow climate pact earlier this month. Saito said the committee “recognised the need to strengthen the ambition” of the IMO’s current strategy to cut international greenhouse gas emissions from shipping in half by 2050. The strategy, which falls far short of what is needed to remain in line with the Paris agreement, was criticised as inadequate by the UN secretary general, António Guterres, in October. But the decision to wait until 2023 to adopt a yet to be revised strategy, was described as “minuscule progress” by environmentalists in the face of a climate crisis already upon us. The chair said the committee could agree to invite interested member states and international organisations to submit concrete proposals for a revised strategy to MEPC78, next year, for consideration, but to MEPC80 (in 2023), for adoption. Lucy Gilliam, shipping policy officer at Seas At Risk, said: “It is really minuscule progress. “It is not enough. We have 10 years to bring emissions down. We need to be halving emissions by 2030. “To spend two years thinking about revising a strategy – is this incredibly tiny step a valid response to the climate crisis? We are not in climate denial but we are in climate delay and that is dangerous.” At the meeting in London, John Maggs, the president of the Clean Shipping Coalition, told delegates that sticking to the Paris target of 1.5C required “deep cuts in emissions right now”. To delay meant “losing the effect of two years of ambition”, he said. Many UN member states are already committed to tighter emissions reductions in their shipping sectors. At Cop26, a coalition of countries including the UK, US, France, Germany, Panama and the Marshall Islands, signed a declaration committing to “strengthen global efforts” to reach net zero on shipping emissions by 2050. The EU is also committed to a reduction under its “fit for 55” target to cut shipping emissions by 55% by 2030. Under the proposed law, shipping companies will need to pay for the carbon they emit travelling to and from the EU and between EU ports by 2026. A resolution for zero emissions by 2050 by the Marshall Islands and Solomon Islands was discussed for two days by delegates, but found support among only a minority of countries. They included Canada, Japan, New Zealand, Ukraine, UK, US, Vanuatu and Iceland. Others, including the EU27, Georgia, South Korea, the Bahamas and Norway supported the targets but not the 2050 resolution. Notably, several EU countries that endorsed the zero-emission shipping declaration at Cop26 failed to support the IMO resolution to make that a goal. Several countries spoke against the 2050 resolution and the 2050 zero-emission target, including Brazil, China, Russia and Saudi Arabia. However, not everyone agreed that progress was insignificant. Edmund Hughes, an independent consultant who formerly worked for the IMO secretariat, said that achieving agreement for a more ambitious strategy was an “important first step” for the IMO and member states. “It is clear from the discussion that there needs to be greater ambition than the 50% by 2050,” said Hughes. “That is not seen as sufficient from many governments and will certainly not meet the goals of Paris. “Achieving an agreement about the revised strategy is an important first step. Once you have revised the strategy you will have an understanding of what the goal is. Governments will only go forward at the pace they want to go forward. “The European member states are in a difficult position because they are currently negotiating the ‘fit for 55’ proposals, which have impacts for shipping.” The shipping industry accounts for almost 3% of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. Merchant ships, which carry about 90% of all globally traded goods, burn approximately 300m tonnes of dirty fossil fuels annually.Jordan Nobbs was expected to be the fulcrum of the Lionesses for many years, but her England journey has not been smooth sailing. A run to the semi-finals of the 2017 Euros was sandwiched between World Cup heartbreak, with injury restricting her to one match at the 2015 tournament in Canada and an anterior cruciate ligament rupture killing dreams of competing at the 2019 edition in France. Since then the pandemic and niggling injuries have stunted her international progress. Before September’s camp, the side’s new manager, Sarina Wiegman, and her staff had wanted to see more minutes from Nobbs and she was omitted. Now, with Arsenal often playing three games a week and Nobbs fit, the 28-year-old is back in the England fold for the World Cup qualifiers against Austria and Latvia. Poignantly for Nobbs, the first will be played on Saturday at the Stadium of Light, where her footballing journey began. “It’s great timing to go to Sunderland and have the family and friends there,” she says at St George’s Park. “That was one of the very first stadiums I played at – at half-time in a men’s game when I was seven – so it’s a nice moment.” Sunderland means a lot to the Stockton-on-Tees-born Nobbs. She joined the club’s centre of excellence at eight, received her first senior call-up at 16 and her three years in the first team caught the eye of Arsenal, where she has been since 2010. “It’s home really, ever since I was a kid,” she says. “I used to play in little sand tournaments just outside of [the Stadium of Light]. I’ve got a book at home where I’ve kept a bit of the grass from my boot when I was seven.” Ultimately, the bigger deal is being back in the reckoning. “It felt like my first call-up again,” she says. “Mentally it’s been tough. Naturally you want everything to go well in the football world but injuries happen, selection things happen, and you just have to stay mentally strong.” The woman stepping on to the turf in the north-east on Saturday has come a long way from the girl who picked the grass from her boots and saved it, and the journey has taught her a lot. “There’s obstacles that come your way, and it tests how tough you are to overcome them. But I think the joy I’ve had with games from the age of seven to now, that feeling never goes away. “Then I was just a little girl who was passionate about football and now the dream has come true; I’ve got to play for my national team, I’m playing at a top club, for Arsenal. You learn a lot through the journey.” When Nobbs was injured she would not shy from following the team. “I still watched everything. It was tough watching, but I always want to stay involved and know what’s going on with the squad. It’s the hard part of football but it’s just trying to stay in it as much as possible and taking the free time when you can.” Sunderland, having failed to retain their Women’s Super League licence when the leagues were restructured in 2018, dropped into the third division and now play in the Championship. The north-east has no representation in the WSL, yet the region nurtured the careers of Nobbs and other current Lionesses such as Lucy Bronze, Steph Houghton, Beth Mead, Jill Scott, Lucy Staniforth, Demi Stokes and Carly Telford. “They’re in a different place now,” Nobbs says of the club. “Hopefully we can show what good came from Sunderland and try and encourage that a little bit more.” In Austria, England face their toughest opponents of the qualifying campaign. The visiting team are ranked 21st in the world, 13 places below England. “It’s good for us,” says Nobbs. “The girls have done a great job and scored lots of goals but we need these challenges and different kinds of games.” Nobbs says there has been no time for banter with her Austrian clubmates, Viki Schnaderbeck and Manuela Zinsberger: “It’s pretty hush-hush really. I think we’ve been so busy at Arsenal we’ve just been focused on the amount of games we’ve had.” That volume of games has helped to bring her back to her best gently. “It has helped me just ease back in,” she says. “It’s pretty much impossible to have played every minute of every game at Arsenal. We’ve had not even the same midfield three in our last six games. Probably in the past I might have played three games in a week but I’m a player that puts 120% into every game. Sometimes you can break down from that. I’m in a very healthy spot right now; it was probably the best time to get the call-up for here as well.”On and on and on it goes. After 30 years, Oliver Stone has released this documentary as a kind of update or companion piece to his gripping 1991 feature JFK, which starred Kevin Costner as the New Orleans DA Jim Garrison, who attempted to test the alleged conspiracy in court. Stone’s film dramatically reopened the debate and single-handedly made conspiracy-theorising a socially and intellectually respectable pastime on the liberal left. (Before that, the most notable JFK moment in Hollywood had been Alvy Singer in Woody Allen’s Annie Hall, obsessing about the subject as a way of avoiding sex with his girlfriend.) Nowadays, the conspiracy enthusiasts are on the right: the QAnoners, the anti-vaxxers and the 5G-mast obsessives. This new movie presents us with a mountain of new circumstantial evidence about the events in Dallas in 1963. With the benefit of innumerable newly released documents and newly uncovered interviewee records, it exhaustively and persuasively shows that there are screamingly obvious inconsistencies and anomalies in the evidence concerning the bullet that was supposedly recovered, the significance of the entry and exit wounds, the compromised integrity of the autopsy records, the whereabouts of Lee Harvey Oswald on the day and the possibility that he was what he always claimed to be – a “patsy”. But, exasperatingly, and despite speculation being the order of the day, the film never attempts to name any supposed second or third shooter, to say exactly where these gunmen would have been positioned, and how the inevitable witnesses to their activity would have been suppressed. The old question reasserts itself: can you do this with any historical event? Could you, with enough time, undermine the case against Gavrilo Princip in Sarajevo in 1914? A lot of Stone’s cui bono material here frankly isn’t new and doesn’t prove anything (Kennedy was arguably as reactionary and hawkish on Vietnam as anyone else in government) and surely the oddest omission in this film is something that itself points most clearly to something fishy; namely, the assassination of Oswald by Jack Ruby. Why isn’t Stone spending at least some of the 115 minutes of this documentary analysing Ruby and his motives and background? (Unsettlingly, the one film-maker who did touch on this was Martin Scorsese in The Irishman, about the assassination of Jimmy Hoffa and organised crime’s rage against the Kennedy family, which made it clear it that killing the killer afterwards as a precautionary measure was a settled mob habit.) Did the whole nation and its governing class go into denial after the Kennedy assassination as a way of managing their shock and grief? Perhaps. But this documentary, for all its factual material, is frustrating. • JFK Revisited: Through the Looking Glass is released on 26 November in cinemas.A lined A4 notebook is pinned open on a board, heavily doodled with love hearts and the random thoughts of an 18-year-old girl, not so different to every other 18-year-old girl in history. “Just plain fuckin’ nice” is the title of a list of four retro-classic songs, including Bobby Darin’s I Wanna Be Around (1965), alongside the words “Chris Taylor loves Amy Winehouse” (with loves scored out), “Paul Watson loves Amy Winehouse” (with loves scored out), meticulous notes on how to fill in the form and send a cheque to the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency in Swansea, a shopping list including “£200 – fridge, £40 – Shelley’s Shoes, £50 – Chanel No.5?”, and five significantly more ominous words floating out from a flurry of love hearts: “diet no dairy or carbs”. It’s testament to the mystery and absurdity of fame how the scraps of ordinary life become archaeological treasures in death, but it’s these inner-world details that stay with you throughout Amy: Beyond the Stage, the Design Museum’s first exhibition dedicated to a single musical artist. More than a year in production and instigated by her dad, Mitch (who asked Amy’s stylist, Naomi Perry, to approach the museum), it’s a mesmerising celebration of a still painfully short life: early-years notebooks and photos gifted by Amy’s mum, Janis; walls alive with TV screens showing early interviews and acoustic demo performances (unleashing the full force of the Winehouse personality and staggering vocal talent); a classy reconstruction of London’s Metropolis Studios; handwritten lyrics from Frank and Back to Black – unflinchingly honest and often hilarious – now under glass like exotic butterflies. There’s also a palpable sadness: her best-known guitars hang silent on walls, her famed frocks static on mannequins, many of which are on loan after being sold at auction this November in Los Angeles, amassing over $4m (all profits from both auction and exhibition are earmarked for the Amy Winehouse Foundation). The most affecting artefacts, though, are elsewhere: the street signs of Camden Square, north London, which fans claimed as graffitied books of condolence from the day she died in July 2011 (stolen 14 times and now belonging to the family), her beloved Wurlitzer jukebox, a used wand of mascara from the Back to Black era: by now she was a millionaire, but still loyal to the high street Rimmel brand (at the sight of which she’d no doubt shriek, “get the London look!”). No wonder, for Adele, Winehouse was the one in terms of influence – a screen shows Adele’s Albert Hall performance of September 2011, imploring the audience to shine their phone lights so the darkened venue becomes a constellation of stars: “So Amy can see us now, from upstairs.” The psychological turmoil Winehouse endured, through the perils of fame and addiction, is seen through a different lens today. One exhibit, “In the limelight”, ponders how the mainstream media of the mid-to-late 2000s, which gleefully pilloried her struggles, “implying that Amy was dysfunctional rather than in need of empathy and support”, has now evolved in a society encouraging “the growing awareness of the connection between public perception and self-esteem”. Would she be alive, now, had she received today’s level of support? Gallingly, she probably would. The exhibition finale is the requisite “immersive experience”, a mirrored, semi-circular space showing performance footage of Tears Dry on Their Own from Shepherd’s Bush Empire in 2007 (reimagined as the jazz club Joe’s Pub in New York), the images distorted into an impressionistic, painterly dreamscape, simultaneously beautiful, euphoric and disturbingly ghostly. It’s a gut thumper of a conclusion, in which Amy Winehouse is no longer immortal through her music – she was a gifted 27-year-old woman who is gone forever. It’s also testament to the mysteries of death itself, that the further away her life recedes, the more radiant her brilliance becomes. Amy: Beyond the Stage opens on 26 November at the Design Museum, London and is booking until February 10.The House of Commons will review rules that led to the Labour MP Stella Creasy being reprimanded for bringing her baby to parliament while she spoke at a debate, the Speaker has announced. Creasy asked for urgent clarification from Commons authorities after being reprimanded for having her infant son in a sling as she spoke in parliament on Tuesday, saying this had not been a problem on other occasions. Commons rules state that MPs should not have children or infants with them in the chamber, but Creasy has taken both her children into the Commons before, without complaint. “Without maternity cover, the residents of Walthamstow would be denied representation if I didn’t keep working – but anyone with a three-month-old baby knows they are too young to leave on their own,” she told the Guardian on Wednesday. The Walthamstow MP brought her three-month-old son in a sling as she led a debate about buy-now-pay-later consumer credit schemes on Tuesday afternoon in Westminster Hall, a subsidiary chamber in the Commons. After an outcry when Creasy posted an email she had received telling her that her son’s presence was against the rules, the Speaker, Sir Lindsay Hoyle, asked the Commons procedure committee, chaired by Karen Bradley, to look at the rules. “It is extremely important that parents of babies and young children are able to participate fully in the work of this House,” he said, saying he had been unaware of the advice given to Creasy until last night. “However, rules have to be seen in context and they change with the times,” he said. “I accept there are differing views on this matter, indeed I have been contacted by honourable members who have babies with a range of views.” Creasy said she had received an email from the Commons authorities saying the latest edition of rules of behaviour and courtesies in the House of Commons, the handbook for MPs, says they should not take their seat in the Commons while with a child. This edition, published in September, states that MPs can take babies or toddlers with them through the lobbies to vote, and if needed through the Commons to do so, but adds: “You should not take your seat in the chamber when accompanied by your child, nor stand at either end of the chamber, between divisions.” Politicians have rallied in support of Creasy, with the deputy prime minister, Dominic Raab, saying he had “a lot of sympathy”. Speaking on BBC Breakfast on Wednesday, Raab said the profession of MP needed to be “brought into the modern world, the 21st century, and can allow parents to juggle the jobs they do with the family time that they need”. The former leader of the Scottish Conservative party, Ruth Davidson, gave examples of the support she had received at Holyrood after the birth of her son, Finn, which included a note from the presiding officer of the Scottish parliament (the Scottish equivalent of the Speaker) assuring her that her baby was welcome on the estate. “If it helps to know how other parliaments around the UK operate, @stellacreasy before I came back to work, the chief exec &amp; PO got in touch to ask what I needed (I got a fridge for my office for storing breast milk) &amp; to reassure me Finn was welcome on the estate &amp; in the chamber,” she wrote. However, the MP received only lukewarm words from the party’s spokesman, after Creasy said she felt unsupported by Labour. Keir Starmer’s spokesman said it would be “inappropriate for me to comment while the procedure committee is considering what it wants to do”. Asked if Starmer has any personal views, he said: “You can clearly see we are supportive when it comes to wanting people to be able to juggle their work and caring responsibilities.” Asked about Creasy feeling unsupported by fellow MPs, including her own party, he said: “You’ll have to speak Stella about that.” Creasy, who also has a young daughter, has battled to ensure MPs can have proper maternity cover. The law prevents a locum from being able to cover the parliamentary work of MPs on parental leave. The MP has also launched a campaign called This Mum Votes – originally named Vote Mama UK, after an existing US campaign – to help support parents in politics, saying she did not think her own party had properly backed her push for maternity rights.For 20 years the Afghan economy has been almost entirely dependent on financial support from the international donor community, delivered to the Afghan government to cover public sector running costs such as the salaries of doctors, nurses, teachers, judges, police officers and civil servants. This international development assistance accounted for 43% of Afghanistan’s GDP and 75% of its public expenditure at the point when Kabul fell, so it is little wonder that the Afghan economy is now on the brink of total collapse following the international community’s understandable refusal to channel funding through the Taliban. Meanwhile the entire Afghan banking system has shut down, leaving Afghans with little access to money beyond importing suitcases full of cash. Britain has a moral duty to support vulnerable Afghans, and it’s in the national interest, too. British servicemen and women should be proud of how their dedicated work helped to provide women and girls in Afghanistan with freedom and opportunities that had previously appeared out of reach, while preventing terror attacks against the west. But political failures mean that Afghans now face Taliban oppression and starvation while Europe faces another refugee crisis. We need a solution. As winter sets in, Afghanistan is on the brink of disaster. The executive director of the UN World Food Programme, David Beasley, warned earlier this month that “23 million people are marching towards starvation ... The next six months are going to be catastrophic. It is going to be hell on Earth.” Heartbreaking reports of parents selling their children are starting to emerge. The UN has confirmed that 55% of the population face acute food insecurity. Labour supports the international community’s reluctance to channel financial support through the Taliban. It would be wrong and naive to reward or legitimise the Taliban’s brutal 20-year campaign of terror, death and destruction. But fortunately there are alternative means by which to provide the Afghan people with humanitarian and financial support. Today Labour is urging the UK government to deliver decisive leadership and proactive diplomacy by taking the following three steps. First, the foreign secretary must convene partner countries that are willing and able to mobilise Afghanistan’s major western donors, to deliver aid off-budget. The two multi-donor trust funds are the World Bank’s now suspended Afghan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) and the UN Development Programme’s Special Trust Fund for Afghanistan (STFA). Both can operate independently of the Taliban by channelling funds and paying salaries directly to the Afghan public sector and NGOs via a model that is both controlled and auditable. Such operations have been undertaken in other countries. Yet the World Bank and UNDP officials can only act if they are instructed to do so by their political masters – the governments of the donor countries. The UK government must therefore organise a meeting of fellow donors immediately. Second, our government must take the lead in re-enabling some form of cashflow in Afghanistan. The banking sector is on the verge of collapse, but international banks fear US sanctions for being seen to support the Taliban. The result is that there is virtually no domestic currency circulating in Afghanistan. The UK government must therefore urge partner countries to amend their respective sanctions regimes – on which the US have already taken some initial steps – to facilitate the re-establishment of focused banking services that can help deliver humanitarian assistance. Third, in the longer term it is going to be essential for aid organisations and NGOs to have some clarity on what donor governments will or will not accept in terms of the Taliban’s behaviour and modus operandi. But if each government develops its own guidelines and conditions this will make it impossible for the aid community to operate effectively on the ground. The UK government should therefore convene the key donors in order to agree on a set of basic principles that will both enable aid actors to work more efficiently and send a clear and consistent message to the Taliban (rather than continue with each western government working to slightly different standards). Successive Conservative governments since 2010 have inflicted terrible damage on our country’s standing in the world, but the Johnson administration appears to be intent on trashing our reputation completely. The decision to abandon the UK’s commitment to spending 0.7% of our GDP on development has fundamentally undermined our credibility and influence internationally. Yet despite Johnson’s weaknesses, the UK is the world’s fifth largest economy – and as a permanent member of the UN security council, we still have the convening power and diplomatic clout that is required to address the Afghan crisis. The question is whether the prime minister and foreign secretary care enough to take action. Labour is not banking on it, and that’s why we are spoonfeeding the government by today putting forward our urgent three-point plan. The consequences of further inaction are simply too devastating to contemplate. Stephen Kinnock MP is shadow minister for Asia and the PacificOn Monday, BTS swept the American Music Awards and made history as the first Asian act to win artist of the year. On Tuesday night, BTS were for a second time nominated for a Grammy for best pop duo/group performance, for their single Butter. BTS are known to break records and their fans, known as Army, are known for being a passionate fandom. When and why did you become a fan of BTS? What sets the band apart from others? What does it mean to you to be part of the fandom? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Moira Buffini’s new play tries to be everything at once. A state-of-the-nation satire, of sorts, it is also a haunted house story with drawing-room farce, country house murder mystery and dystopian disaster movie optics thrown in. It wavers in an uncertain space between all these forms before spiralling into unconvincing storytelling and clumsy comedy. The manor house setting, as in Mike Bartlett’s far more potent Albion, represents a bygone imperial England. When a village is hit by flooding, the bursting of the riverbanks brings saints and sinners to the doors of Burnt Marple. This is the house owned – in one of the play’s more dated jokes – by upper-class “Lady Diana” (Nancy Carroll). Her daughter, Isis (Liadán Dunlea), is named after the ancient goddess and not the terrorist organisation, though there is an extremist in Ted (Shaun Evans), the head of a far-right group named Albion, who is swept in by the storm. Quickly – too quickly – he converts another houseguest to his cause and cavorts – again, unconvincingly – with Diana. Carroll and Evans have no chemistry between them and the latter lacks the dark charisma to pull off his Svengali-like character. Although Ted’s racism and misogyny are clearly being parodied, they feel crass and gratuitous when combined with the play’s ineffective comedy. In one scene he incites a character to spit out the P-word, which elicits some nervous sniggers from the auditorium and, whatever its objective, sounds especially distasteful in the light of Azeem Rafiq’s recent testimony. Despite the gravity of the play’s themes it has a prevailingly saggy sitcom vibe, from the vision of the village vicar, Reverend Fiske (David Hargreaves), parading in a fluffy pink jumper and boxer shorts to unfunny fat jokes at the expense of working-class Perry (Edward Judge), who, we are told, lives in a caravan and got the sack from Sainsbury’s. More serious-minded subject matter is wedged in awkwardly, from a climate warning to limp jabs against the wealthy 1% and “hormonal white men”. Out of nowhere, there is a lesbian kiss that seems to aspire to be radical in this bland Middle England landscape. Yet the drama has a well-worn, ersatz tone which is far from edgy. An initially dungaree-clad Diana and her husband, Pete (Owen McDonnell), look like they are in a dissolute version The Good Life, no less twee for the magic mushrooms Pete guzzles. A body is later laid out on the kitchen table on one side of the stage, a Faulkneresque touch that does not go anywhere beyond another implausible plot turn. Lez Brotherston’s set is a wonky interior with higgledy fireplace, chandelier and a blast of stormy sky around it, and resembles a Roald Dahl storybook. It is eye-catching but feels vast, and under the direction of the playwright’s sister, Fiona Buffini, actors inhabit its various corners at once, leaving our focus divided and diffuse. It is topped off with unconvincing performances all round. Maybe the actors have too little characterisation to work with and maybe they are not convinced by the jokes either. Either way, we do not care enough about these people. In the play’s closing moments, the flood waters sweep into the house in a deluge of visual effects that are nicely created by Nina Dunn’s projections and John Clark’s lighting, but accompanied by a wave of relief that it is all finally ending. Manor’s many failings might have been forgiven if the comedy was just sharper, funnier, at least a few degrees more dangerous. But even as a light-hearted Christmas show, this feels little short of a turkey. At the National Theatre’s Lyttelton theatre, London, until 1 JanuaryKeeping shelves stocked is “harder work than ever before”, the UK boss of Lidl has said as shortages of drivers, warehouse workers and food processing staff put pressure on grocery supply chains. Christian Härtnagel, chief executive of the German discount chain’s British arm, said problems with availability of products in stores had eased in the past 10 to 12 weeks and “the worst times are behind us” but “daily hard work” was still required to ensure there were no gaps on shelves. He said the company was constantly having to seek new ways to work around problems, by simplifying ranges and other measures, as a combination of the pandemic, Brexit and trade disruption continued to affect businesses. Lidl last week said it would be investing £18m to increase wages for its lowest-paid workers, from £9.50 to £10.10 an hour outside London and £10.85 to £11.30 within the M25 from March 2022, as part of efforts to retain and recruit staff in a highly competitive market. That comes on top of £8m invested in pay rises last year, as well as a £9.5m one-off thank you payment and gift voucher for staff in recognition of their efforts during the pandemic. The retailer is to take on about 4,000 extra staff as it continues to open a store a week for the next four years, to reach a total of 1,100 stores in the UK by 2025. Härtnagel said Lidl wanted to open stores “from London to Scotland and down to Southampton”, with its main focus on 1,300-sq-metre outlets. He added that it was not considering small convenience stores. The group said sales increased 12% to £7.7bn in the year to 28 February 2021. It also made pretax profits of £9.8m, springing back from a loss of £25.2m a year before, despite returning £100m in business rates relief. Härtnagel said the profits turnaround was the result of strong sales and “a laser focus on our business model” without the distraction of home deliveries. He said online orders made up about 12% of the total grocery market in the UK, down from a peak of almost 15% last year during pandemic-related high street lockdowns, adding that he expected that share to diminish further. “In future 90% of the market will be bricks and mortar and that is fine for us,” he said. The supermarket chain is investing in digital expansion with the launch of its Lidl Plus loyalty app. It has also registered the Lidl Go name for an app that would help shoppers scan and pay for goods without having to visit a till. Härtnagel said Lidl was “exploring and working on” the service but there were no plans for a launch at present.A teenager acquitted of murdering two men and wounding another last year during racially based protests in Wisconsin reportedly visited Donald Trump at his Florida resort, with the former president describing Kyle Rittenhouse as “really a nice young man”. Trump revealed the visit in an interview with the TV show host Sean Hannity that aired on Fox News on Tuesday night. It was accompanied by a photograph of the pair together at Trump’s Mar-a-Lago resort in Palm Beach, where the former president lives. Rittenhouse, 18, and Trump were smiling and flashing thumbs-up signs at the camera, both wearing suits. Rittenhouse, who was found not guilty on all charges by a jury in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last Friday, “wanted to know if he could come over and say hello because he was a fan”, Trump told Hannity, as reported by Raw Story. “He came over with his mother. Really a nice young man. And what he went through, that was prosecutorial misconduct. He should not have had to suffer through a trial for that. He’s a really good, young guy.” Rittenhouse was 17 when he traveled 20 miles from his home in Antioch, Illinois, to Kenosha, as protests erupted at the shooting of Jacob Blake, who is Black, by a white police officer on 23 August last year. The teen shot and killed Joseph Rosenbaum, 36, and Anthony Huber, 26, and wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, 27, with an assault rifle on 25 August as he roamed Kenosha with other armed men claiming to act as self-appointed, unofficial security guards. He testified that the shootings were in self-defence during a tumultuous trial. The verdict was celebrated by rightwing politicians and pundits and decried by civil rights groups and activists, with Kenosha left divided. Rittenhouse also claimed prosecutors had “taken advantage” of him during his own controversial interview on Fox on Monday night with Tucker Carlson. In that appearance the teenager insisted his trial was not about race and that he was a supporter of the Black Lives Matter movement.A hospital in Belgium has been ordered to compensate a couple for their “shock” and “impoverishment” after they ended up having three children by IVF treatment owing to a mistake at its fertility clinic. It is the first time the Belgian courts have found that a healthy child can be the cause of loss to parents. The case involved a Spanish couple who had a son with beta thalassaemia, a genetic disorder that leads to a lack of oxygen travelling to parts of the body, and for which a bone marrow transplant is a potential solution. The couple decided to have a second child who could act as a donor – a so-called saviour sibling. They attended a fertility clinic at the Universitair Ziekenhuis Brussels hospital where doctors were willing to use in vitro fertilisation and “pre-implantation diagnosis” to ensure their second child conceived was a suitable donor. The doctors developed several embryos of which three were healthy and one was suitable as a donor. The hospital mistakenly implanted the wrong embryo in the mother and the pregnancy led to the birth of twins. Neither girl was able to be a donor to their brother. The distraught couple tried again at a hospital in Madrid. A healthy fourth child, who was suitable as a donor, was born in 2018. The long-awaited bone marrow transplant is said to have taken place last year. According to the Flemish newspaper De Standaard, the couple subsequently filed a lawsuit in Brussels, in response to which a judge awarded damages of €27,000 (£23,000) to the mother and €11,000 to the father, for “the shock they suffered after learning that the twins were not suitable as donors” and for the “anxiety and risks generated by a new pregnancy”. The judge ruled that the couple had “wanted two or three children within their family project, but under no circumstances four”. UZ Brussel hospital was also ordered to pay compensation of €5,000 to the oldest child for the delay in his transplant. The court additionally awarded the couple material compensation, estimated at €25,000, to cover “the impoverishment caused by the presence of a fourth child in the family”. The birth of “saviour siblings”, in which doctors pick an embryo for implantation, is contentious. In the UK the fertility watchdog, the Human Fertilisation and Embryology Authority, relaxed its rules in 2004 on embryo screening to allow the birth of so-called designer babies. In 2010 nine-year-old Megan Matthews, from King’s Lynn in Norfolk, became the first child in the UK to benefit from the successful operation of the entire process of a child being selected and born as a donor. Megan had suffered from Fanconi anaemia, which prevented her body from making blood. Through the work of medical teams in Cambridge, Bristol and Nottingham, her parents had a son, Max, whose umbilical cord blood was preserved. He later underwent an operation to recover bone marrow, which was then successfully used in Megan’s transplant. The parents said at the time that they did not regard Max as a “saviour sibling” as they already had the intention to expand their family but that natural conception left relatively slim chances of the new child being a perfect tissue match for their daughter.They say war is hell, don’t they, and also that hell is other people. So perhaps we should all have seen the chaos coming, when Electronic Arts proudly announced that 128-player matches were coming to Battlefield. We should have learned from trying to board the tube at rush hour what 128 people all vying simultaneously to complete an objective feels like, and it’s not often pleasant. Battlefield 2042 has many problems, but much potential. The ingredients for awe-inspiring war games are here, but don’t always come together – at least, not yet. This venerable shooter series’ characteristic bombast and spectacle is alive and well. 2042 is set under the extreme weather conditions that ravage our near future, trigger the dissolution of most nation states, and begin a war fought by stateless “no-pats” what resources are left on Earth. Running headlong into a tornado with 63 other players while another 64 await you on the other side of its vortex will leave you feeling awestruck the first time. But it doesn’t serve a match of Conquest (capture control points) or Breakthrough (capture control points, but this time in order) particularly well. On a server filled to capacity, there’s simply too much chaos to carve out a satisfying personal story. That’s always been the difficulty for Battlefield as its player population has grown: how do I feel as if I’m effecting change within a vast conflict? The scale only serves to dilute individual accomplishments, not to mention increase the odds of a random death at the hands of remote unseen opponents. Since Battlefield 2042 was released last week, players have complained about wobbly netcode, bugs too numerous to detail and missing features from previous games. I suspect, like many other shaky big-budget games of the recent past, it will eventually evolve into something more stable and feature-rich. At present, it’s not unusual to see soldiers in endlessly looping death throes, like some interactive anti-war art installation, or vehicles that appear to be obeying lunar physics, or bullet spray so wild that you might as well brandish an aerosol at your foe instead. There’s no single player campaign this time, so it falls to the new Hazard Zone mode to provide light relief from the large-scale fracas. Here, a squad of up to four players hunts down data drives from satellite pods dotted around the map and then extracts them, fending off waves of disconcertingly ferocious AI soldiers. Rather than the treasure hunt itself, the rewarding loop of earning points and spending them on better kit for your next try proves most engaging. That persistence gives your team a reason to specialise, and there’s joy in cultivating co-operative efficiency. It doesn’t offset the broader disappointments, but is a worthy diversion. There is a silver lining around 2042’s storm clouds. Bots have been enlisted to make up server numbers, and they’re available to spar against in solo and co-op versions of the game’s multiplayer battles. If you play against bots, the game gives us all the keys to the kingdom. I’m not too proud to admit that I will never, never ever, not even if I devoted the next five years of my life to it, get 92 sniper kills in a single round of Battlefield against other humans. But against 2042’s easy bots, I can and I have. I am a warrior king. Objectives topple and fall under my control in one concerted push. I fly fighter planes, unashamed of my terrible piloting, and I largely ignore the bugs because my K:D ratio is biblical. This is what it feels like to be absolutely brilliant at Battlefield, and Dice is both letting you feel it on your own terms and (if you use harder bots) training you to at least attain some fraction of that sense of achievement online. There’s still more hope here in the form of Portal mode. Not only does it give you a set of tools to build your own game modes, but it also gives the community the maps, weapons and vehicles of Battlefield 1942, Battlefield 3 and Bad Company 2. It’s the Abba Gold of the franchise, and while that classic content is still at the mercy of technical issues, it’s a generous addition. My hope is that we’ll look back at this launch and laugh, remembering that a great game began on such a shoogly peg. For now, the best fun is found in the sideshows. On the main stage of its chaotic 128-player showdowns, it stumbles. Battlefield 2042 is out now; £49.99.It turns out that Chelsea had no reason to spend any money on strengthening their right flank last summer. There was no need to rival Paris Saint-Germain for the signature of Achraf Hakimi when they already had Reece James, whose scintillating display against Juventus on Tuesday night provided Chelsea with yet another reminder to trust in their brilliant academy. The beauty of it for the Stamford Bridge faithful was that James was not the only homegrown hero leading the charge against the Italian club. The opening goal came from Trevoh Chalobah, a 22-year-old centre-back who looked likely to leave at the end of last season, and there was a made-in-Cobham feel to the move that saw the European champions go 3-0 up just before the hour. Ruben Loftus-Cheek, who had come on for the injured N’Golo Kanté, danced through before feeding Callum Hudson-Odoi and Thomas Tuchel was on the pitch when the ball flew into the Juventus net, whipping up the crowd and punching the air as he savoured his side producing arguably the most complete performance of his 10-month tenure. For the manager, it was a night that showed “what makes teams special”. The German spoke about the mix of his squad, revelling in the blend of “superstars from abroad” and academy graduates, and again demonstrated that he is fully invested in Chelsea’s future. Unlike many of his predecessors, Tuchel has realised that the academy is capable of making the first team stronger and he has devoted time to improving Chelsea’s array of gifted youngsters, evidence of which is captured by how quickly James has become one of the world’s best players in his position. Not so long ago there were a few doubts over what the ceiling was for James. There was a naivety to the 21-year-old’s defending at times and it was not always obvious how refined he was on the ball. He did not appear to be quite as gifted as Liverpool’s Trent Alexander-Arnold, who seemed certain to become England’s first-choice right-back two years ago, and James’s form had plummeted by the time Frank Lampard’s time at Chelsea came to an end last January. James needed to produce more and Tuchel did not seem fully convinced at first, even after watching the youngster produce an impeccable performance when Chelsea beat Manchester City in last season’s Champions League final. The victory over City was followed by Chelsea looking to buy a right-sided player and they came close to signing Hakimi from Internazionale, only for the exciting Moroccan full-back to join PSG. Free to nail down a starting spot at wing-back, James has seized his chance. He has dominated the right flank and was sensational against Juventus, whether tracking back to subdue the dangerous Federico Chiesa, rampaging forward to burst into crossing positions or drifting inside to link with Jorginho and Kanté in midfield. The standout moment, of course, was the venomous shot that made it 2-0 in the 55th minute. It was James’s fifth goal of the season, making him Chelsea’s top scorer, and a glorious exhibition of his technique and power. Yet there was more to the England international’s performance than his goal. It was also a tactically refined and highly technical display from James, interesting in the way that he did not stay glued to the touchline, instead confusing Juventus with his ability to move into central areas, and an eye for a pass that gives Tuchel’s team even more variety and invention in the final third. The range of the delivery was impressive. There was an early free-kick that almost caught out Wojciech Szczesny at his near post, underlining James’s dead-ball threat, and he rarely looked flustered in possession. His short passing was polished and his long game incisive, most notably when his diagonal ball allowed Hakim Ziyech to set up Timo Werner for the fourth goal in added time. He also went close with an ambitious free-kick in the first half. Juventus had been devoured. But they were not the first team to suffer at the hands of a player whose versatility, adaptability and technique make him ideally suited to playing for Tuchel. There was a rampaging display against Arsenal in August, a lovely dinked effort in the 7-0 thrashing of Norwich and two thrilling blasts against Newcastle last month. “We don’t need to do shooting exercises in training with Reece,” Tuchel said after the win over Newcastle. “He shoots like a horse.” The power is breathtaking at times and the natural ability is not too shabby either. It is no wonder that Gareth Southgate, England’s manager, believes that James can be “anything he wants to be”. He is a special talent and, for Chelsea, his performances should be a source of immense pride in the rise of their academy.The head of the UN’s nuclear watchdog has said he has failed to reach a deal with Iran over renewed access to key nuclear sites after talks in Tehran. Rafael Grossi, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), said the failure was seriously affecting the agency’s ability to do its work and the chances of a restoration of the 2015 Iran nuclear deal. He told a press conference he was “close to the point when I will not be able to guarantee continuity of knowledge”, adding: “We must reach an agreement. We must do it.” No date has been set for a further meeting, although Grossi said he would continue to contact Iran. The failure may endanger the wider talks due to start next Monday in Vienna about restoring the deal that inspectors are supposed to police. Grossi had flown to Tehran this week to seek permission for his inspectors to reinstall functioning cameras at the Tsai complex in Karaj, west of Tehran. The IAEA says Iran has restarted building centrifuges at the factory. Discussing the site, Grossi said: “It is obvious such a long period of time without access would prevent me from continuing to say that I have an idea of what is going on.” In a formal report to an IAEA board meeting on Wednesday, Grossi said: “The lack of access to the Karaj workshop has meant that the restoration of surveillance and monitoring at all of Iran’s facilities and locations in relation to the joint comprehensive plan of action [the Iran nuclear deal] could not be completed.” Iran says the site was the subject of Israeli sabotage in June, a claim Israel has not confirmed. Tehran reportedly told Grossi access would only be restored to the site if the IAEA shelved its longstanding claim to examine three undeclared sites at which nuclear particles had been found. Iran says the evidence about these sites was first made available to the IAEA by Israel and never formed part of the inspection agreement. But Grossi told the board: “The presence of multiple uranium particles of anthropogenic origin at three locations in Iran not declared to the agency, as well as the presence of isotopically altered particles at one of these locations, is a clear indication that nuclear material and/or equipment contaminated by nuclear material has been present at these locations.” He said his inspectors were still subject to excessively invasive physical searches of their bodies on entering sites. He demanded the end of the intrusive inspections, saying this was a right not a favour. The failure to reach agreement came when Grossi visited Tehran on Monday and Tuesday to discuss access to the sites with Mohammad Eslami, the head of Iran’s atomic energy organisation, and the Iranian foreign minister, Hossein Amir-Abdollahian. It was the first time Grossi had met the minister since a new hardline government was elected in June. Iran feels the west and the IAEA have not been willing to condemn what it alleges are repeated covert Israeli attacks on its nuclear installations, or the assassination of its top nuclear scientist, Mohsen Fakhrizadeh, in November 2020. Grossi acknowledged there was pressure on the IAEA not to declare the entire inspection regime defunct since it would provide a difficult backdrop for the broader talks in Vienna, starting on 29 November. The talks, in abeyance since June, could conclude with the US rejoining the nuclear deal, the lifting of most economic sanctions on Iran and an end to Iran’s non-compliance with its non-proliferation obligations under the deal. In a report last week, the IAEA said Iran’s high-concentration uranium levels had reached new records, and well beyond the stockpile limits set in the nuclear deal. The IAEA said Iran possessed 17.7kg of enriched uranium at a concentration of 60%, compared with 10kg in September.Looking at how health services in different countries have responded to Covid, we can see some common ground. Many countries are increasing funding for health services, expanding the number of frontline clinical staff, providing separate areas to care for patients with confirmed or suspected Covid-19, and using digital technology to deliver virtual rather than face-to-face appointments. But there are some distinctions: peer a bit closer and it is clear that we have something to teach and something to learn from every healthcare system. The UK has its achievements to share, from a nationalised (and devolved) system that can pool surgical resources in local areas and support mass trials to test new treatments, to a historically strong primary care model that played a key role in delivering the largest vaccination programme in British history while continuing to deliver daily care to patients. There is also much we can learn from other nations. Some of the countries affected by Sars, such as Singapore, developed new types of facilities with more single and isolation rooms, better ventilation, and versatile designs that could be rapidly adapted for surges in demand. The government’s new hospital building programme must ensure that NHS facilities are better suited to cope with future pandemics. We can also learn from the way in which other countries increase their health and care workforce during surges of demand like pandemics. Even before Covid-19, some states such as France had established permanent reserve lists of workers who can be rapidly expanded and mobilised to support health services. Other countries that mandate community service often offer placements in hospitals, ambulance services and nursing homes. During Covid-19 the NHS workforce was boosted by a dedicated corps of volunteers, retired clinicians, and clinical students, but exploring other approaches to rapidly expanding our health and care workforce would be prudent with future pandemics in mind. Although virtual GP and outpatient appointments ballooned here, other countries with more advanced health-data systems have gone further and faster in using digital technology to support health services. In countries such as Singapore and Denmark, self-driving disinfection robots helped clean clinical environments and “command centres” were developed to coordinate health service responses based on real-time data. The NHS worked hard to collect and use data in a more sophisticated way during Covid-19, but a more sustained commitment to digital technology will be needed to give the UK the modern tools it needs to face future pandemics. The final international lesson is the simplest: give your health and care system the resources it needs to be resilient. The NHS went into the pandemic with rising waiting lists for care, hospitals full to bursting and fewer doctors, nurses and intensive care beds than comparable countries. And successive governments have ducked the issue of social care reform while countries like Japan and Germany acted decades ago to shore up their social care systems. According to the Care Quality Commission, this inaction has left the UK’s health care and social care systems facing a “tsunami of unmet need” and hospitals full of stranded patients who could be discharged if they had the support they needed when out of hospital. Our health and care system was agile enough to create emergency field hospitals, transform general hospital wards into intensive care areas and use available private sector capacity during the pandemic. But it is hard to shake the impression that the NHS was having to press the accelerator harder because it was starting near the back of the queue. The promises of social care funding reform and a new funding deal for the NHS are welcome, but these come with much ground to make up after a decade where funding failed to keep pace with rising demand and a health and care staffing crisis was allowed to develop. Recently published data show the UK is still towards the middle of the pack of industrialised nations when it comes to funding our health service, lagging behind countries like France and Germany. Although the government has promised a new funding deal for the NHS, it is unlikely that this will send us to the top of the international leaderboard on health funding. And the new investment – while clearly substantial – is unlikely to be enough to meet the medium-term pressures on a service that will be fighting fires on multiple fronts, as it continues to battle Covid-19 and tackle the burgeoning waiting lists for care that grew during the pandemic. Siva Anandaciva is chief analyst of policy at the King’s Fund, an independent charitable organisation working to improve health and care in EnglandA man who was told he had a “fundamental right to sex” despite not understanding the issue of consent, has been refused permission to pursue sexual relationships by the supreme court. The 36-year-old man, referred to as JB, is autistic and has impaired cognition. He has been assessed as presenting a “moderate risk” of sexual offending to women, particularly to those who are vulnerable, because he is unable to understand that consent is relevant in sexual situations and that attempting sex without consent is likely to be a criminal offence. JB, who cannot be identified, has been since 2014 subject to a care plan by his local authority, which has imposed significant limitations on his freedoms. But in 2019, the court of protection, which considers issues relating to people who may lack the mental capacity to make decisions, ruled JB had the right to pursue sexual relations because he was “entitled to make the same mistakes which all human beings can, and do, make in the course of a lifetime”. Mrs Justice Roberts, the first judge to hear the case, added that insisting that JB understood the issue of consent before being allowed to pursue sex would be discrimination because it would “impose on him a burden which a capacitous individual may not share”. After the court of protection found in JB’s favour, the local authority appealed to the court of appeal, which found for the local authority. JB then took his case to the supreme court, the UK’s final court of appeal. On Wednesday, five judges agreed with the court of appeal ruling, unanimously dismissing JB’s appeal on all grounds. In a ruling that will have far-reaching consequences, Lord Justice Stephens said the case raised issues of profound significance. He said the Mental Capacity Act 2005 and the court of protection “do not exist in a vacuum but are part of a wider system of law and justice, and so must take into account the need to protect others”. “The court for protection should have regard to reasonably foreseeable adverse consequences, with the aim of protecting members of the public as well as persons who may lack capacity,” he said. It is the first time the courts have been asked to decide whether and on what basis the law should act when someone without capacity asks for permission to act in a way that may harm others. In his legal blog, Alex Ruck Keene of 39 Essex Chambers said the ruling was significant because it gave rise to the wider question of what sexual consent should mean. The ruling could, he said, lead to a re-examination of many past cases.Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Moderna. Britons have become so accustomed to the three Covid vaccines available in the UK that most have forgotten about two others. One is the vaccine developed by Janssen, approved in May, with doses due to be delivered by the end of this year, but the UK government is now planning to donate all 20m of them to developing countries, via the Covax initiative. The other is the Novavax jab; the government has ordered 60m doses and hundreds of British jobs depend on it. Late last month the US company, with a factory on Teesside primed to manufacture doses, submitted final data to UK regulators and a positive decision is anticipated within days or weeks. It will bring to an end what feels like a long wait compared with the speedy development and approval of the other jabs, including for those who took part in trials. So what difference would this additional weapon make to the UK’s vaccination armoury? Novavax’s offering is a protein-based jab – similar to those used to protect against flu, and for routine childhood vaccination against pertussis (whooping cough) or meningococcal infection. Other protein-based Covid vaccines are also in late-stage clinical trials, including one being developed by Sanofi and GSK, again with 60m orders from the UK. Final data from its phase 3 trial is expected any day now, paving the way for the companies to seek regulatory approval. Whereas existing UK Covid-19 jabs instruct our cells to manufacture the coronavirus spike protein, protein-based vaccines deliver pre-made fragments of it alongside an immune-stimulating adjuvant. Clinical trials suggest that two doses of the Novavax jab have an efficacy of about 90% against symptomatic Covid – similar to the other approved UK vaccines. It is also undergoing “mix and match” testing with the Oxford/AstraZeneca or Pfizer/BioNTech jabs and preliminary data suggest it generates a robust immune response when given as the second dose. But it is the emerging signs of reduced side-effects that could make Novavax particularly attractive. Trial data appear to show the potential for lower “reactogenicity” compared with existing jabs, meaning side-effects such as injection-site swelling, fatigue, headaches and muscle pain occur less frequently. No direct head-to-head comparisons have yet been done, however, and further studies are needed. “Lower reactogenicity becomes particularly important in groups such as children, where the balance between vaccination and not vaccination becomes a little less clear, simply because, for example, in young children the likelihood of them having severe Covid-19 is so small,” said Prof Paul Heath, the director of the Vaccine Institute at St George’s, University of London, and chief investigator of Novavax’s UK trial. However, a caveat with any new vaccine is that rarer side-effects may not become apparent until a vaccine is used widely, said Azeem Majeed, professor of primary care and public health at Imperial College London. “Post-marketing surveillance would be needed to identify any previously unknown side-effects,” he said. The fact that it uses a more established vaccine technology could also make it more appealing. Heath said: “It may well be that those people who have been hesitant about receiving other Covid vaccines may be more open to receiving a vaccine that uses this protein adjuvant technology; it may be something that’s more familiar to them, and therefore will be happy to receive.” Majeed is less convinced Novavax will make much difference to uptake but can see other benefits to such protein-based vaccines. It can be stored in a standard vaccine fridge at 2C to 8C, making it easier to transport and store than mRNA-based vaccines. He said: “The AstraZeneca vaccine has similar storage requirements to Novavax but the UK government seems to have largely stopped using it.” Access to a broader range of vaccines would also be helpful if regular booster shots are needed in the future. “Because of Novavax’s simpler storage requirements, it would be easier to use in GP surgeries and pharmacies,” said Majeed. This combination of easier transport and storage is even more important in developing countries, where low temperature-controlled supply chains are less well established. “Worldwide, the more vaccines the better, particularly if they are low cost and don’t require freezing for storage and delivery,” said Brendan Wren, professor of microbial pathogenesis at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine. Jobs could come alongside the new jab, too: in March, Boris Johnson announced that 60m doses would be made in north-east England. Fujifilm Diosynth would manufacture them at its plant in Billingham, while GSK would fill and finish them – package them up in vials – at its operation in Barnard Castle. About 300 people at FujiFilm are said to have been working on the vaccine, though delays had prompted concerns that jobs would be hit. Fujifilm last month said manufacturing was unaffected by the delay, and it planned to expand its workforce in the years to come. The local Labour MP, Alex Cunningham, who represents Stockton North, met with a representative of Novavax and said he felt reassured. “I don’t know how long the approvals process will take but hope production will get up and running soon,” he said. The Novavax jab has already been approved for use in the Philippines and Indonesia. On 4 November, the company submitted an emergency use application to the World Health Organization. If approved, it would be the first protein-based vaccine to be recommended by the WHO. Novavax told the Guardian that it was now routinely producing high-quality product at commercial scale at multiple sites across the world. The Serum Institute of India is also manufacturing doses, 20m of which have been approved for export to Indonesia. Silvia Taylor, the senior vice-president of global corporate communications and investor relations at Novavax, said: “Now that the submission [to the UK Medicine and Healthcare products Regulatory Authority] is complete, the timeline is in the hands of the regulatory agencies.”It promised to be a knockout exhibition, with both artists wearing boxing gloves on the poster. But the eagerly anticipated 1985 show of joint works by old master Andy Warhol and bright new star Jean-Michel Basquiat was thumped by critics when it opened in New York. Now, the story behind the exhibition is being told in a new play at the Young Vic theatre in London. The world premiere of Anthony McCarten’s drama The Collaboration will be staged by the Young Vic’s artistic director, Kwame Kwei-Armah, with Paul Bettany (Wandavision) playing Warhol and Jeremy Pope (One Night in Miami) as Basquiat. Kwei-Armah said the production, which will be designed by Anna Fleischle, “invites us behind the iconography and fame, and inside the intimate friendship between two artists”. The story would ask audiences “to lean in closely and challenge our preconceptions” he added. The relationship between the artists, and the question of whether each was exploiting the other’s fame, is also the subject of a new play by Ishmael Reed which opens in the US next month. The Slave Who Loved Caviar is at Theater for the New City in New York. The Collaboration opens at the Young Vic in February and will be followed by a transfer of a Tony award-winning, re-orchestrated production of Rodgers and Hammerstein’s Oklahoma! directed by Daniel Fish that, Kwei-Armah said, “unlocks a fresh perspective on a great American musical”. The Guardian’s Michael Billington called the 2019 Bard SummerScape production “extraordinary” and wrote that “nothing was as expected” in this revival of the well-worn musical. At New York’s Circle in the Square, the set was designed as a community centre and the audience ate chilli that had been cooked on stage during the interval. The revival is billed by the Young Vic as “funny and sexy, provocative and probing, without changing a word of the text”. The Young Vic’s spring season announcement included the news that Deirdre McLaughlin is the 2021 Genesis Future Directors award recipient and will direct a new show in the studio space. The theatre’s Five Plays strand will see a series of five-minute plays, by the playwrights babirye bukilwa, Gaël Le Cornec, Martin Crimp, Erinn Dhesi and Mufaro Makubika, to be directed by James Barnes, David Furlong, David Gilbert, Abigail Sewell and Khadifa Wong. The Young Vic will also be inviting artists to explore the medium of TikTok as part of its Creative Headspace scheme, designed to support early-career theatre-makers, created in response to the devastating impact of the pandemic on arts freelancers.Sally Wainwright’s award-winning ITV crime drama Unforgiven has been redeveloped for Netflix as a feature film; it has been transplanted from Yorkshire to Seattle, and the title has been changed, perhaps to prevent any confusion with the Clint Eastwood movie. Sandra Bullock takes over Suranne Jones’s leading role as Ruth Slater, a woman released from prison on licence after 20 years for killing a cop in a semi-accidental spasm of rage and fear when the officer was sent in to enforce her eviction. Now she is obsessed with tracking down her only family: kid sister Katherine, who was put up for adoption after Ruth was sent down. Bullock is in full zero-makeup blue-collar real mode as the dead-eyed ex-con, and this faintly ridiculous role in this faintly ridiculous movie does not allow for any of the wit and fun that usually make her such a watchable performer. On release, Ruth goes to a grim hostel downtown, checks in with her tough-but-fair parole officer Vincent (Rob Morgan), and gets a scuzzy job gutting fish, where she develops a highly implausible romantic spark with fellow fish-gutter Blake (Jon Bernthal). She then very improbably manages to befriend John Ingram (Vincent D’Onofrio), the corporate lawyer who happens to live with his wife (Viola Davis) and kids in Ruth’s old house (the one she killed the cop in). Ruth persuades him to help her to make contact with the uptight adoptive parents who are deeply protective of the now teenaged Katherine (Aisling Franciosi), who remembers much more of the trauma than they realise. Meanwhile, the dead cop’s grownup sons are seething with vengeful rage. The plot’s twists and turns, which were manageable in a three-part TV drama, look contrived and unlikely in a feature film and Bullock has little to do but look self-consciously solemn and martyred for the entirety of it. • The Unforgivable is released on 26 November in cinemas and on 10 December on Netflix.Balwinder Rana was 16 when he first spoke to a white person. It was 1963, on a sunlit but freezing spring day, and he had just landed at Heathrow airport, after taking his first plane journey, on his first trip outside Punjab, India. He had arrived to join his father and his brother, who had moved to England two years earlier. “How long are you staying here?” the white immigration officer asked. “It’s up to my father,” a sheepish Rana replied. Fifty-eight years later, Rana has devoted most of his time since to fighting racism and fascism. He founded the first Indian Youth Federation in Gravesend, Kent, in 1969, spurring on a decade of Asian youth mobilisation in response to the rising power of the National Front. He also worked full-time for the Anti-Nazi League for two years from 1977 and was a key figure in marches protesting against racist murders, such as the Battle of Lewisham that same year and the Welling protest against the British National Party (BNP) in 1993. In 2013, he formed Sikhs Against the English Defence League (EDL) and is still a convener of his local Stand Up To Racism group. It has been a formidable and uncompromising career. Rana is warm, quiet and softly spoken. Wearing a crumpled white shirt, his grey hair swept back, he listens attentively and calmly sets out his memories of the abuse he has experienced and witnessed. He begins by explaining that it was the tenor of his early encounters with white people that set him on the path to campaigning against racism. A few weeks after his plane landed, he moved in with his older brother in Gravesend, staying in a bedsit that housed five people in two rooms – a “horrible place”. He would head out early each morning to look for a job at local factories and often came across signs posted in the windows saying “No blacks, no Irish” (“black” was often used as an interchangeable term for all people of colour). Once, a visit to a paper mill prompted the foreman to say: “Your people are not allowed to cross this barrier.” “I was stunned,” Rana says. “I came here from a small village and a fairly middle-class family, so I had never experienced any racism or prejudice before. I didn’t know what it was.” He went home to tell his brother, who was indifferent. “He said not to worry and to keep looking. He was already used to it and had the responsibility of his own family to look after, so he had to just take it on his shoulders.” Rana was less willing to be passive. When he did eventually find a job after moving to Slough, the factory foreman took to calling him “black boy”. Rana asked him to stop but the man persisted, which led to a scuffle on the factory floor and, inevitably, he was sacked. “After that, I decided to get an education – I had to get out of these factories,” he says. As one of a handful of Asian students at his college in Gravesend, Rana witnessed the change towards overt and often violent racism in England after Enoch Powell’s infamous 1968 Rivers of Blood speech. “I remember the morning after the speech, one of the white students threw a newspaper at me with the headline ‘Send Them Back’ and he sniggered,” he says. “That was when I realised that if even our fellow students were going to start turning on us, we were in real trouble.” There followed a spate of racist attacks and a rise in prominence of the National Front, which began to organise coordinated rallies in predominantly Black and Asian areas. “The normality and scale of racism was becoming a real shock – it was no longer isolated incidents – so my fellow Asian students and I decided we had to do something,” Rana says. Along with his friends Rajinder Atwal and Mohan Bhatti, Rana contacted young Asians from nearby hockey teams or those who were involved with the local Sikh gurdwara (place of worship) to see if they were interested in starting an anti-racist youth movement. They soon had their first meeting in the community hall where Rana was elected president of the newly named Indian Youth Federation, along with an 11-person committee. “Someone at the meeting mentioned there was a nearby pub that wouldn’t serve our people and I decided there was no better time than now to confront them,” Rana says. “So the 50 of us marched down to that pub and I demanded ‘Fifty pints of lager please’,” he says, laughing. “They started running around like headless chickens to serve us.” There began several years of local activism, which included holding advice sessions to mitigate the prejudices that often meant people of colour found it harder to secure mortgages. The Indian Youth Federation also organised shows of strength whenever National Front supporters made a scene in the town. “We set up a phone network to make sure that everyone was informed and protected,” Rana says. At a time of such heightened racial violence, it took an almost reckless level of fearlessness to confront racists so directly. “We had no choice but to fight back,” Rana says. “It was different for my father or my brother, since they had the responsibility of a family, and also had the mantra: ‘It’s only for five years, then we will go back,’” he says. “Regardless, I wanted us to be treated with dignity and respect at all times – plus I was young and single, so I felt I could make a stand.” With his parents concerned for his safety but proud of his new standing in the community, Rana continued his studies and moved to London in the early 70s to work as a computer programmer. He passed on the leadership of the Indian Youth Federation to a new committee and returned to Gravesend any time there was a march. However, the intensity of racial hate in England did not abate. In 1974, the National Front organised its largest rally to date at Red Lion Square in central London. There followed intensive clashes between the police and anti-racist protesters, and a student from Warwick University, Kevin Gately, was killed. Rana attended a march held in Gately’s memory a week later and it was there that he encountered the leftwing political sphere for the first time. “Up to that point, I had been a local activist, and this was the first time I came across the unions and socialist party,” he says. “I had never seen other white people admit that racism existed before – now they were marching alongside me and willing to fight for this cause.” It was an experience of solidarity that would be desperately needed in the years to come. In 1976, an 18-year-old student, Gurdip Singh Chaggar, was murdered in a racist attack in Southall. In the wake of the killing, the fascist and former chairman of the National Front John Kingsley Read reportedly said: “One down, a million to go.” The ensuing outrage led to the founding of the Southall Asian Youth Movement, an anti-racist group with the same remit as Rana’s Gravesend contingent, as well as other Asian Youth Movements across the country in Birmingham and Sheffield. These groups oversaw an unprecedented mobilisation of young south Asians in organising political opposition to racism throughout the 1970s and 80s. Violence escalated. In 1976, the president of the Sikh temple in Gravesend was pushed through a plate glass window on the high street and was rushed to hospital by Rana and his comrades. The following year, a counterprotest against the National Front in south London turned into a violent police clash, known as The Battle of Lewisham. The collective trauma of these events marked a turning point for Rana. “Lewisham felt different. A lot of the local Black youth and white workers came to join us and we totally stopped the National Front from marching,” he says. “That’s when I thought: this is my calling. I should go into activism full time.” Rana began working for the Anti-Nazi League in 1977, travelling to university towns to organise counterprotests the week before the National Front or Read’s hard-right splinter group, the National party, were due to arrive. It was dangerous work. “The riskiest parts were when we were travelling to protests on the coach and we’d stop at the motorway cafes,” he says. “You might pull into the car park and see there were already coachloads of skinheads there and then you’d be in trouble.” In 1979, Rana was just streets away when the teacher Blair Peach was killed during an Anti-Nazi League march in Southall. A report compiled by the Metropolitan police commander John Cass, only released in 2010, concluded that Peach was “almost certainly” killed by one of six riot police officers who were members of the Special Patrol Group. Fourteen witnesses also saw Peach being struck by an officer, but nobody has ever been charged with his death. “I was horrified. The police had their truncheons out and were hitting everyone in the vicinity – even if they weren’t protesters,” Rana says. It was a tragedy that called for a different response. “They kill, you march, and then they kill again – so when does it stop?” Rana says. “When there was another death in Hackney in the same year, I convinced the protesters to take a different tactic and instead block two of the main arteries passing through London: Whitechapel Road and Commercial Street. It was the first time the police ever listened to us. The youth movements started to get much more organised after that.” It is a controversial tactic that made headlines again recently with the road-blocking actions of the climate group Insulate Britain. It also brought Rana to the attention of the Labour party, and he was approached about standing as one of the first Asian councillors in England. Yet Rana wasn’t convinced by Labour’s anti-racist stance and, instead, stepped back from his full-time role to become a west London organiser for the Anti-Nazi League from 1979. He also resumed work as a computer programmer, as by now he had a family. “Thankfully, I managed to keep the two sides of my life separate, although I miss not having spent enough time with my children when they were young because I was always out campaigning,” he says. His son is now 39, his daughter 36. Rana’s commitment to protesting against racial injustice never waned. He helped to organise the march around Brick Lane, east London, after the killing of Altab Ali in 1978; he is famously pictured being held back by the police during the anti-BNP protests in 1993; he set up strike support groups for the Hillingdon hospital workers in 1996 and the Gate Gourmet workers in 2006; in 2011, he formed Sikhs Against the EDL. “First it was the National Front, then the BNP, then it was the EDL,” he says. “They tried to be clever by saying they were only against the Muslims and it made my blood boil to see Sikhs start to join their ranks.” Rana responded by setting up a petition to have the leader of the Sikh EDL faction, Guramit Singh, excommunicated unless he resigned, which he did a week later. “In some ways we’ve gone backwards in the Asian community because, in the 70s, we were all perceived as Black; Black was a political colour,” Rana says. “We were united against the common cause of racism, but now we are fragmented and I worry that Asians are only protesting for things that directly affect them, when solidarity is key.” As such, Rana praises the efforts of the 2020 Black Lives Matter protests, which activated youth movements across the globe largely through social media, as well as the direct action of Extinction Rebellion. “[The home secretary] Priti Patel is trying her hardest to make sure we cannot protest, but the only solution is to stand up and protest,” he says. “We are facing a three-part crisis of the climate, Covid and an economic recession, which means that we’ll continue to face inequality. These are the perfect conditions for the resurgence of racism and fascism, so I think things are going to get worse before they get better. We have no choice but to come together because either we fight back or we perish, and there is no substitute for taking to the streets.” As such, Rana is off to see some old friends and activists after our meeting, to discuss next steps. “I’ll never stop,” he says. “We cannot simply rely on politicians, we have to believe in people and in our power to help ourselves – together.”Police investigating the alleged murder of 18-year-old Bobbi-Anne McLeod in Devon are examining whether she was abducted by a stranger after waiting at a bus stop. Detectives are also pursuing a sexual motive as a significant line of inquiry. McLeod went missing after leaving her home in Plymouth at about 6pm on Saturday. After a three-day search, a body believed to be hers was discovered on Tuesday near Bovisand, about six miles from Plymouth. Two men, aged 24 and 26, who were arrested on suspicion of murder, continue to be held by police in Plymouth and fingertip searches of multiple sites were taking place across the city. On Wednesday, McLeod’s brother led tributes, describing her as “beautiful and talented”. Nikki Leaper, an assistant chief constable with Devon and Cornwall police, said: “The two men who were arrested on suspicion of murder remain in police custody at this time. We do not anticipate this to change throughout today as inquiries continue at a pace.” A source with knowledge of the investigation said it was most likely to have been a stranger abduction, and detectives were trying to establish how many people were involved. McLeod, a college student described by police as 1.50 metres (4ft 11ins) tall and of slight build, had been due to catch a bus into Plymouth city centre to meet her boyfriend on Saturday evening. She left her home in Leigham at about 6pm but did not arrive in the city centre. Before the body was found a close family friend, Amanda Isaacs, 34, said: “Her headphones and baccy were found at the bus stop and there’s just no trace. It has been sealed off and forensics are there.” Isaacs described McLeod as very family-oriented, adding: “She is 18, but she is very tiny and very slim that she probably looks about 15 in reality.” Detectives are investigating whether McLeod, who had waited at a bus stop, went willingly with occupants of a passing car, or was abducted. A local MP said on Wednesday the death was another disturbing example of the “cultural problem of violence against women”. There was a sense of anger and fear in Plymouth, with some women too frightened to go out alone and others investing in rape alarms. Police refused to say if they were looking for anyone else in relation to the investigation, which added to the concern. McLeod’s brother Lee, 20, posted a picture on Facebook of himself and his sister together as children and wrote: “Until we meet again sis. I love you. You didn’t deserve this. Such a beautiful and talented girl and to have you as my little sister. The adventure and journey we had been on will always be treasured. Now go rest easy.” Isaacs, a friend and neighbour, also paid tribute after setting up a GoFundMe page that quickly raised thousands of pounds for McLeod’s family. The body was located near Bovisand in South Hams, on the south coast of Devon, about seven miles from McLeod’s home, after information was passed to the police. Devon and Cornwall police said on Tuesday night that formal identification had yet to be carried out but McLeod’s family had been informed of the development and were being supported by officers. Police had been conducting searches and inquiries across Plymouth, supported by a helicopter. A Facebook page set up to help find McLeod attracted more than 13,000 members. Friends and local residents joined searches of woods near her home on Monday and Tuesday. Smeaton’s Tower, a lighthouse on the waterfront, will be lit purple on Wednesday evening, drawing attention to the abuse of women. The Labour MP for Plymouth, Sutton and Devonport, Luke Pollard, said Britain had a cultural problem with violence against women. He said: “I suspect there will be people in our city who will want to look again at what is happening in the violence against women and girls area. We know that there is too much violence against women and girls. It is completely unacceptable. We have a cultural problem right across Britain. We need to look at how we keep everybody safe in Plymouth.” Pollard referred to the Keyham shootings in Plymouth in August in which five people were killed by Jake Davison, 22, before he turned the gun on himself. The MP said: “It’s now three months since the Keyham shootings took place and our city was beginning to heal and come to terms with the awful events that took place in August.” A cordon has been set up blocking access to the road leading to the Bovisand cafe and car park, and also the holiday park, where a number of people are staying in caravans. Searches were also taking place in woods close to McLeod’s home. Leaper said searches were expected to continue over the coming days, adding: “The public can expect to see can increased visible police presence during that time.” Floral tributes appeared close to the bus stop where she was last seen alive and a vigil is planned there for Thursday evening. One tribute read: “Sadly you have gained your wings and been taken too soon, you will forever be in our hearts.”World Rugby has approved a landmark change to its eligibility laws which will allow players to switch Test nations and significantly bolster developing countries in time for the 2023 World Cup. In a game-changing move for the sport, players who meet the criteria will be able to change nations from January with the Pacific Islands among the teams poised to most reap the rewards. The change means Charles Piutau, who has 17 All Blacks caps, will be free to represent Tonga, as will Israel Folau, George Moala and Vaea Fifita. England’s 2023 World Cup pool stage opponents Samoa could be bolstered by the former New Zealand fly-half Lima Sopoaga, the Bristol captain Steven Luatua, Julian Savea and Denny Solomona, who has won five caps under Eddie Jones. The move also frees Billy and Mako Vunipola to play for Tonga in 2024 should they wish, and likewise Manu Tuilagi for Samoa. Players are eligible to switch nations if they have been stood down for three years – in other words, not been selected for 36 months – and if they, or a parent or grandparent, were born in the country they wish to represent. A switch can only be made once and the change comes into effect from the start of next year. In England’s case, Alex Lozowski would be eligible to now switch to Italy but Jake Polledri would, in theory, be available to move the other way in 2023. The motion was voted on by World Rugby’s council and required a 75% majority. It is understood that the threshold was only just met after sustained lobbying from the World Rugby chairman, Bill Beaumont, who had pledged to make changes as part of his manifesto for re-election. It is also understood that the New Zealander Joe Schmidt, formerly the Ireland head coach and now the director of rugby at the world governing body, was also instrumental in gathering support. The Rugby Football Union voted in favour of the change. “Approval of this landmark regulatory change is the culmination of detailed and widespread modelling and consultation across the game,” Beaumont said. “We have listened to our membership and players and sought to update the regulation recognising the modern professional rugby environment without compromising the integrity of the international game.” While the less heralded nations stand to benefit – the Tongan rugby league team has been transformed since a similar change was introduced in that code – players can also move from developing to established nations, prompting some observers to urge caution over the move. The counterargument is that, say, a player of Pacific Island heritage may be more likely to pursue a career with an established nation in their prime, safe in the knowledge that they can see out the latter stages with Tonga, Fiji or Samoa. The general reaction to the move, however, has been largely positive with World Rugby considering Spain, Portugal and Namibia as examples of the types of nations who stand to benefit most. The change also means players who have been “captured” by appearing for a nation’s second team – either an ‘A’ side or an under-20s team – are free to represent a different country provided they meet the criteria. It was a ruling that denied Carl Fearns the chance to switch allegiances to France while playing there and which ultimately led to Russia qualifying for the 2019 World Cup following sanctions for Spain, Romania and Belgium over ineligible players. Meanwhile, Australia is set to be awarded the 2027 World Cup after being announced as World Rugby’s preferred candidate and the USA is the frontrunner for the 2031 tournament after entering into exclusive discussions with the governing body. Australia was widely expected to host the tournament in six years’ time but the USA’s emergence as the favourite for the subsequent competition is a significant development. The RFU had expressed a firm interest in bidding but had prioritised the 2025 women’s tournament. On Wednesday England was announced as the preferred candidate for that competition. The RFU chief executive, Bill Sweeney, said: “We are delighted to have been awarded preferred candidate status for Rugby World Cup 2025. Hosting it will be incredible, our ambition is to stage the best attended women’s RWC ever, with nationwide qualifiers and a sellout final at Twickenham Stadium. We are looking forward to working with World Rugby and government to make this happen.”Charlotte Tobierre is a friend of mine and a fellow Windrush activist. Her father, Thomas, is a Windrush victim: he lost his job, his pension and his dignity when the Home Office wrongly stripped him of his status, 60 years after he arrived and laid down roots, legally, in the UK. Earlier this year, Thomas accepted an insultingly low offer from the Windrush compensation scheme. He was exhausted, having fought the Home Office and undergone two stages of its independent review process for victims who are unhappy with their awards. Thomas’s wife, Caroline, was also due to receive compensation from the scheme, having disrupted her life to support him. She was made a lowball offer, which she refused. Caroline was also fighting cancer, and passed away earlier this month. To defray the costs of Caroline’s funeral, the grief-stricken family were promised an “urgent and exceptional” payment – a type of emergency relief intended to support victims who have a “compelling” reason why they cannot wait for the Home Office’s parsimonious, time-wasting exercise to be completed. Earlier this week, I received a message from Charlotte. Having accepted that Caroline’s estate was due this “urgent and exceptional” payment, the Home Office was now demanding reams of bank statements to prove the family’s need for this money, which was less than the paltry sum it had already offered Caroline when she was alive. Even worse, the Home Office demanded evidence of how Thomas had spent the entirely separate pittance it awarded him, strongly implying that it had a duty to make sure he deserved this, which he wouldn’t if he had blown it all on fripperies. In fact it barely covered the debts he racked up while unemployed. These are the realities of the Windrush compensation scheme, which was launched in April 2019 and has barely made a dent in the task of providing redress to an estimated 15,000 people. That is the finding of the home affairs select committee, which today said it believed the scheme should be stripped from the Home Office and run independently. The Home Office is once again failing a cohort of people who have been persecuted, marginalised, rendered destitute and, in some cases, dislocated – by the Home Office. The Tobierres’ case is sadly typical. Uptake of the scheme remains low – about a fifth of the estimated total expected. The experiences of those who have applied show why that is the case. Claimants’ accounts of their own lives are not believed; documentary proof is demanded of things which cannot be proven, such as the absence of employment offers; case officers fall off the grid for months at a time, leaving claimants hanging; documents – entire applications in some cases – are repeatedly “lost”. At the same time, the home secretary, Priti Patel, issues bizarre self-congratulatory statements lauding the value of amounts offered (crucially, not the same as amounts accepted or paid) and repeating two empty, shop-worn phrases: that the Home Office is “righting the wrongs” based on the “lessons learned” from the Windrush scandal. That is, to put it mildly, arrant nonsense. But what did we expect? This is the same body that tells LGBTQ+ asylum seekers they aren’t at risk because there is a lively “gay scene” in their Muslim home country, tried to deport an autistic teenager to a country he knew nothing of over the (disputed) theft of a mobile phone, and pursues a policy that, up until very recently, it named “hostile”. It should never have been allowed near a compensation scheme designed to make restitution for its own wrongdoing. As many Windrushers have observed, it is the equivalent of having to beg a robber to please return what they stole. The select committee’s findings are welcome, but do not go far enough. In paragraph 38 of its report, it states that it “believes” the scheme should be transferred to an independent organisation, then immediately equivocates by adding that its recommendations should be adopted, “whether by the independent organisation or the Home Office”. That will not compel the Home Office. And it will not trouble the home secretary, an individual who thinks “do-gooder” is an aspersion. Why start now, when almost identical findings by the National Audit Office, the Equality and Human Rights Commission, and the government’s own Inspector of Constabulary, Wendy Williams, have been largely ignored? The scheme must be taken away from the Home Office. Whatever the Sewell report might say, at the heart of this debacle lies a deep-rooted queasiness around looking at the underlying problem and calling it what it is: institutional racism. Black and brown citizens were targeted by the Home Office for harassment and removal. There is no other explanation as to why this problem almost exclusively affected them, as opposed to migrants (and their descendants) belonging to any other race. In that sense, what they are due from the Windrush compensation scheme should perhaps be framed as reparation rather than compensation. They were systematically wronged. It is not for the Home Office or any other body to assess the merits of the harm they suffered and “award” them compensation. They are not “customers”, as the Home Office nauseatingly refers to them in its official statistics. They are victims, and they are owed redress. This is not an administrative problem at its heart, though the scheme is beset with those as well due to the archaic structure and procedures of the Home Office. It is political. The scheme is ex-gratia; it is not underpinned by any statute. That is why report after damning report can “recommend”, and even criticise, but not force change. But that is what we must have. This report finds that at least 23 victims have died while waiting for compensation. But the size of the affected cohort is very likely under-reported, so the true number is likely much higher. We cannot wait another year for the Home Office to make a hundred tiny ineffectual tweaks to the scheme, when it is sweeping, root-and-branch change that is needed. This ends now. Ramya Jaidev is a co-founder of Windrush Lives, an advocacy group and victim support network. In collaboration with Good Law Project, it is running a survey to gather data on victims’ experiences of the Windrush compensation schemeThe German, French and Spanish stock markets are down again today, amid a fourth wave of coronavirus infections, while the UK’s FTSE 100 index has edged 0.2% higher to 7,283 and Italy’s FTSE MiB is 0.3% ahead at 27,016. On Wall Street, the Nasdaq is trading 1.15% lower while the S&amp;P 500 has lost 0.6% and the Dow Jones has slipped 0.26%. The US economy grew at an annualised rate of 2.1% in the third quarter, up from the 2% estimated previously, but this represents a sharp slowdown from the previous quarter’s 6.7% growth, with consumers spending less. Durable goods were much weaker than expected. On a brighter note, initial jobless claims fell to 199,000 in the week to 20 November, the lowest since 1969. Tonight, we’ll get the Fed minutes. Here are our main stories today: Thank you for reading. We’ll be back tomorrow. Take care - JK The US Federal Reserve’s preferred inflation measure, the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) index, rose to an annual rate of 4.1% in October from 3.6% in September, as expected. On Wall Street, shares have slipped as expected after poor results from US companies, a mixed bag of US data and growing Covid worries in Europe. The Nasdaq is down more than 1%, while the Dow Jones opened 0.6% lower and the S&amp;P 500 lost 0.5%. Over here, the FTSE 100 index has given up earlier gains and is trading flat while Europe’s main indices are a sea of red. Fiona Cincotta, senior financial markets analyst at City Index, has looked ahead to the Wall Street open, and the barrage of US data. US stocks are set to open slower on the back of disappointing earnings from a number of big retailer names, after a mixed bag of US data and amid growing Covid concerns in Europe. On the one hand, Q3 GDP was revised up in the second estimate to 2.1%, from 2% thanks to stronger than initially estimated consumer spending. However, this was still short of forecasts of an increase to 2.2%. This is still down sharply from 6.7% in Q2 amid a resurgence of Covid, supply chain disruptions and labour shortages. Alongside a slightly disappointing GDP print were weaker than forecast durable goods sales. Durable goods sales unexpectedly contracted in October to -0.5% month-on-month, down from -0.4% in September and well short of the 0.2% increase forecast. On the other side of the coin, US jobless claims figures were impressive falling to a level not seen since 1969. The significant drop in jobless claims is offsetting weak data elsewhere because we know that the Fed is watching the labour market very closely. The Fed wants to see improvements in the labour market recovery in order to raise rates and today’s data is certainly a step in that direction. However it is worth noting that this huge drop could in fact be due to seasonal swings. Looking ahead there is still plenty more data for investors to sink their teeth into with Michigan confidence and Core PCE data due [at 3pm]. Core PCE is expected to show inflation at 4.1% with a high reading expected to prompt bets of a sooner move by the Fed. The minutes from the latest Fed meeting are also due and whilst these could shed some light on the transitory inflation theme, it’s important to remember that the meeting happened prior to the 6.2% consumer price index print. And the latest on the supply shortages. Keeping shelves stocked is “harder work than ever before”, the UK boss of Lidl has said as shortages of drivers, warehouse workers and food processing staff put pressure on grocery supply chains, reports our retail correspondent Sarah Butler. Christian Härtnagel, chief executive of the German discount chain’s British arm, said problems with availability of products in stores had eased in the past 10 to 12 weeks and “the worst times are behind us” but “daily hard work” was still required to ensure there were no gaps on shelves. He said the company was constantly having to seek new ways to work around problems, by simplifying ranges and other measures, as a combination of the pandemic, Brexit and trade disruption continued to affect businesses. And here is our story on David Cameron lobbying a Lloyds Banking Group director over the lender Greensill Capital, which has since collapsed. David Cameron lobbied a director of Lloyds Banking Group, whom the former prime minister had given a peerage, to reverse the bank’s decision to withdraw support from Greensill Capital, which it later did. Cameron appealed to James Lupton, a Conservative peer who had served as party treasurer and donated more than £3m to the Tories, to urge the bank not to withdraw funding from Greensill’s supply chain financing of NHS pharmacies. After his lobbying of Lord Lupton in January, the bank reconsidered its decision and agreed to continue providing financial support to Greensill, according to the Financial Times, which first reported the story. Here’s the latest on the fate of Bulb, from our energy correspondent Jillian Ambrose. Bulb Energy could be in the hands of an administrator within hours after the regulator applied to the courts for an advisory firm to run it after its collapse on Monday. Britain’s seventh-largest supplier is expected to become the first energy company to be placed into a “special administration” process so it can continue to provide gas and electricity to its 1.7 million customers through the winter after going bust on Monday. The provision for a special energy supplier administrator was first set in legislation in 2011 but has never been used, in part because previous supplier collapses have been small enough in scale to find a new buyer relatively quickly. Energy industry sources believe it could take “somewhere between six weeks and six months” for the fallout of the Bulb collapse to be resolved by the administrator and a team of banks, which are due to be appointed in the coming weeks. The energy regulator, Ofgem, has proposed that the global advisory firm Teneo take over the running of Bulb while the fate of gas and electricity customers is decided. A court hearing is expected to take place later on Wednesday before an appointment is confirmed. Ofgem urged Bulb customers not to worry and said they would “see no disruption to their supply, their price plan will remain the same and any outstanding credit balances, including money owed to customers who have recently switched, will be honoured”. Returning to the US GDP figures, they show that the economy slowed to a modest annual rate of 2.1% in the October-December quarter, slightly better than its first estimate, but down sharply from 6.7% in the second quarter. Economists are predicting a solid rebound in the current quarter as long as rising inflation and a recent uptick in Covid cases do not derail activity, AP reports. The small increase from the initial GDP estimate a month ago reflected a slightly better performance for consumer spending, which grew at a still lacklustre 1.7% rate in the third quarter, compared to a 12% surge in the April-June quarter. The contribution to GDP from business inventory restocking was also revised up. The economy’s weak summer performance reflected a big slowdown in consumer spending as a spike in Covid-19 cases from the delta variant caused consumers to grow more cautious and snarled supply chains made items such as new cars hard to get and also contributed to a burst of inflation to levels not seen in three decades. While Covid cases in recent weeks have started to rise again in many parts of the country, economists do not think the latest increase will be enough to dampen consumer spending, which accounts for 70% of economic activity. The expectation is that the economy in the current October-December quarter could grow at the strongest pace this year, possibly topping 8%. For the whole year, the expectation is that the economy will grow by around 5.5%, which would be the best showing since 1984 and a big improvement from last year, when the economy shrank by 3.4% as the country struggled with lockdowns. So far, the improving economy this year has not boosted the approval ratings of President Joe Biden because the US, with one of the most rapidly recovering economies, is also caught up in a global supply chain squeeze that is driving prices higher for everything from new cars and gasoline to the cost of food and airline tickets. Biden this week nominated Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell for a second four-year term to head the central bank. Powell and other Fed officials had earlier in the year insisted that the spoke in pries was being caused by temporary factors, such as those snarled supply chains. However, recently the central bank has stressed that if the price increase persist it will be ready to start raising interest rates sooner than expected to slow growth as a way of dampening inflation pressures. More good news for the US economy: Initial jobless claims fell by 71,000 to 199,000 in the week to 20 November, the US Labor Department said. This was much better than the 260,000 expected by economists. This is the lowest level since November, 1969 when it was 197,000. The previous week’s level was revised up slightly, by 2,000 to 270,000. The US economy grew at an annualised rate of 2.1% in the third quarter, a tad higher than the 2% pace estimated a month ago, according to the US Commerce Department’s Bureau of Economic Analysis. This comes after 6.7% growth in the previous quarter, due to a slowdown in consumer spending. BEA explains: A resurgence of Covid-19 cases resulted in new restrictions and delays in the reopening of establishments in some parts of the country. In the third quarter, government assistance payments in the form of forgivable loans to businesses, grants to state and local governments, and social benefits to households all decreased. Here is our full story on the CBI industrial trends survey. Britain’s factories are struggling to meet the record demand for their goods as severe supply constraints put a brake on production lines, the latest snapshot of industry has shown, writes our economics editor Larry Elliott. The CBI said manufacturers were running down their stocks of finished goods to meet the strongest order books since records began in 1977. Here is the latest on Bulb, one of the UK’s biggest energy suppliers with 1.7m household customers, which went bust on Monday. Britain’s energy regulator Ofgem has submitted a court application to appoint a special administrator for Bulb, and told Bulb customers not to worry. The regulator said: Ofgem has applied to the court to appoint a special administrator to run Bulb Energy Limited. Customers of Bulb do not need to worry. If a special administrator is appointed, they will see no disruption to their supply, their price plan will remain the same and any outstanding credit balances, including money owed to customers who have recently switched, will be honoured. The Department for Business, Energy &amp; Industrial Strategy said: Energy regulator Ofgem, with the government’s consent, has made an application to the court. We do not comment on ongoing court proceedings. The Special Administration Regime is long-standing, well-established mechanism to protect energy consumers and ensure continued energy supply when a supplier fails. US stock futures are also down ahead of the tsunami of US economic data at 1.30pm GMT, suggesting declines of 0.2% to 0.3% when Wall Street opens later. On the stock markets, the main European indices have turned negative again, while the FTSE 100 in London is still in positive territory, just about. UK’s FTSE 100 up 0.1% at 7,274 Germany’s Dax down 0.5% at 15,856 France’s CAC 40 down 0.1% at 7,035 Spain’s Ibex flat at 8,807 Italy’s FTSE MiB flat at 26,932 Samuel Tombs, chief UK economist at Pantheon Macroeconomics, says about the CBI survey: Demand for goods still is increasing rapidly, leaving manufacturers struggling to keep up. Admittedly, the total orders balance overstates just how much demand increased in November, because it is not seasonally adjusted and nearly always falls in October, before bouncing back in November. Nonetheless, our seasonally adjusted version of the total orders balance rose 11 points in November to reach its highest level since records begin in 1977. Unfortunately, the relationship between the total orders balance and the official measure of manufacturing output is quite weak, because manufacturers are asked to compare orders to “normal levels”, and right now manufacturers cannot fulfil all orders. Even so, manufacturing output probably still has scope to rise further in Q4, as formerly-furloughed staff are recalled and as manufacturers invest to enhance productivity. Even if orders weaken next year, perhaps as restocking demand fizzles out, production will be supported by the large work backlogs that have accumulated this year. Meanwhile, resilient demand is enabling nearly all producers to hike their selling prices. Indeed, the output price expectations balance rose to +67—its highest level since May 1977—from +59 in October, consistent with core producer output price inflation rising to nearly 8.0% in January, from 6.5% in October. Core goods CPI inflation, therefore, still looks set to rise further over the next six months, helping to push the headline rate above 5% in the spring. Former bank of England rate-setter Andrew Sentance, a well-known hawk, and Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, tweet: Factory orders jumped this month, with growth hitting its highest level since at least 1977, according to the CBI. However, price expectations among manufacturers also climbed to a 44-year high, the business group’s monthly survey showed. The findings are likely to add to concerns at the Bank of England over mounting inflationary pressures ahead of its next meeting on 16 December. The CBI’s survey showed manufacturers’ monthly orders book balance jumped to 26% in November from 9% in October, marking the highest reading since the series started in April 1977. The balance deducts firms saying orders fell from those reporting order growth. Anna Leach, the CBI’s deputy chief economist, said: It’s good to see strong order books and output growth in the manufacturing sector holding up as we head into winter. But intense supply side challenges continue to put pressure on firms’ capacity to meet demand. The CBI’s measure of price expectations for the next three months climbed to 67% from 59% in October, the highest since May 1977. Stock levels of finished goods dwindled to the lowest on record, reflecting global supply chain bottlenecks and strong demand, as the economy rebounds from the pandemic slump. “Follow the science”: I was at the opening of AstraZeneca’s shiny new £1bn research &amp; development centre in Cambridge yesterday, which was unveiled by Prince Charles. The Discovery Centre (or DISC) houses 16 labs and 2,200 scientists, making it the biggest science lab in Britain along with the Francis Crick Institute in London. I’ve tracked AstraZeneca’s progress since 2014 when it fended off a hostile £69bn takeover approach from Pfizer. Mulberry shares jumped as much as 24%, and are still more than 22% higher, after the British handbag maker reported a return to pre-pandemic sales levels. It said its UK factories had allowed it to avoid the supply chain disruptions that have dogged some fashion rivals. Here is our full story: Britain is facing a Christmas booze shortage unless the government does more to ease the ongoing shortage of HGV drivers, a group of 48 wine and spirits companies have told the transport secretary, my colleague Rob Davies reports. In a letter to Grant Shapps, businesses including Pernod Ricard, Moët Hennessy and the Wine Society said rising costs and supply chain “chaos” had held up wine and spirit deliveries, raising the risk that supermarkets will run dry and festive deliveries arrive late. Members of the Wine and Spirit Trade Association (WSTA), which coordinated the letter, have reported it is taking up to five times longer to import products than a year ago, with two-day orders taking more than two weeks to process. Freight costs have increased by about 7%, the WSTA said, as delivery firms have had to raise HGV drivers’ wages to retain them, causing particular difficulty for small businesses that struggle to compete on salaries with larger rivals. It’s a different story in France, where business confidence has improved, with the business climate index from Insee rising to 114, well above the long-term average. Charlotte de Montpellier, economist for France and Switzerland at ING, sums up the findings: The improvement of the business climate shows that the French economy remains relatively well positioned in November, even if this is mainly due to the service sector, which is a major risk given the evolution of the pandemic. Inflationary pressures are stronger than ever. The increase is notable in both the industrial and service sectors. In the industrial sector, the increase is mainly due to growing order books, and mainly orders from abroad. In the services sector, the business climate is at its highest level since December 2000. The effects of the recovery are clearly being felt, with the balance of opinion of business leaders on activity over the last three months rising sharply to its highest level since 1990. Carsten Brzeski, global head of macro at ING, says the risks of stagnation or even recession for Germany at the turn of the year have clearly increased. Over the last few days, Germany has already introduced some stricter restrictions but is still far away from the Austrian situation. This could change soon. Not only has Austria been a very good leading indicator for what will happen in Germany in terms of infections and government measures, this morning’s news that the SPD, Greens and FDP have come to a coalition agreement could also bring change. Germany’s reaction to the fourth wave has suffered from a power vacuum, with the caretaking government not wanting to decide on stricter measures and the incoming government not ready yet, and possibly not really wanting to start a new era with tighter restrictions. The expected press conference of the leaders of the probable new government this afternoon could shed some light on potential next restrictions and measures. Returning to the economic outlook, the German economy was already suffering from ongoing supply chain frictions, higher inflation in general, and higher energy and commodity prices in particular. Industrial production actually shrank both in the second and third quarters, despite filled order books and low inventories. Sentiment in the German economy has worsened, according to a closely-watched survey from the Ifo research institute in Munich. The ifo business climate index fell from 97.7 points in October to 96.5 points in November, the lowest level since February, and marking the fifth month of declines. Companies were less satisfied with their current business situation, and became more pessimistic about their prospects, amid supply bottlenecks and the fourth wave of the coronavirus. Clemens Fuest, president of the Ifo institute, says: In German manufacturing, the index fell as companies assessed their current business as considerably worse. Their expectations, by contrast, brightened somewhat, especially due to developments in the automotive industry. Supply bottlenecks in intermediate products and raw materials still have a grip on the manufacturing sector and a majority of companies plan to raise prices. Sentiment in the service sector deteriorated noticeably. Skepticism grew substantially, especially as regards expectations. The last time the expectations indicator saw such a heavy decline was in November 2020. However, service providers were less satisfied with their current situation as well. The fourth coronavirus wave caused expectations to plunge especially in the tourism and hospitality industries. The index slid in trade because of greater pessimism in companies’ expectations, although they rated their current situation as somewhat improved. The mood in retail continues to suffer due to supply problems and prices are more likely to increase over the coming months. The business climate in Germany’s construction industry worsened slightly. Following the continuous upswing of recent months, expectations have turned more pessimistic. Companies judged their current situation to be somewhat better. Johnson Matthey shares have largely recovered from their earlier 8.3% fall and are now down 1.6% as investors are reassessing the company’s prospects. Nicholas Hyett, equity Analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, has sent us his thoughts. The announcement earlier this month that Johnson Matthey would be exiting battery Materials raised questions about the group’s long-term future. That’s resulted in a £314m impairment in these results. But elsewhere there’s evidence that, in the here and now, the group’s core businesses are going from strength to strength. With automotive factories back up and running the group’s seen sales of its automotive catalysts boom – unsurprising in a world that’s increasingly focussed on reducing emissions wherever possible. The group’s started pitching for work on the new, and even tighter Euro 7 emissions standards, which should mean more complex catalysts attracting a higher share of overall automotive construction spend. There’s also been significant progress in the natural resources business, driven by platinum recycling, as increased demand boosted prices and volumes. Given a large portion of recycled platinum comes from old auto-catalysts the group’s long standing and financially powerful “circular economy” continues to tick along nicely. However, he added that there are only hints about what the group’s long-term solution to the end of the combustion engine age is. Electric cars don’t need catalysts and clean air accounts for over half of operating profits, throw recycling of old auto-catalyst into the mix and the total exposure to automotive market is huge. There are some signs of progress in the hydrogen and industrial catalyst markets, but planned sales of the advanced glass and health businesses make the group more dependent on automotive rather than less. With capital coming back to shareholders through buybacks rather than being reinvested in new “growth areas” we worry about whether management has a solution to the electric car threat. It may be some years away but it can’t be ignored. Johnson Matthey, one of the UK’s biggest chemicals companies, has warned that its decision to pull out of the electric battery materials market will cost it £314m. This drove it to a loss before tax of £9m in the six months to 30 September, compared with a profit of £26m a year earlier. Sales rose 23% to £8.6bn as the company benefited from higher precious metals prices and underlying operating profits more than doubled to £293m, ahead of pre-pandemic levels. Robert MacLeod, the chief executive, is stepping down after eight years in the role, and will be succeeded on 1 March by Liam Condon, an Irishman who heads up crop science at the German chemicals firm Bayer. Johnson Matthey warned that the supply chain crisis, especially the shortage of semi-conductors, was hitting production for its car and truck customers, while precious metal prices had also declined. This means full-year profits will be lower than expected. The news sent its shares down more than 8% in early trading. The firm said: Demand remains strong in many of our end markets. However, supply chain volatility especially the shortage of semi-conductors is affecting production for a number of our auto and truck customers. Global auto production is now forecast to decline 5% for our fiscal year which is a 14% reduction since our trading update in July. Consequently, precious metal prices have also declined, largely because of the lower demand from the automotive industry. We are also experiencing acute temporary labour shortages in the US that are adversely impacting our Health business. The firm makes most of its money from producing catalytic converters to clean exhaust emissions from petrol and diesel cars. Britain’s hopes to grab a slice of the fast-growing market for electric vehicle batteries was deal a blow by Johnson Matthey’s decision to exit a fortnight ago. The company explained that it was too far behind rivals who are already making batteries at gigantic scale. Samsung has said it will build a $17bn (£12.7bn) semiconductor factory in Texas, amid a global shortage of chips used in cars, phones and other electronic devices. The plant just outside of Austin would be the South Korean company’s biggest US investment and is expected to be operational in the second half of 2024. Samsung had also considered sites in Arizona and New York for the factory, which will be much bigger than its only other US chip plant, also in Austin. Samsung said the new facility would boost production of high-tech chips used for 5G mobile communications, advanced computing and artificial intelligence, and also improve supply chain resilience. The Financial Times has a great scoop: it’s reporting that David Cameron lobbied Lloyds Banking Group to reverse a decision to cut ties with the ailing lender Greensill Capital, appealing to a board member whom he had ennobled while prime minister. Cameron lobbied Lloyds in January, the FT said, citing people familiar with the matter, when he contacted Lord James Lupton, a director of the bank who had previously been a Conservative party treasurer, and succeeded in persuading the bank to carry on doing business with Greensill. Lupton, Tory treasurer from 2013 to 2016, has donated more than £3m to the Conservative party and was appointed to the House of Lords in 2015, sparking accusations of cronyism against then-prime minister Cameron from rival politicians. The scandal surrounding Greensill, which has since collapsed, has spread throughout Westminster with allegations the lender was given preferential treatment. On the stock markets, the FTSE 100 index has pushed 37 points higher to 7,304, a 0.52% gain. Germany’s Dax is up 13 points at 15,950, pretty much flat, while France’s CAC has gained 0.5% to 7,079 and Italy’s FTSE MiB is 0.66% ahead at 27,116. The British handbag maker Mulberry said sales had returned to pre-Covid levels, up 34% to £65.7m in the six months to 25 September. It made a half-year profit before tax of £10.2m versus a loss of £2.4m a year earlier, partly boosted by a one-off profit on the disposal of a Paris lease. The company cut its workforce last year when sales suffered badly during Covid lockdowns. Mulberry has just launched “The Lowest Carbon collection”, crafted from the world’s lowest carbon leather and using a local supply chain. It has also launched a resale programme “Preloved Bags” to boost its sustainability credentials. New bags include the Sadie, a satchel with a Typography lock, and the Billie bag, with a “youthful crossbody slouchy silhouette”. Mulberry has been trying to connect with younger customers. Amid a global supply chain crisis, Mulberry is confident, as its two Somerset factories supply half of its handbags. Thierry Andretta, the chief executive, says: The bold decisions we have taken with regards to focussing on our UK production capabilities, means that we are well placed for the festive trading period and beyond. The German discount supermarket chain Lidl is ramping up its expansion in the UK as it reported a 12% rise in revenues to £7.7bn in the year to 28 February, despite the pandemic. It made a profit before tax of £9.8m compared with a loss of £25.2m in the previous year. Lidl has raised its store target to 1,100 by the end of 2025, creating up to 4,000 new jobs. It opened 55 stores over the year, taking the total to 880, and says it is on track to reach 1,000 stores by the end of 2023, its previous target. The company said it had repaid more than £100m in business rates relief it received during the pandemic, mirroring moves by other supermarkets that performed well during the crisis, unlike other businesses. Christian Härtnagel, the chief executive of Lidl GB, said: We continue to see tremendous opportunity in the market and that is why today we are announcing our new target of 1,100 stores by the end of 2025. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. The Turkish lira has weakened again this morning towards a record low that it hit against the dollar yesterday, after the Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan signalled that he would not be deterred by rising inflation from cutting interest rates further. The lira is down 2% against the dollar at 12.95 after closing at 12.7 on Tuesday, when it fell as low as 13.45. It has lost more than 40% of its value this year. The Turkish president, who had declared himself an “enemy” of high borrowing costs, defended the four percentage point cut in interest rates this year to 15%. He said it would spur investment, increase job prospects and boost economic growth. However, amid concerns that his unorthodox management of the economy was likely to deter investment and increase inflation above the 20% level recorded in October, investors took flight. Some banks across the country stopped currency transactions yesterday, fearing that the steep fall in the lira’s value could spark a run on reserves, according to local newspaper reports. There was also speculation that the government had laid plans to impose strict capital controls to prevent further withdrawals should the economic situation worsen. With the US closed on Thursday for the Thanksgiving holiday, we will get a tsunami of economic announcements today, including the second estimate for third-quarter GDP and culminating in the release of the latest Federal Reserve minutes. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, says: While the minutes aren’t likely to deliver too much in the way of surprises they could act as a decent insight into the deliberations of the FOMC into the decision-making process when it came to deciding the amount of the initial taper. While the initial reduction of asset purchases was widely expected, an initial monthly reduction of $10bn in Treasuries, and $5bn in mortgage-backed securities, it will be interesting to find out how many FOMC members wanted to go faster. This will be especially pertinent given how the committee was evenly split on raising rates next year, when it last met. We already know that there a number of Fed officials who are uneasy at the pace of price rises, and there does appear to be significant disagreement about how persistent some of these price pressures are. Today’s minutes could show where these divisions are, with today’s economic numbers giving added fuel to the argument for a faster taper when the Fed meets next month. Before that we get to see the latest revision of US Q3 GDP which is expected to see a modest upward adjustment to 2.2%, from 2%. In Asia, stock markets were mixed, with Japan’s Nikkei falling 1.6% while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng edged 0.2% higher. European stock markets are expected to open higher, bringing some respite to Germany’s Dax which has fallen for four days amid a fourth wave of coronavirus infections, while the FTSE 100 index in London posted a modest gain for the second day this week. The Agenda 9am GMT: Germany Ifo business confidence for November 11am GMT: UK CBI Industrial trends survey for November 1.30pm GMT: US GDP for Q3 (second estimate) 1.30pm GMT: US Durable goods orders for October 1.30pm GMT: US Jobless claims 2.30pm GMT: UK Bank of England policymaker Silvana Tenreyro speaks 3pm GMT: US Core Personal Consumption Expenditures index for October (forecast: 4.1%) 7pm GMT: US Federal Reserve minutesChelsea are waiting to discover whether Ben Chilwell could miss the rest of the season with suspected anterior cruciate ligament damage. Chilwell was forced off during Chelsea’s win against Juventus on Tuesday night and will be scanned to determine the severity of the injury. The left-back could be out for six to nine months if fears that he has sustained ACL damage are confirmed. Even if he has avoided cruciate damage he is highly unlikely to play again this year. Chelsea will be desperate to receive good news on Chilwell, who has been in outstanding form this season. The England international had a slow start but he has impressed since winning his place back from Marcos Alonso. He has played a major part in Thomas Tuchel’s side rising to the top of the Premier League and has scored four times for club and country. Chilwell appeared to be in major trouble after jarring his knee during the second half of Chelsea’s victory at Stamford Bridge. He walked off with assistance and Tuchel later said that some of the pain had subsided, but that does not necessarily mean he has avoided serious injury. West Ham’s Angelo Ogbonna played on for a few minutes after sustaining a knee injury against Liverpool this month, only for scans to reveal the defender had ACL damage. England will also be anxiously waiting to find out whether Chilwell is facing a lengthy lay-off. The 24‑year‑old, who has impressed since joining Chelsea from Leicester in the summer of 2020, is a regular in Gareth Southgate’s squad and it would be a major blow if he were unable to take part in preparations for the 2022 World Cup. Chelsea also have concerns over N’Golo Kanté, who is a doubt to face Manchester United on Sunday after being taken off against Juventus with a knee problem. Ruben Loftus‑Cheek would be in line to start in central midfield if Kanté is out.The boss of JP Morgan has apologised for predicting that the Wall Street bank would outlive China’s Communist party, saying he “regrets” the comment, made less than 24 hours earlier. Speaking at an event in Boston, Massachusetts, on Tuesday, Jamie Dimon referred to the fact that the bank began operating in China in 1921, the same year as the Communist party. He said: “I made a joke the other day that the Communist party is celebrating its 100th year – so is JP Morgan. I’d make a bet that we last longer.” “I can’t say that in China,” he said, adding: “They are probably listening anyway.” On Wednesday morning in the US, JP Morgan issued a formal statement in which an apparently chastened Dimon apologised for his remarks. “I regret and should not have made that comment,” he said. “I was trying to emphasise the strength and longevity of our company.” A JP Morgan spokesperson said Dimon understood that he should “never speak lightly or disrespectfully about another country or its leadership”. “During the discussion Jamie made clear China and its people are very smart and very thoughtful,” the spokesperson added. Dimon risked incurring the wrath of Beijing a week after he was allowed to skip Hong Kong’s strict 21-day hotel quarantine rules during a 32-hour trip to Hong Kong, the first visit by a Wall Street bank boss to China since the pandemic. Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, said he had been allowed to do so because he ran “a very huge bank” with “key business” in the Chinese-controlled region. JP Morgan has several ventures in China and won regulatory approval in August to become the first foreign owner of a securities brokerage in the People’s Republic. Dimon’s climbdown is not the first time that he has been forced to backtrack after off-the-cuff remarks risked incurring the wrath of a global superpower’s leadership. In September 2018, Dimon said he could beat Donald Trump, who was US president at the time, in a campaign. He put this down to being more intelligent than Trump and having earned his wealth rather than inherited it. An hour later he issued a statement saying he shouldn’t have made the comments and that they proved he may not be such a good politician after all.Name: The swine bomb. Status: Ongoing and escalating. Appearance: Like Planet of the Apes, but with pigs. Well, this all sounds very ominous. You are right to be worried. While we were busy concerning ourselves with global threats such as war and climate change and viruses, it seems we neglected to pay attention to the rise of the hogs. I’m sorry, the rise of the what? The hogs, man. The wild hogs. They’re everywhere, and they’re coming for us. You’ll forgive me for thinking you’re being alarmist. I am being nothing of the sort. Have you heard nothing of the plight of Corona, California? Packs of feral pigs have been running riot there since Halloween, tearing up lawns and – according to one resident – “tormenting our neighbourhood”. That sounds very much like an isolated incident. Oh, you poor sweet fool. The US Department of Agriculture estimates that feral hogs are now running rampant in 38 separate states. There are 6m of them, and their number is rising sharply. It is estimated that the pigs cause $1.5bn in damage annually. Thank heavens I live in Europe. Oh, you poor sweet fool. Have you not heard of the European swine bomb? Barcelona is absolutely overridden with wild boar, and has been for some time. In 2016 alone, police there fielded 1,187 calls complaining of the porcine menace. OK, now I’m starting to worry. You should. The sight of wild boars digging through rubbish has become a source of widespread embarrassment in Rome and, in July, residents of Hong Kong were stunned to spot a baby boar riding on the subway. Last year, a wild boar in Berlin stole a nudist’s laptop. And don’t get me started on Shakira. Shakira? Fine. In September, Shakira was essentially mugged by a pair of boars in Spain. How did this piggy plague get so out of hand? Believe it or not, the wild boar is an incredibly invasive species. The current theory is that they were introduced to environments as a food source, but then escaped and bred like crazy. That’s scary. It is, especially because they can thrive in almost any environment. They’re destroying native crops, competing with native species and can carry diseases like African swine fever. There’s honestly a lot to be concerned about. Plus they unsettled Shakira. Yes, that is the most awful of their crimes. Do say: “Amazed, terrified, huddling together, the animals watched the long line of pigs march slowly round the yard. It was as though the world had turned upside-down.” Don’t say: “Wait a minute, they stole a nudist’s laptop?”Outside Dakar, Senegal’s capital, is a rubbish dump with its own name: Mbeubeuss. The land on which it sits was once flat swampland. It began as a landfill site in 1968; today, it is a mountain of rubbish. It has accumulated so much plastic waste from the city that to reach it you have to drive on a road of compacted trash. This is not the Africa I grew up in. As a child here in the 1970s and 80s, it was not like this. But when I returned in 2012, I was shocked at what I found. Here in Senegal, there was plastic waste everywhere – at roadsides, in trees, everywhere. The younger generation don’t know any different: it’s just part of their environment now. I decided I wanted to shoot a series to raise awareness of environmental issues in Senegal, in the hope that people would realise that things do not have to be this way. I wanted to connect environmental issues with the cultural interests of the population, and started researching animism – the belief that objects and the natural world are imbued with spirits. Animism is connected to nature: it was about praising nature in all its different elements, working with it not against it, and living in harmony with it. Much of that was lost with globalisation and the modern way of living. With this series, I wanted to create a series of spirits sent by Mother Earth to warn humankind about its neglect and destruction of the environment. Each of the shots in the series addresses one environmental concern: coastal erosion, oil spills, sanitation and the burning of the land for agriculture, for example. But this image, the first I shot for the series, was about plastic consumption. I had the idea to make a dress that was a continuation of the trash mountain, so it looked as though this spirit was emerging from the piles of rubbish. I collaborated with a Senegalese stylist called Doulsy who had been working with recycled materials and can sew pretty much anything: he was the perfect person to create this costume. It needed to have a sense of scale: the model is sitting on a barrel of oil to give that height to the figure. We wanted to strike a balance between working with abandoned materials and making something that looked like a fashion editorial. But more than anything this image is a message: the model is holding a child’s doll, looking out over the wreckage. It represents the future generations that we’re condemning to environmental catastrophe through our overconsumption. At first, I only intended to make 10 images. They were all going to be shot in Senegal, and distributed to people here. But I felt uneasy when the work was finished: it felt like I was drawing attention to Africa for the wrong reasons. I was concerned it made the continent look uniquely polluted, as though this isn’t a problem all over the world. The only reason Europe doesn’t look like this is because it ships its waste out to us. So I continued the series, shooting all over the world, from Australia and the destruction of the coral reefs to the US and the damage wrought by coal mining. My work is about unity, about revealing the ways in which we are all connected, to each other and to nature. Taking this series global helped achieve that. My work has always been a mix of different things, a kind of blending of different disciplines and cultures denoted in the French word métissage. I’m European and I’m African. I grew up in a culture heavily influenced by voodoo, while also reading western comics. I’m a fashion photographer but I’m also an industrial engineer. My work represents all of that. Across all I do, I’m interested in identity and how we separate ourselves from those we consider the “other”. Throughout history, humankind has created an idea of the other in order to justify his or her exploitation. It is an idea that was central to slavery and colonialism. But it’s also at the heart of our approach to the environment. Only because we see ourselves as apart from the natural world, or superior to it, can we continue to treat it this way. Today, people talk about the anthropocene era: a geological term for a time in which nature is being fundamentally changed by humanity. But it suggests that humanity as a whole, not the specific capitalist system we have created, is the problem. In fact, it is the system that is the problem, and the system that needs to be opposed. Fabrice Monteiro’s CV Born: Namur, Belgium, 1972. Trained: Self-taught. Influences: Alexander McQueen, Malcolm Ferdinand. High point: “Realising that I can make a living from my creative work.” Low point: “Working on environmental subjects and understanding how dire the situation is. It scares me.” Top tip: “Always try to explore outside boundaries.” • Fabrice Monteiro has been shortlisted for Prix Pictet prize, to be announced on 15 December. The work of all 12 shortlisted artists will be at the V&amp;A, London, from 16 December.A couple of weeks ago, I had the pleasure of discussing the promise and perils of “authenticity” in leadership, at Guardian Masterclasses’ one-day MBA, and with active participation from a very global virtual group, including current and aspiring leaders. As is always the case when you have a smart and engaged audience, I was fortunate to learn a lot from this discussion, including the main reasons people struggle addressing the demand for authenticity, and some of the key challenges many of us face when we navigate the inherent tension between the need to be ourselves, the desire to advance our careers, and the aspiration to be great leaders. In a rich and open discussion moderated by the brilliant Nathalie Nahai (who has just published an awesome book on the ethical imperative modern leaders face), we addressed five important reasons for the counterintuitive premise that the greatest leaders are rarely authentic, and that anyone interested in not just increasing their career success, but also being a better leader, will probably benefit more from being less rather than more authentic. Here they are: 1. Great leaders are always a work in progress They are never a finished product but instead, keep getting better. How do they do this? By learning new habits, expanding the range of behaviours they display in critical situations, and in effect managing to go against their nature. Imagine a leader with anger management issues – a volatile, temperamental, and explosive person who instantly reacts to any circumstance as if it were a cynical provocation. Or a boss with a tendency to speak over others, mansplain things, and share even their most inappropriate thoughts as if they were smashing ideas, without any filter or self-awareness. Or a manager who naturally avoids conflict and confrontation, refusing to provide honest and critical feedback to others so they can improve. I could continue, but you get the point. We have all worked for these bosses because they are human. All humans have flaws, but the most detrimental flaw of all is the unwillingness to address our flaws, which tends to happen a lot, especially with those who are in charge. Left to our own devices, we all become exaggerated versions of our former selves, and that is rarely a good thing. But with some self-awareness, motivation and effort, we can learn to suppress the natural, uninhibited or “authentic” version of ourselves, in order to display the best possible version of our professional persona. 2. You need to be pretty entitled to assume that you can just be yourself Any relevant social situation requires adhering to a given etiquette and conforming to certain norms, which is broadly what we mean by “culture”. If you can do this automatically and without any effort, because you “fit right in”, or have amazing “culture-fit”, then you are lucky to be part of the status-quo; you have privilege, are part of the in-group, and perhaps even a cult (there’s a reason “cult” and “culture” have the same root). Unfortunately, this model doesn’t scale well if organisations are interested in diversity and inclusion, and the fact of the matter is that everyone who isn’t privileged or naturally favoured by the ruling elite will need to make a great effort to fit in and be accepted by others – they will certainly not be able to achieve this by just being themselves, even if the idea sounds romantic and epic. This is why when we hear about leaders who were just themselves, in the sense that they felt no pressure to self-control, self-censor, or exercise even a minimum of self-restraint. They look a lot like Bernie Madoff, Jeffrey Epstein, Dominic Strauss-Kahn, and Harvey Weinstein. For the rest of us, the pressure to behave in prosocial and ethical ways is such, that we are far more incentivised to follow than to break rules, and to pay a great deal of attention to what others think of us. 3. It is OK not to bring your whole self to work The notion that we ought to bring our “whole self” to work has fortunately become somewhat outdated with the pandemic, since we went from working from home to living at work without leaving even our bodies at the office – but the furniture is mostly still there. But wherever we carry out our work and whoever we work for, it is OK to see this as just work. First, there aren’t enough meaningful, purposeful, and mesmerizing careers in the world to give every human the chance to transcend or achieve perpetual states of flow and Nirvana-like mindfulness while they are sending an e-mail or performing any of the other tasks jobs may require. Second, while leaders are usually tasked with engaging and inspiring teams, their main job is to ensure their teams perform well. For all the hype of Chief Happiness Officers, a Chief Misery Officer would make more sense, given how most people feel about their jobs. Thirdly, you can be a very private person and respect your employees’ privacy (whether you are managing via Zoom or in-person), and be the best leader they’ve ever had. Why? Because you care about them, understand them, assign them to roles they can perform and enable them to work well with others. Great leaders don’t bring their whole self to work – they persuade others to collaborate effectively. 4. Integrity does not depend on being “real”, but on having the right values, and practising what you preach It is always amusing when people nominate their famous real-life examples of “authentic” leaders, which will generally include only those leaders they admire or align with ideologically. So, for instance, not many people will nominate Stalin, Mao, or Hitler, even though they were probably true to their values? Authenticity may be judged from the eye of the beholder, which is probably the best-case scenario. So, what matters most is not how authentic you think you are (not least because decades of social psychology have taught us most people are profoundly deluded and self-deceived about their identity, talents, and honesty), but how real others think you are. That will mostly be a function of the degree of consistency between your words and your acts, but also anchoring your words and acts on intentions, beliefs and values that are deemed benevolent, ethical or prosocial. So, even if we like authentic leaders, the type of authenticity we want comes with the loss of nuances and caveats, and is rather hard to find. 5. Who are you anyway? If it is hard to determine how authentic others are (leaders or not), it is even harder to work out whether we are authentic. Personally, I devoted over a decade of my studies and clinical practice to psychoanalytic psychotherapy and despite spending way too much time with Freud and Lacan the only conclusion I could reach is that we are all neurotic, unless we are psychotic. Neither condition provides a clear indication of who we are: neurotics are the best-case scenario and they are only aware of their doubts and ignorance (that’s called “maturity”); psychotics are extremely certain but wrong – they create a delusional persona which is real only to themselves. There are, of course, other ways to work out who you really are: you can check into an Ashram in India as the Beatles did; experiment with hallucinogenic mushrooms in Costa Rica; or believe what your parents told you. You can also work for any of the companies with cult-like cultures so you feel that everything you do while on their payroll is your real you, your true north, and your authentic self. Sadly, this is bad news for everyone else who isn’t your colleague, boss, or employee. Even if you love your job, there is something called life out there, and it usually requires a different version of you. Want to share your own thoughts on authenticity? Please send me a note: hello@drtomas.com or connect @drtcp on Twitter. Both authentic and inauthentic comments are welcomed.Mulberry is planning to expand its UK factory after the Somerset-based facilities helped the handbag-maker to avoid the supply chain problems dogging companies that rely on production abroad. Thierry Andretta, the chief executive of the British luxury brand, said about 60% of its products were now made in the UK, up from about half before the pandemic. He said Mulberry had added one extra production line, employing about 50 people, to its UK factory in the past year and was likely to add another if sales continued to grow at a similar pace. Mulberry said sales increased 34% to £66m in the six months to 25 September, compared with £49m in the same period in 2020 as it bounced back from pandemic-related high street lockdowns. Half-year revenue was £69m two years earlier. The sales recovery helped the company make pre-tax profits of £10.2m in the half year, compared with a £2.4m loss in 2020, although the 2021 figure included £5.7m from selling a lease in Paris. Mulberry’s share price jumped by 24% on Wednesday morning to 375p, its highest level since May, as Andretta said the company was “well placed” for the crucial Christmas period. Andretta said Mulberry had taken the “bold decision” to focus on UK production because it had a strong mix of flexibility, efficiency and quality after years of investment. He added that production had been aided by Mulberry stocking up on key materials and components ahead of Brexit. “Some months were really challenging but we are really proud of what the team achieved,” he said. Mulberry avoided the kind of shortages that have forced some fashion companies, including Germany’s Hugo Boss and Italy’s Benetton, to bring production closer to their home countries. Supply chain delays, caused by paused production in overseas factories during the pandemic, transport snarl ups and driver shortages, have been particularly problematic for fast fashion companies at the cheaper end of the market that rely on getting ever-changing designs to market quickly. The UK online retailer Asos said last month that the disruption would affect its profits, while Boohoo also warned about the impact of higher freight costs. Next and Superdry this month also cautioned about delays, which in Superdry’s case may be up to six weeks Mulberry had been a takeover target for the retail tycoon Mike Ashley after a difficult 2020 in which it cut one-quarter of its global workforce. But on Wednesday the company said UK sales had recovered strongly as shoppers returned to stores after the end of the last Covid-19 lockdown. Rising sales in Asia, driven by a strong online business, also made up for the loss of lucrative tourist traffic in its home market, it added. Andretta said the relationship with Ashley was “quite good and relaxing” with the company meeting his Frasers Group twice a year to discuss the results.Indications are that Giovanni van Bronckhorst will not be shy when it comes to shaking things up at Rangers. The Dutchman has been afforded only two days of training with his squad before Sparta Prague visit Ibrox on Europa League business on Thursday. Steven Gerrard, now at Aston Villa, implemented a solid template; his successor is clearly of a mind to put forward one of his own. “It has been a very short time with the players but I think they can already sense what I want to change and what is needed to become successful again,” Van Bronckhorst says. “Not only on the pitch but the way we behave as a team and the way we prepare mentally. You cannot do everything in two days, I need more time, but step by step I am sure the players will understand the way I work and the way I want to play. “I have a certain way of working. There are certain things I expect and want from my players.” On the specific challenge of Sparta, who are level with Rangers in Group A, the former Rangers player expanded on the theme. “I have certain ways of playing against certain systems,” Van Bronckhorst says. “You will see a team tomorrow in the system I like to play and how it is best to play against Prague. You will definitely see some changes.” Assessment of what Van Bronckhorst has walked into is not straightforward. After 13 games Rangers, who won the league at a canter last season, are four points clear of a Celtic team who are mid-rebuild. In the two Premiership matches immediately before Gerrard’s sharp exit, Rangers were comfortable in dismissing Ross County and Motherwell. Europa League involvement post-Christmas remains highly attainable. Yet for a club which makes such great play of a requirement to succeed, recent events have been odd. Villa confirmed Gerrard as their manager on 11 November. Last Sunday, Rangers were humbled 3-1 by Hibernian in a League Cup semi-final with B-team coaches in the dugout and Van Bronckhorst, appointed three days earlier, in the stand. That Rangers insist work permit timing meant Van Bronckhorst could not have any influence on the tie is fair enough but that the new manager was posing for photos over a city-centre dinner with Ross Wilson, the sporting director, on the previous evening looked especially clumsy – or complacent – as Hibs, who had not played in almost a month, raced into a 3-0 lead. “We weren’t happy with the result or the goals we conceded,” Van Bronckhorst says. “We have to make sure we are defensively much more focused and compact.” Plenty is made of Wilson’s succession strategies; Rangers did not have adequate provision in place for a key fixture. They have not won a domestic cup since 2011. After their latest bloody nose, the centre-back Connor Goldson claimed his team had “lost a bit of hunger”. Van Bronckhorst adds that he had spoken to Goldson about his comments. “Obviously the team was not happy or in a good place on Sunday,” he says. “It was quite an emotional game. For me, the most important thing is to move forward. If you might feel that as a player, you have to work hard to keep the hunger and desire, the willingness to work hard. That’s what I demand from day one. So far, it has been really good.” There is, typically, excitable analysis over Van Bronckhorst’s coaching credentials. The claiming of the 2016-17 Eredivisie with Feyenoord was a fine achievement, albeit this was no team of plodders. Feyenoord finished 17 and 21 points from the league’s summit in the following two seasons. Their European record was unimpressive throughout. Van Bronckhorst’s only other management role, in China with Guangzhou City, was as brief as it was inauspicious. The 46-year-old is a sensible appointment by Rangers on grounds of availability and existing connection to the club. World-renowned dugout status is not required to prevail in Scotland. Yet a touch of realism may be useful; Van Bronckhorst was hardly on Premier League speed dials. He has plenty to prove. “I can’t wait to feel the atmosphere again in the stadium,” he says. “I am old enough to separate my emotions from the focus I need to perform with the team. “The players are ready. It is a new start for them, as well, with me coming in as their new manager. They have worked hard. They have looked very fresh and sharp. We are well prepared.”SAME OLD-HAM STORY “Meat pie, sausage roll, come on Oldham, give us a goal … ooh, we’ve got a corner,” as Grandad Roberts and his son Elvis once sang so lustily. Chance would be a fine thing for the Latics, staring down the barrel of relegation from League Two and the fate of becoming the first ever former Premier League club to plunge into non-league. Andy Ritchie’s goals, Jon Hallworth’s saves, Joe Royle’s head, Mike Milligan pointing and passing, Nicky Henry’s biting tackles, Richard Jobson not being the lead singer of the Skids of the same name, the patronage of the Inspiral Carpets … it’s a long time since the Sky Strikers were shaking their thang in the vicinity of an Oldham team in the FA Carling Premiership. Wednesday witnessed Oldham issue the ‘Do One’ card to manager Keith Curle, after Tuesday’s defeat at Northampton proved an 11th of the season. Third-bottom, they have won just one of the last nine, and are just two points above Carlisle and Firewall FC in the drop zone. Mind you, Curle’s eight months in charge look like Lord Ferg’s tenure at Manchester United when considering he is the ninth manager since the club was sold to Abdallah Lemsagam, a former Mr 15%, in January 2018. Paul Scholes lasted barely 31 days after bringing his positive vibes and training-ground party trick of being able to hit a bin lid from 100 yards to Boundary Park in February 2019. He left implying interference from the owner. Laurent Banide, a former boss at Monaco no less, was sacked in September 2019 after just 11 matches in charge. His replacement, Dino Maamria, was appointed 20 minutes later, and at least lasted the rest of the season, only to be canned in favour of Harry Kewell. Ah. Sick of all that and the team playing like a drain for years, many supporters have decided they don’t want to pay any penny that might end up in the pockets of Lemsagam and his brother Mohamed, the club’s sporting director. Instead, wearing clown wigs and carrying fake coffins, they’ve protested inside and outside the ground, though some also have had their season tickets suspended after protests in the stadium. The brothers Lemsagam, meanwhile, stay away. Not even some classic football-man-babble could save Curle. “I’ve got a bad habit of telling players the truth and when I say a bad habit, some players don’t like it but those players will go on a journey and I sincerely wish them well,” he roared on Tuesday night. “There’s an easy way of telling them, and using a lot of expletives, but the modern-day players don’t respond to that.” Using a lot of expletives, particularly one the Cambridge English Dictionary defines as “in a very bad or difficult situation” may be the only way to describe Oldham Athletic right now. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Barry Glendenning from 8pm GMT for hot Big Cup MBM coverage of Manchester City 1-1 PSG, while John Brewin will be on hand for Liverpool 2-1 Porto. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Football is something irreplaceable. It is the thing I love the most in life and I will always love it and I will do it whenever I can. Even though I am not with a team now, I try to play and to train to do it as best I can” – Gai Assulin, who was once known as the “Israeli Messi” when he came through at Barcelona, tells Will Unwin he still hopes to have a successful career in the game despite currently having to get his kicks playing five-a-side in Stockport. FIVER LETTERS “Maybe worth a mention of a good news story. Connor Jennings returned to first-team football with Stockport County on Tuesday, some nine months after a medical check revealed he had a rare form of cancer. And, as in all good stories, there is a happy ending: he scored the fifth goal during his 10 minutes on the pitch as a substitute. Very down-to-earth man as his post-match interview shows” – Brian Ross. “Could I suggest to disgruntled Manchester United fans that they take this opportunity to form their own club, one more focused on football than on commerce? I can’t see what could go wrong. Unless, of course, not near enough actually sign up, the club get marooned in the Northern Premier League and are overtaken by some ersatz burlesque of an arriviste club from the town next door who’ve been financially doped by unfathomably feted bored millionaires, who, if they’d had any guts, would have backed you. What? Oh” – Jon Millard. “Was it just me who thought the misty-eyed Barça love-in from yesterday’s Fiver was a bit much? Instead of pining for the days of Rivaldo and co, it’d perhaps have been more apt to call out that the Catalan ‘giants’ are quite rightfully in a ruddy mess due to years of lining the pockets of players like their now estranged former No 10 with enough Euros to purchase a small army of Ricardo Quaresmas, and more patatas bravas than you can shake a muleta at” – Johnny Connelly (and no others). Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Brian Ross. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Sheffield United’s John Fleck is recovering at home, having been discharged from hospital after collapsing during their win at Reading. “One moment he fell down. It was a really complicated situation,” said manager Slavisa Jokanovic. Karim Benzema has been given a one-year suspended prison sentence and a €75,000 fine after being found guilty of conspiring to blackmail former France teammate Mathieu Valbuena over a bongo tape. Manchester United pre-interim manager Michael Carrick reckons the 2-0 Big Cup win over Villarreal had nothing to do with his coaching. “It’s not about my ideas,” he blabbed. “It’s about the lads working hard … I’m delighted.” Meanwhile, the club are in the midst of chats with Ernesto Valverde about keeping the managerial hot seat warm for whoever they appoint next summer. Chelsea’s Ben Chilwell could be out for the season with suspected anterior cruciate ligament damage sustained in the 4-0 rout of Juventus. D1ck Advocaat has quit as Iraq boss after just three months and no wins in six Human Rights World Cup qualifiers. And League One strugglers Fleetwood Town have marched manager Simon Grayson through the door marked Do One. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Here’s the latest Football Weekly pod. RECOMMENDED BOOKING No Christmas party again this year? Then you’re cordially invited to Football Weekly’s very own one on … checks notes … 30 November. Tickets are available now. STILL WANT MORE? The future is bright, the future is Sancho, writes Jonathan Liew. Thiago Silva, 78, has still got it and epitomises all that is good and surprising about Chelsea, reckons Jacob Steinberg, who is also effusive about Reece James and the Blues’ academy. Which outfield players have impressed most between the sticks? The Knowledge takes a deep dive into the world of emergency keepers. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! BIG MOODAuthorities in the French Caribbean territory of Guadeloupe have extended a nightly curfew until Sunday as police attempt to restore calm after several nights of protests and violent clashes that were triggered by Covid-19 regulations but are rooted in long-running concerns over the high cost of living, low wages, youth unemployment and mistrust of the Paris government. Gunfire has targeted police over the past few days, a general strike has entered its second week and many stores remained closed after night-time looting. The curfew requires people to be inside between 6pm and 5am. In nearby Martinique there were gunshots fired at police for a second night running, French media reported on Wednesday, in a sign that unrest is spreading in the French Caribbean overseas territories. Roadblocks affected public transport and there were school closures in Martinique. Trade union groups decided to lift their protest barricades but some citizen groups were expected to continue demonstrating on roads. People in Guadeloupe and Martinique have been angered by a government requirement – also in force in mainland France – for all healthcare workers to be vaccinated against Covid-19. Compulsory vaccination is a particularly sensitive issue in the two island territories owing to significant mistrust of government science after a long-running health scandal over exposure to toxic pesticides used in banana plantations. In one of France’s biggest health and safety scandals, the insecticide chordecone was used from 1973 to 1993 on banana plantations in Martinique and Guadeloupe, exposing a significant part of the population to health dangers and related cancers and polluting the soil. The product was banned in the US in 1976 and in France in 1990, but special provisions were made for its continued use in the Caribbean territories until 1993. In Martinique, protesters demanded not just an end to the mandatory vaccination of health workers but also action to tackle high fuel prices. The unrest represents a test for the French president, Emmanuel Macron, who has made much of the global footprint given to France by overseas territories that span the Caribbean to the Pacific via the Indian Ocean. France’s economy minister, Bruno Le Maire, said the Covid health pass was “not negotiable” in the Caribbean territories. The pass, showing a person has been vaccinated or recently tested negative for Covid, is required in cafes, restaurants, libraries and other public buildings. Opposition politicians from the left to the right have accused the government of being unprepared for the crisis in the Caribbean, which they said should have been prevented. The far-right leader Marine Le Pen said: “The government always has the same method – let the situation deteriorate, like it did with the gilet jaunes protesters, or over pensions, and wait until the violence that ensues discredit the demands being made.”In recent years, RuPaul’s Drag Race has become a mainstay of international TV, with outposts from Spain and Australia to Thailand and Canada. The UK version debuted at the end of 2019 to much acclaim, with two more series filmed in London and Manchester following in quick succession. The third – currently airing on BBC Three – has seen a number of twists on the format, however, with shock eliminations and surprise saves, and lip-syncs used to separate both the top and the bottom of the pile. It’s the closest the UK series has felt to its US counterpart, but in doing so it risks losing the subversive, cheeky charm that made it so irresistible. In fact, the first two series of Drag Race UK were worlds away from the heavily produced and polished US series. Embracing the camp irreverence of its queens, it allowed them to shine on their own terms, relishing their rough edges and quintessentially British pop culture references (think EastEnders, Gemma Collins and, er, Margaret Thatcher). Breathing new life into Drag Race, it struck the balance between revering and ridiculing the franchise. It also celebrated queer people and shared their stories in a way that many shows struggle to do, with British drag celebrated on the global stage. Drama happened organically, via an iconic sparring match between Divina De Campo and The Vivienne (“A red wig and a silver dress? I don’t think”) in series one, and Ginny Lemon’s self-elimination in the second run. Filming for the second series was interrupted by the pandemic, which only raised the stakes and made for intense, emotional viewing. This year, however, the drama hasn’t been left to chance, with producer-made twists in almost every episode leading some viewers to switch off. The changes haven’t just been in front of the camera but also behind it, with some episodes rumoured to have been filmed in just one day (typically they would be made over two). While it may prove logistically easier, this alleged filming schedule has its flaws, not least in giving the queens less time to prepare – and to shine. A lack of time has been a consistent theme across the series, not least in episode seven, an adaptation of the show’s classic “ball” challenge where contestants must present three themed outfits on the runway. Expectations were sky-high, with previous ball challenges having birthed incredible looks such as Divina De Campo’s legendary laundry bag pantsuit and A’Whora’s breathtaking superhero Covid Nine-Tina (constructed entirely from blue bin bags). This year’s challenge took place against the clock, meaning contestants had just one hour to create and change into each outfit. It was a clever twist on a classic, but Drag Race UK didn’t stop there, throwing in an additional celebrity guest to bark catchphrases at the harangued queens, who had precious little time to create a look from scratch. All this, while also asking them to talk about their childhood traumas. Neither the queens nor the viewers knew whether to laugh or cry. The judges’ opinions of the cast has also seemed less important this year than delivering shocking results. Despite almost exclusively positive feedback from the judges for Kitty Scott-Claus and River Medway following the “Drag-Lexa” challenge in episode five, RuPaul revealed that there would be no winners that week and that all queens were at risk of elimination. Episode six saw yet another controversial decision, with the double elimination of fan favourites River Medway and Choriza May. While River had been criticised by the judges in the main challenge, Choriza had been largely praised. The lip sync didn’t seem to justify both queens being sent home – with RuPaul’s decision feeling unnecessarily harsh (and necessitating a double save later in the series to balance the numbers). Indeed, the best moments in this series have been the ones that have felt authentic and joyous, such as the lip sync between Vanity Milan and Scarlett Harlett (dressed as Bianca from EastEnders, because, of course). Their performance of Mis-Teeq’s Scandalous, which set social media ablaze for all the right reasons, was Drag Race UK – and Drag Race full stop – at its best. The talent of the queens shone bright, with Mis-Teeq singer and guest judge Alesha Dixon screaming, cheering and harmonising as the queens stomped, span and dropped into the splits. We also witnessed the long-awaited inclusion of the first cisgender female queen, Victoria Scone, with the UK series breaking ground for the franchise as a whole. Moving conversations between queens have also highlighted important issues such as representation, body image, toxic masculinity and living with HIV, with the support they have offered one another acting as an antidote to aggression both within and against the queer community. Even so, the producer meddling has felt overt, and unnecessary. The success of Drag Race UK’s first two series shows that the format works well in its simplest form, and there was no need to fix what wasn’t broken. Clearly, though, viewers are willing to stick with it; before series three has even ended, anticipation is already building for the upcoming fourth outing. Let’s hope it’s given a little more breathing space next time around, to be as brash and brilliant as it can be. The finale of Drag Race UK series three is on BBC Three and BBC iPlayer on 25 November at 7pmMeeting Nicolas McDowall in 1967 led to 20 years of creative collaboration and 54 of close friendship. For secondary school English departments we worked together on anthologies of contemporary poetry, characterised by the striking juxtaposition of text and monochrome photographs. In later years it was a joy to stay with Nicolas and his wife, Frances, in their Wye Valley home. They encouraged my wife and me to translate Lucian Blaga’s wonderful Poems of Light from the Romanian, and published an Old Stile Press edition with powerful images by the artist Sara Philpott.The two-time Olympic gold medallist Haile Gebrselassie has announced he is enlisting in the Ethiopian military to fight an insurgency that threatens the capital, Addis Ababa. Gebrselassie, who set 27 long-distance running records, told Reuters he was joining up on Wednesday. The Olympic silver medallist runner Feyisa Lilesa would also enlist, local media reported. International alarm has grown over the escalating war in Ethiopia as Tigrayan rebels edge closer to Addis Ababa. On Wednesday, Switzerland and Britain advised their citizens to leave Ethiopia, citing the worsening security situation. France and the US have already called on citizens to leave. Britain’s minister for Africa, Vicky Ford, said the conflict was deteriorating quickly. “In the coming days we may see the fighting move closer to Addis Ababa, which could severely limit options for British nationals to leave Ethiopia,” she said. The country’s prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, has gone to direct the war from the frontlines, state-affiliated media reported. His government has described the conflict as an “existential war”. While Abiy is away, the deputy prime minister, Demeke Mekonnen Hassen, will take charge of routine government business, the government spokesperson Legesse Tulu told a news conference, according to a report from the Fana news outlet. Last month Tigrayan forces and their allies threatened to march on Addis Ababa. They have also been fighting to try to cut a transport corridor linking landlocked Ethiopia with the region’s main port in Djibouti. On Tuesday, the US special envoy for the Horn of Africa, Jeffrey Feltman, said the Ethiopian military and regional militias had held back Tigrayan attempts to cut the corridor, but Tigrayan forces had been able to move south towards the Addis Ababa. Ethiopia’s military spokesperson did not respond to requests for comment. Ethiopian police have trained about 147,000 civilians in the capital to form neighbourhood defence groups and help detect possible infiltrators, police said. Feltman, along with the former Nigerian president turned African Union envoy Olusegun Obasanjo, has been trying to broker a ceasefire between the two sides. On Tuesday, Feltman said nascent progress risked being overshadowed by military developments. On Wednesday, Ethiopia expelled four of six Irish diplomats because of Ireland’s stance on the conflict, the Irish foreign minister, Simon Coveney, said. Ireland has been at the forefront of calling for meetings of the UN security council on Ethiopia and pushing for council statements on the conflict since it joined the 15-member body in January. “Ireland has been shining a spotlight on things that have been happening in Ethiopia that really are breaches of international law and are of serious humanitarian and human rights concern,” Coveney told Ireland’s RTÉ radio. “We’ve already had unfortunately a lot of death and a lot of killing in Ethiopia this year, but it could get an awful lot worse in the next few weeks … and that is why, unfortunately, the Ethiopian government has decided to target Ireland.” Dina Mufti, the spokesperson for the Ethiopian ministry of foreign affairs, did not immediately respond to a request for comment. The Irish foreign ministry said its embassy would remain open but it had asked its citizens to leave by commercial means immediately, and said those planning to visit should reconsider. Reuters and Agence France-Presse contributed to this reportBoris Johnson should convene an emergency Cobra meeting to draw up a rescue plan for England’s overstretched ambulance services, the Liberal Democrats are demanding. Their plea comes amid worsening delays in ambulances answering 999 calls and large numbers of crews having to wait outside hospitals because A&amp;E staff are overwhelmed and the hospitals have run out of beds. All 10 regional NHS ambulance services in England moved on to their highest alert level in September and October, meaning they were under “extreme pressure”, it emerged on Wednesday. The health minister Edward Argar made the admission when answering a written parliamentary question from Daisy Cooper, the Lib Dem deputy leader and party health spokesperson. “This is shameful. Forget the statistics. We’re talking about loved ones waiting for ambulances that arrive too late or get stuck in queues at hospitals, with devastating results,” said Cooper. “The prime minister must get a grip of this crisis. He should call an urgent Cobra meeting and agree a rescue package for our overstretched ambulance services ahead of the difficult winter months.” About 6,000 patients a year across the UK were dying because so many ambulance crews were tied up for long periods outside A&amp;E units, the bosses of the 10 ambulance services last week estimated in a report. It comes after Mark Docherty, the West Midlands ambulance service’s nursing and clinical commissioning director, recently told councillors how Shropshire “ran out” of ambulances to answer 999 calls. “Two weeks ago today we ran out of ambulances in Shropshire and Telford,” he was quoted as saying by the BBC. “What I mean is that every single ambulance we had was stuck outside a hospital with a patient on. This isn’t about blame or pointing fingers. This is about us all acknowledging that we’re in a very difficult position.” Ambulances are taking longer and longer to attend to incidents. The most recent NHS figures show that response times in October were the longest since records began in 2017. It is taking crews on average just under 54 minutes to answer the second most serious category of 999 call, three times the 18 minutes it should take. Cooper is urging the prime minister to bring in military personnel to help NHS ambulance services, drop plans to close ambulance stations and boost bed numbers to stop hospitals getting so full, so that A&amp;E staff can admit more patients more quickly. The Department of Health and Social Care has been approached for a response.The Indian government is preparing to ban private cryptocurrencies and allow the country’s central bank to launch an official digital currency. The proposed legislation follows a crackdown on cryptocurrencies in China, where financial regulators and the central bank have made all digital currency transactions illegal. The Indian proposals were flagged in a parliamentary bulletin listing upcoming legislation which included one paragraph on “The Cryptocurrency and Regulation of Official Digital Currency Bill, 2021”. The accompanying description of the bill appeared to leave some room for using cryptocurrencies, however. “To create a facilitative framework for creation of the official digital currency to be issued by the Reserve Bank of India,” it read. “The bill also seeks to prohibit all private cryptocurrencies in India, however, it allows for certain exceptions to promote the underlying technology of cryptocurrency and its uses.” India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, said last week that cryptocurrencies could “spoil our youth” and the country’s central bank has repeatedly warned, in line with other central banks, they could pose “serious concerns on macroeconomic and financial stability”. In September, El Salvador became the first country to accept a cryptocurrency, bitcoin, as legal tender. But major economies have generally been wary of digital currencies, with the deputy governor of the Bank of England, Sir Jon Cunliffe, warning that they could cause financial meltdown. Nonetheless, the BoE and the Treasury are to launch a formal consultation into a UK central bank digital currency next year. The India move triggered heavy selling in the country’s digital currency markets, with the dollar-linked stable coin tether (USDT) slumping 25% to nearly 60 rupees on Wednesday. In the global markets, the price of bitcoin – the signature cryptocurrency – fell 2.7% to $56,171. Laith Khalaf, head of investment analysis at investment platform AJ Bell, said: “India’s plan to ban cryptocurrencies has not wrought the same damage on the bitcoin price as China’s summer crackdown, but it nonetheless marks yet another stumbling block in crypto’s advancement as an economic force in the real world.” Khalaf added that El Salvador’s embrace of bitcoin appeared to be an outlier and it was “inevitable that cryptocurrencies will continue to encounter either greater regulation or prohibition in more jurisdictions around the world”. On Tuesday, the International Monetary Fund warned El Salvador against its rush into cryptocurrency, a day after the country announced proposals to develop the first “bitcoin city”.The civil rights attorney Ben Crump on Wednesday accused a lawyer defending the killers of Ahmaud Arbery of displaying “the essence of white supremacy” for his call to ban Black pastors from the courtroom. Crump was speaking as a jury in Georgia began its second day of deliberations in the trial of three white men accused of murdering Arbery, 25, who was Black, as he jogged along a road near Brunswick in February 2020. Kevin Gough, the lawyer for William “Roddie” Bryan, one of the defendants, sparked outrage during the trial by stating: “We don’t want any more Black pastors in here,” and asking the judge to ban high-profile church leaders such as the Revs Al Sharpton and Jesse Jackson, who have both attended. The judge refused the demand. In a pre-trial interview with the Atlanta Journal-Constitution, Gough also said he thought there were not enough “Bubbas or Joe six-packs” – meaning white, older blue-collar workers - on the jury. Crump, who is representing the Arbery family, told CNN that Gough’s stance was inexcusable. “In the Black community, the church, and faith, is the foundation,” he said. “To not allow Ahmaud’s mother and father to have their faith and spiritual leaders pray with them to keep their sanity … Think about what you saw in that courtroom, pictures of their child, their baby, with a hole in his body. “It was just so arrogant, it was the essence of white supremacy mentality. Almost like thinking [that] because a Black man is jogging, ordinary white citizens can stop him, and if he dares to not follow their orders they have the right to kill him. We must be better than that.” Crump also accused defense lawyers of referring to Arbery “like a runaway slave”. During closing arguments on Monday, attorney Laura Hogue drew gasps in the courtroom when she branded the victim as an “erratic” character with “long, dirty toenails”. Bryan, 52, and father and son Gregory and Travis McMichael, 65 and 35, respectively, each face five counts including murder, aggravated assault and false imprisonment. Although Travis McMichael fired the fatal shots, all three face life imprisonment if convicted.A new law that will bring in mandatory life sentence for offenders who kill emergency services workers while committing crimes will not be retrospective, Dominic Raab has said. The justice secretary’s statement means that the killers of PC Andrew Harper, who died in on duty, will not have their sentences extended. However, lawyers have expressed disquiet over the plan, warning it was a “knee-jerk” response to Harper’s killing that will result in injustices. Lissie Harper, his widow, has led a two-year campaign to change the law after he was killed while answering a late-night burglary call. The court of appeal previously rejected an attempt by the attorney general to increase the sentences handed down to the officer’s killers. The justice secretary told BBC Breakfast: “That is one of the things that made us look very carefully and focus on changing the law, but of course it only applies to crimes and sentences going forward; I think that’s the right thing to do.” The so-called Harper’s law is expected to make it on to the statute books through an amendment to the existing police, crime, sentencing and courts bill, meaning it is likely to get royal assent and become law early next year. Harper, 28, died from his injuries when he was caught in a strap attached to the back of a car and dragged down a winding country road as the trio fled the scene of a quad bike theft in Sulhamstead, Berkshire, on the night of 15 August 2019. Henry Long, 19, was sentenced to 16 years and Jessie Cole and Albert Bowers, both 18, were jailed for 13 years iover the manslaughter of the Thames Valley police officer. Long, the leader of the group, admitted manslaughter, while Cole and Bowers, his passengers, were convicted of manslaughter after a trial at the Old Bailey. All three were cleared of murder by the jury. The sentences prompted Harper to lobby the government to better protect emergency services workers on the front line. However, Richard Atkinson, former chairman of the Law Society’s criminal law committee, described the plan as “very dangerous”. He pointed out that manslaughter already carries a maximum sentence of life, that judges can and do impose. He told the Guardian: “There will be occasions where it will be exceedingly harsh to impose a life sentence in certain circumstances, and therefore unjust. Taking away the discretion of judges and making it mandatory is very worrying.” Atkinson said that under the change someone who kills a police officer by accident could face a life sentence whereas someone who tries to kill a police officer would not. He said: “If I push a police officer as I run away, and they stumble and hit their head and die, then that’s manslaughter and I would get life. But if I’ve stabbed them two or three times, and they don’t die, then I don’t face life.” He said the proposal flouted the principle of equality before the law by treating the lives of emergency workers more highly than anyone else. He added: “It’s a knee-jerk reaction to a specific instance … [PC Harper’s death] was particularly nasty incident, and there are few, if any, who would have sympathy with the perpetrators of that particular crime. But that doesn’t mean that it is of general applicability.” Matthew Scott, a criminal barrister and blogger, agreed. He said: “I think the maxim that hard cases make bad law applies here.” Speaking to the BBC he said: “It blurs the distinction between murder and manslaughter. To remove all discretion from judges in cases of manslaughter of emergency worker would be quite wrong.” The police, crime, sentencing and courts bill is currently being considered in the House of Lords and peers and MPs would have to agree to the proposed amendment to introduce the new law as part of the legislation. Lissie Harper said: “Emergency services workers require extra protection. I know all too well how they are put at risk and into the depths of danger on a regular basis on behalf of society. That protection is what Harper’s law will provide, and I am delighted that it will soon become a reality.” Police officers, National Crime Agency officers, prison officers, custody officers, firefighters and paramedics are all defined as emergency services workers.The Australian trade minister is pessimistic about an imminent deal to waive intellectual property on Covid-19 vaccines, as he prepares to fly to Geneva for crucial World Trade Organization talks next week. Dan Tehan’s planned travel comes amid accusations the Australian government has been “trying to have it both ways” by backing the proposed waiver but not co-sponsoring it at the WTO. The idea – first proposed by India and South Africa a year ago in a bid to speed up vaccine delivery to low-income countries – would allow for cheaper generic versions to be manufactured in developing nations. But it has yet to be approved, despite support from more than 100 countries including the US. Civil society groups see the move as a vital step towards more equitable distribution of vaccines, saying just 5% of the population of low-income countries are fully vaccinated against Covid-19. Tehan has been in parliament this week but is expected to attend next week’s ministerial meeting of the WTO, where he will focus on trying to find “common ground”. Asked what position he would take to the meeting, Tehan said Australia “will support” a waiver on the Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (Trips) Agreement, as confirmed in September. But he also offered a gloomy assessment of the prospects of an imminent deal. “A waiver can only be passed with the support of all 164 WTO members and there is no proposal on the table right now that has the required level of support,” Tehan said. “Australia is working with other countries to find common ground on a solution that will ensure all countries can overcome any intellectual property barriers as they respond to Covid-19 or future pandemics.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning WTO’s 12th ministerial conference is due to run for four days from Tuesday. Labor’s trade spokesperson, Madeleine King, said Tehan should try to “make a real difference” ahead of the meeting by working diplomatically to build “a coalition of support for the Trips waiver”. King said Tehan and the prime minister, Scott Morrison, “had to be dragged to their current position of muted support for a Covid vaccine Trips waiver” after months of pressure from advocacy groups. She renewed her calls for Tehan to “follow through and co-sponsor the Covid-19 vaccine waiver in the WTO”. She said the global economy would only recover from the pandemic if vaccines were available to all. “Vaccine accessibility in both developed and developing nations is imperative for global supply chains to recover,” King said. The Times of India reported last week that India was “engaging with countries like Australia, Switzerland, and Japan on a regular basis to allay their concerns” on the waiver plan. The Greens’ spokesperson for international development, Mehreen Faruqi, called on the Australian government to put “people before the profits of big pharmaceutical companies”. “The Morrison government is trying to have it both ways, but frankly, this is a coward’s way out, and will harm the efforts of Global South countries to tackle Covid-19,” Faruqi said. “Australia should be working to galvanise support for the original proposal from India and South Africa, and reject the weak counter-proposal from the EU.” The EU has proposed a compulsory licence system to cover any exports destined to countries that lack manufacturing capacity and to ensure “affordable prices” especially for low- and middle-income countries. Amnesty International is expected to write to Tehan later this week to urge Australia to do more to build a consensus at the WTO. Ry Atkinson, a campaigner with Amnesty International Australia, said the government’s position “lacks any substance”. “Pharmaceutical giants can and must share their intellectual property so everyone around the world has equal access to vaccines,” Atkinson said. “For Australia to be passive in this process is morally unconscionable.” In May, Pfizer urged Australia against joining the growing push to waive the intellectual property protections for Covid-19 vaccines, arguing it could actually harm vaccine supply and invite less safe copycats. Medicines Australia, which represents Pfizer and other pharmaceutical giants, stepped up those warnings this week, saying the waiver could create “greater demand for already scarce ingredients in the supply chain”. “If anything, noise around a waiver is a distraction from the key issues,” the chief executive of Medicines Australia, Elizabeth de Somer, wrote in an op-ed in the Australian newspaper. She said the waiver idea would fail to address “the trade restrictions, regulatory inadequacies or healthcare system deficiencies that are currently posing real barriers to vaccine equity”. Mathias Cormann, the former finance minister who now serves as OECD secretary-general, called for “an all-out effort to reach the entire world population with vaccines as quickly as possible”. “No country will be appropriately protected until every country is appropriately protected,” Cormann told a Lowy Institute event on Wednesday evening.Distrust of the state, a fear of child removal, and fear of social and cultural isolation are all barriers to reporting for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women experiencing violence, while community-based solutions “have been shown to work time and time again”, a new report says. A coalition of advocacy groups called Change The Record says stopping violence starts with putting First Nations women in charge. The report criticises successive governments for failing to address injustices against First Nations women, including physical, sexual and emotional violence and disproportionate incarceration rates. Change the Record has released the Pathways to Safety report – “the case for a dedicated First Nations Women’s National Safety Plan written by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women, for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women”. “It’s long been clear that top-down, government responses to family violence make things worse, not better, for First Nations women, children and communities,” the report states, pointing out that First Nations women are 32 times more likely to be hospitalised due to family violence, 10 times more likely to die due to assault and 45 times more likely to experience violence compared to non-Indigenous women. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women know the causes of and solutions to the challenges we and our sisters, brothers, children and communities face.” The report recommendations include prioritising the leadership of Indigenous women and increasing investment in violence prevention, better support services and better access to housing. Wakka Wakka woman Naomi Murphy, who survived 20 years of family violence, eventually found help through community organisation Djirra. “To end family violence for our women, we need to both provide the long-term care and support women – and provide options for our men to heal, not just lock them away,” she said. Djirra chief executive officer, Antoinette Braybrook, who is also co-chair of the National Family Violence Prevention and Legal Services Forum, said Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women know how to keep their children and communities safe. “We trust and have confidence in our own solutions, not government or mainstream imposed responses,” she said. In October, Change The Record wrote an open letter to prime minister Scott Morrison. First Nations women have been calling for a national safety plan written by and for them for years, it said. That demand was repeated at September’s National Summit on Women’s Safety, and has now been crystallised in Thursday’s report. After the summit women’s safety minister, Anne Ruston, said she would work with Indigenous leaders on “a plan that is specific and targeted to the needs of their women and children”.News earlier this week that Bulb Energy is to go into special administration is the latest episode in a period of unprecedented financial strain in the UK’s energy sector. Like the other 22 energy suppliers that have collapsed since August, Bulb has been squeezed between rising wholesale gas prices and the cap set by Ofgem – the energy regulator – on the amount it can charge consumers. But Bulb’s failure is particularly significant because of the size of its customer base. Supplying about 1.7 million households and businesses, it is the seventh largest gas supplier in the UK. The company’s failure exposes long-running dysfunctions in the energy sector that must be addressed if the country is to build a more resilient energy system for the future. The immediate causes of soaring wholesale gas prices are well known. Surging international demand for natural gas due to the easing of Covid-related restrictions has been a key factor. Shifts in supply dynamics have also been central. Gas supplies have been strained by Russia’s decision to withhold some of its natural gas from European markets, the depletion of the Netherlands’ natural gas fields and the shortfall of energy provided by wind power in Europe. In the context of these developments, energy company executives have blamed the government price cap for the travails of the energy sector. However, this narrative diverts attention from the structural problems that emerged with the privatisation of the energy system that began in the late 1980s and early 1990s. Supporters of privatisation claim that it benefits consumers, as market competition between suppliers should lead, in theory, to lower prices. In reality, the opposite has occurred. Even before the current energy crisis began, domestic energy bills steadily increased in “real” (ie inflation-adjusted) terms by 50% from 1996 to 2018. By early 2022, energy bills are expected to continue to increase by more than 30%. Over 3 million people in the UK are now estimated to live in fuel poverty. Why has privatisation failed to deliver? A key part of the problem has to do with oligopolistic concentration in the energy sector. Though there has been an influx of smaller companies in recent years, the energy market is dominated by a handful of large companies: Centrica, the parent of British Gas, EDF Energy UK, E.ON UK, npower, Scottish Power and Ovo, which recently acquired the retail arm of SSE. Often referred to as the big six, these companies control 77% of the UK household energy market. In addition to charging higher prices to consumers, the energy companies display many of the maligned characteristics associated with oligopolies: fat profit margins, use of outsourcing and layoffs, and the funnelling of billions of pounds to shareholders through dividend payments. In 2013, the Office of Fair Trading aptly described the oligopoly of the big energy companies as a “confusopoly” because they deliberately make their price structures complex so that households find it difficult to evaluate whether their gas tariffs offer value relative to others. This means that the fierce cost competition that was envisaged by Thatcherite reformers in the 1980s has never come to fruition. To make matters worse, there are widespread concerns that the big suppliers are greenwashing: mis-selling some energy tariffs comprising electricity that comes from non-renewable sources as environmentally friendly. Price limits implemented under the Tariff Cap Act in 2018 reflected a begrudging acknowledgment by the Conservative government that the market had failed to deliver value for households. But what has emerged is a regulatory system based on a hodgepodge of principles, which neither protects nor empowers consumers. It is therefore little wonder that, according to our calculations, the average Trustpilot rating of the six biggest gas suppliers is only 2.9 out of 5, with scores ranging from a creditable 4.3 to a woeful 1.1. The stronghold that the largest gas companies have over the sector has forced many of their smaller retail competitors to run losses in a desperate bid to gain market share. This is ultimately what put companies such as Bulb in a perilous position once wholesale gas prices began to surge. Since August, 17 of the 22 collapsed energy suppliers have been bought up by either the big six or Shell Energy, a subsidiary of global oil company Royal Dutch Shell. As large companies tighten their grip over the energy sector, the problems associated with oligopolistic markets are likely to persist and even worsen. So what is the solution? As we lay out in a recent briefing, bringing the energy sector back under public control will redress many of the failures of privatisation. Public ownership won’t solve the problem of rising wholesale gas prices, but it would bring much-needed stability to an energy market racked by the chaos of failing private suppliers. And since public suppliers are not beholden to shareholders and pressures to pay dividends, they are better positioned to provide effective subsidies to reduce household energy bills, put an end to “fire and rehire” tactics and meaningfully invest in the renewable energy infrastructure the UK urgently needs. Joseph Baines and Sandy Hager are senior lecturers in international political economy at King’s College London and City, University of London respectivelyThe attorney general, Michaelia Cash, has left open the possibility of making further changes to the proposed religious discrimination act, as she defends the controversial statement of belief clause facing widespread criticism, including from moderate Liberals. Cash, who presented the revised religious discrimination bill to the Coalition party room on Tuesday, also rejected claims from equality advocates that the new laws could be used to overturn state bans on gay conversion practices, saying any regulations made under the bill could be disallowed by the Senate. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, will introduce the bill to the House of Representatives on Thursday, but it will not be debated or voted on until next week. Once it reaches the Senate the draft legislation will go to a committee inquiry. Cash said the government would be prepared to consider any recommendations made through the Senate process, but insisted the bill was a good balance between “religious discrimination and intersecting human rights”. “It will go to a Senate committee, and a Senate committee in the normal course of events will then conduct a review into the bill and report back early next year with recommendations, if any, and then we’ll be able to debate the bill early next year in the Senate,” Cash told Guardian Australia. “The government would consider any recommendations made by the committee at that time.” But Cash said there was a “misunderstanding” about the effect of the statement of belief clause, which would override state anti-discrimination laws and which has been singled out by LGBTQ+ groups and moderate Liberals as being of particular concern. She said that the clause would only protect statements made “in good faith”, and not conduct. She rejected suggestions the clause would protect a boss writing in an employee’s book that her lesbianism was sinful – an example that has been put forward by Equality Australia – because this statement would not have been made in “good faith”. “All the statement of belief clause does is provide that the making of a statement of belief in and of itself, if it is made in good faith, the statement itself would not be discrimination under any Australian anti-discrimination law,” Cash said. “The minute you move into conduct, that is entirely different.” Cash said she wanted to “kill off” any suggestion that the power to make further regulations to prescribe other state and territory laws could be used to protect gay conversion practices, which have been outlawed in some states. “We have no intention of doing that, that is just wrong,” Cash said. She said that new laws would only be included by regulation if they “impinged upon the ability to express genuine and sincerely held religious views and non religious views”. “It would be a disallowable instrument, and if the minister adds something by regulation, the Senate can say no, and we do not control the numbers in the Senate.” Cash said she believed the changes made to the bill after six months of consultation had “simplified and clarified” the legislation, and she was hopeful of securing bipartisan support as a result. “I believe they do strike a balance between religious discrimination and intersecting human rights and I would hope that would be enough for me to get bipartisan support in relation to the bill.” After months of consultations on the legislation, Cash removed the controversial Folau clause and dumped provisions that would have allowed conscientious objection for health professionals. But equality advocates are still concerned the bill could water down protections for other minority groups, with particular concern about the bill’s statement of belief clause that protects religious statements from breaching state and territory anti-discrimination laws. Equality Australia says, for example, the proposed law would protect someone telling an HIV-positive patient that the disease was a “punishment from God”, or expressing their belief that homosexuality is a sin. Moderate Liberal MPs are also concerned about these provisions. In the Coalition party room on Tuesday, Morrison said the legislation would be referred to a Senate committee inquiry to allow these concerns to be ventilated, and potentially see the legislation amended. Tasmanian Liberal MP Bridget Archer said she had a “lot of problems” with the bill overriding Tasmanian anti-discrimination laws. “The uncertainty at the prospect is already causing some anxiety for LGBTI teachers in religious schools,” she said. “Tasmania’s anti-discrimination law works really, really well, and it has an educative function, this [bill] would create a more adversarial system for pursuing a complaint.” North Sydney Liberal MP Trent Zimmerman said on Wednesday he was continuing to raise his concerns over the potential for the bill to override state laws with the attorney general. “What I am concerned about as a broader principle, is the fact that a bill like this does give primacy to statements of belief founded in religious belief, over other beliefs that are personally held,” he told the ABC. The Liberal senator, Andrew Bragg, said the government needed to fix the sex discrimination act to protect gay teachers from being sacked “at the same time” as the religious discrimination bill was being considered, rather than wait for a review conducted by the Australian Law Reform Commission in 12 months’ time. “Too many Australian teachers are being sacked for being gay, and I do think that the existing exemptions in the Sex Discrimination Act are not fit for purpose,” Bragg said. Labor is yet to declare whether they support the legislation, but on Tuesday Anthony Albanese indicated the opposition could seek amendments. The party wants the bill examined by a joint select committee rather than a Senate inquiry, which would allow both MPs and senators an opportunity to properly examine the bill. “I’m of the view that people should be allowed to, of course, practice their faith. That should be respected. That’s my starting point,” Albanese said. “That, of course, shouldn’t be at the expense of discriminating on the basis of other people’s characteristics.” The bill also faces a tide of opposition at the state level, with the Victorian Labor government and both sides of Tasmanian politics rejecting elements that override state laws on educational institutions’ hiring and statements of belief. On Wednesday the Victorian attorney general, Jaclyn Symes, told reporters she was “disappointed” and would “very firmly oppose” any attempt to override Victorian anti-discrimination laws. Symes is awaiting advice on the bill but did not rule out a high court challenge in the event it passed. The Tasmanian premier, Peter Gutwein, has said the government doesn’t want its discrimination laws “weakened” and had conveyed this to the commonwealth. The Tasmanian shadow attorney general, Ella Haddad, told parliament on Wednesday the federal bill is “a fundamental states’ rights issues”. “Our act is the strongest, in Tasmania, Tasmanians have more to lose under this federal bill than any other state,” she said.Tens of thousands of people experiencing homelessness, living with disabilities or who are Indigenous are being disproportionately affected by welfare payment suspensions under the mutual obligation regime, government data shows. The data, reported to federal parliament by the employment department, comes as a separate study by the charity Anglicare suggests most jobseekers believe mutual obligation is doing little to help them find work. To keep their payments, jobseekers must attend appointments with privatised employment service providers and log their efforts to apply for as many as 20 jobs a month. The system had been paused for much of the pandemic but restarted across the country last month. Payments can be suspended if a person misses one of these requirements, or cut or cancelled altogether if a person is judged to have engaged in repeated “non-compliance”. While the government argues the system ensures people are serious about finding work, advocates argue the system is punitive, does little to help jobseekers find employment and some businesses have complained it leaves them wading through unsuitable applications. The system is also filled with complaints that payments can be stopped erroneously due to mistakes from employer service providers. The new data suggests that despite new rules offering a 48-hour grace period for jobseekers to contact their provider before their payments are suspended, those considered vulnerable by Centrelink – such as the homeless, disabled and Indigenous jobseekers – are still disproportionately affected by the system, as Guardian Australia has previously reported. It shows more than 56.4% of the 64,123 jobseekers who have been flagged as having experienced homelessness have had their payments suspended in the six months to September. Among the 133,559 jobseekers who have a disability, 47.1% had received a payment suspension in those six months, while the same was true of 63.5% of the 70,150 Indigenous jobseekers. Some jobseekers will have been recorded across multiple or even all three measures. The data confirms those considered vulnerable by Centrelink are more likely to face payment suspensions than the overall cohort in the jobactive system. Overall, 43.8% of the 595,516 people in the jobactive system had a received payment suspension in the six-month period. Under the mutual obligations system, jobseekers also receive “demerit points” when their payments are temporarily suspended for failing to meet their activities. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning After five demerits, they can receive financial penalties, meaning their payments are reduced by half, or cut altogether for a fortnight. They can be kicked off welfare payments altogether for what is considered serious non-compliance. The data shows that between September 2020 and September 2021, on 1,532 occasions people experiencing homelessness received one of these penalties. Similarly, the employment department applied these penalties on 2,597 occasions towards Indigenous jobseekers and 1,495 times for those with a disability. Asked what benefit there might be to cutting the payment of a person experiencing homelessness, a department spokesperson said a “core principle of mutual obligations is that requirements must be tailored to individual circumstances”. The spokesperson said the system had a “range of protections” to “ensure that jobseekers do not face a penalty for not meeting requirements for reasons beyond their control”. “There is clear evidence that these safeguards operate effectively at ensuring penalties are targeted at those able but unwilling to meet their requirements,” the spokesperson said. “Exemptions from mutual obligation requirements are also available to job seekers who are unable to meet any requirements, for example due to homelessness. “Some job seekers who face penalties are recorded in administrative systems as having experienced homelessness, however, this does not necessarily imply that their requirements are inappropriate or not tailored to their circumstances.” Anglicare’s Asking Those Who Know report, released on Thursday, surveyed 618 jobseekers and found 79% believed their Centrelink activities were “pointless”, while 56% thought the obligations prevented them from participating in more meaningful activities. Only 19% felt their obligations were tailored to their needs and only 13% said they were getting the support they needed to find work. “We’ve got that hamster wheel of activities that aren’t helping people find work,” the Anglicare chief executive, Kasy Chambers, said. “They were getting in the way of voluntary work, getting in the way of them doing meaningful training, they were even getting in the way of people starting small businesses.” A government-commissioned report, revealed by Guardian Australia in May, also found employment service providers were unsatisfied with the mutual obligations system.Ahead of next week’s GDP figures the latest data on construction suggests the lockdowns in New South Wales will massively affect that state’s economic figures, but that outside the south-eastern parts of the country things have been carrying along nicely. The September quarter GDP figures due next Wednesday are likely to be among the worst ever seen. Treasury secretary Steven Kennedy told the Senate last month that he expected the economy will have fallen 3%. That would not be as bad as the 7% fall last year, but the lockdowns in NSW, ACT and then Victoria during July, August and September clearly have had a massive impact. Just how big of an impact was shown in the September quarter construction figures, released on Tuesday by the Australian Bureau of Statistics. These are the first lot of data that comes out in the run-up to each quarter’s GDP figures. Today we will see the latest investment data and then on Monday will come the business indicators that reveal profits and wages. The building and construction figures are important because the government’s homebuilder program was a major stimulus for the economy during the pandemic. Over the past financial year, residential housing construction, alterations and renovations were a key driver of GDP growth: If the graph does not display please click here So it was not the greatest news to find that construction in the September quarter fell 0.3%. But that fall is rather better that might have been expected – construction in Victoria actually rose, despite being in lockdown for some of the period. Overwhelmingly the problem was NSW and the ACT: If the graph does not display please click here Construction outside NSW and the ACT grew a decidedly strong 3.5%. So massive was the impact of the lockdowns that for the first time ever in one quarter Victoria had more construction work than NSW: If the graph does not display please click here Because Victoria’s lockdown started later than NSW’s, the December figures will probably show a fall in construction in that state, while NSW is likely to show improvement. But what is most promising is that even with the massive falls in NSW, overall private-sector building and construction work across Australia rose. The national declines were all driven by a fall in public-sector building: If the graph does not display please click here But even here the falls were again driven by NSW and its lockdowns: If the graph does not display please click here Even with these large falls in NSW, and the overall small drop across the country, total construction remains strongly above where it was a year ago: If the graph does not display please click here All up these are quite promising figures, which suggest that while the lockdowns shuttered the NSW economy, the rest of the nation continued to perform quite strongly. The 0.5% increase this quarter is quite healthy when you consider that last year , the nation’s economy dropped by the record 7% and private-sector building work in that quarter fell 3.7%. Of course it is a health driven by the massive stimulus of the homebuilder and first-homebuyer incentives, and record low interest rates. For now the market still expects the Reserve Bank to increase rates, with the yield of Australian government two-year bonds being well above the cash rate of 0.1%. When that occurs it means the market expects the cash rate to rise: If the graph does not display please click here But just because the market thinks rates will rise, that does not mean they will. In 2018 there was a strong belief that rates needed to rise. At the time I suggested such beliefs were wrong. This time round the likelihood is stronger. But there is something that needs to be considered, when either considering interest rates or inflation, or even the strength of the economy. What we are seeing now is still the economy subject to the pandemic – either through lockdowns or through massive, unprecedented stimulus or supply chain blockages. These construction figures suggest the stimulus and low-interest rates are still working, but they give us little sense of how strong the economy will be once those measures are removed.The New South Wales government has kept secret a document calling for a halt to native logging in regions hit hard by the black summer bushfires and recommending revising agreements to account for the increasing threat of global heating . The Natural Resources Commission report on the Coastal Integrated Forestry Operations Approval (IFOA), a copy of which was obtained by Guardian Australia, called for the suspension of timber harvesting for a minimum of three years in three zones it deemed to be “extreme risk”. These are Narooma and Nowra on the south coast and Taree on the mid-north coast. In those areas, “there is a risk of serious and irreversible harm to environmental values from the cumulative impacts of fire and harvesting,” the report said, adding that a temporary suspension was needed “in line with the precautionary principle”. It also identified six other zones the commission categorised as “high risk” where logging would be restricted in 75% of the area. Only seven of 27 native forest regions were “low risk”, where harvesting could continue under “standard” rules. Those risks included threats to vulnerable and critically endangered fauna and flora, including koalas and the long-nosed potoroo. The NSW government asked the commission to prepare the report after the 2019-20 fires burnt about 4.8m hectares of the state, including 64%, or about 700,00 hectares of the native state forest estate. The Coastal IFOA was only adopted in 2018 “on the basis that it reflected best practice forest management … [including] enhanced protections for habitat and native fauna”, the report noted. Although completed in June 2021, the government has not released the report, which explores the prospects for logging and jobs in regional communities. As an indication of the sensitivities, “the Commission was not able to consult with the forestry sector or forest industry, which also impacts the accuracy of estimates”, it said in the report. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The independent upper house MP Justin Field said that two years after the fires, the government was “keeping secret a report that the logging rules are not fit for purpose to deal with extreme events”. “The report called for an urgent response, including immediately stopping logging in some areas and putting in place significant additional protections in many others,” Field said. “Some of these areas are being logged today without those additional protections undermining forest recovery.” Government ministers were approached for comment, including the deputy premier, Paul Toole. “The report is cabinet in confidence, and it is therefore not appropriate for me to comment,” the minister for planning and public spaces, Rob Stokes, said. A spokesperson for state-owned Forestry Corporation declined to comment on the report. The fires and a surge in demand, though, had contributed to supply shortages even with the salvage logging of burnt plantations. “Forestry Corporation has harvested 5m tonnes of fire-affected timber from softwood plantations and supplied it to industry,” the spokesperson said, adding it had also replanted a record 16m seedlings this season, up from a normal 10m. “[The corporation] has been working to maintain a responsible level of structural hardwood timber production from plantations and native forests, under strict conditions that balance the production of renewable timber with environmental protection,” the official said. Preliminary modelling conducted by the government predicted the recovery of burnt areas in the north coast would be much quicker than for the south coast. “The NSW government should initiate a rapid assessment of forestry industry size, viability and resilience to changes in wood supply for south coast subregions in full consultation with industry,” the report said. Other recommendations included a call for a “large-scale, funded, scientific field sampling strategy” to improve the existing “recovery index” and for updates every January using new satellite imagery to inform authorities of the state of the forests. Climate change also features prominently, with the commission recommending Forestry Corp “accelerate its sustainable yield modelling program to account for “projected climatic and fire regimes and post-fire mortality and growth assumptions”. The existing Coastal IFOA had not been designed to reduce the risks of logging in a severely fire-affected landscape after the record bushfire season, the report said. The trends indicate the threats will intensify. “The 2019-20 [fires] significantly changed disturbance regimes and the direction and magnitude of this change are likely to be reinforced in coming decades,” the report said. “This means that the area of the Coastal IFOA that will be exposed to high frequency and high intensity wildfires is likely to increase substantially.” The commission recommended the government develop a new framework to address the risk and priorities, and use research to fill data gaps. “This information will not only inform decisions made in relation to the Coastal IFOA, it will also be critical to inform the development of actions or plans to aid in the response to future, large-scale fire events,” it said.After completing his HSC exams in emergency accommodation in Forbes, the only way Sean Darcy could get home to Bedgerabong was via helicopter. Darcy and his family are among 150 people isolated in the town of Bedgerabong, about 30km west of Forbes, due to flooding along the Lachlan River. Spokesperson for New South Wales State Emergency Service southern zone, Brett Koschel, said the current advice is the community should prepare for isolation potentially until Christmas. Bedgerabong is a small farming community located between Condobolin and Forbes. With no stores of their own they are reliant on road access to neighbouring towns for shopping. The Forbes SES unit commander, Robert Walshaw, said it’s “virtually the whole community” who are flooded in. The SES have only been able to deliver food supplies, sandbags and even local school teachers from Forbes via helicopter. The mayor of Forbes, Phyllis Miller, said her biggest concern was for Bedgerabong residents’ welfare – both their physical health ensuring they have all the supplies they need, as well as their mental health as farmers “see their bumper crops washing away in front of them.” “The water’s going to be around for a long time” Walshaw said, as the Wyangala dam will need to release water to prevent overflow. Koschel said the water has come from the Wyangala dam and will keep moving downstream from Forbes through Bedgerabong, Jemalong and on to Condobolin, with the flat terrain meaning the flooding is slow to recede. The Jemalong weir – the closest measurement to Bedgerabong – had not dropped from its peak of 7.9m on Monday. The river at Condobolin is currently causing minor flooding, but is expected to rise to 6.3m on Sunday. Sean’s father, Scott Darcy, reckons the family’s Christmas will be affected – as the flooding in 2016 saw the family isolated for eight weeks. He can remember the date precisely because after the floods began in September they were only able to leave their home on Sean’s birthday in October. Sign up to receive Guardian Australia’s fortnightly Rural Network email newsletter A wheat and canola farmer, Scott Darcy has had seven paddocks of crops completely flooded. He will not be able to derive any income from those crops, and says there will be added expense from the clean up in the aftermath of the flooding. One paddock of canola has been protected due to a levee “so far” – but the flooding means he can’t access it with the windrower to harvest the crop. Michelle Whiley, from Warroo 15kms away from Bedgerabong, says the community solidarity is very strong. Her property had never been threatened before now, but she’s had people from Bedgerabong come with a digger to help her build a levee around her home. “That community is the best the community I’ve ever been involved with,” Whiley said. “They know who they have to check up on … It’s an unwritten rule, you don’t have to ring up, it just happens. That’s the community it is.” At her property Whiley says “we’ve managed to put a vehicle on the other side of the flood water, so we can kayak to the road and drive to Condobolin for the supplies. Our access is only by boat, so to speak.” Koschel described the community as very self-sufficient. In the north of the state, other communities are also isolated due to flooding. Spokesperson for the NSW SES, Dave Rankine, said the town of Wee Waa, 35kms northwest of Narrabri, is predicted to suffer major flooding on Wednesday, which will isolate the community. Rankine said all roads within a 20km radius of Wee Waa are effectively inundated with water and that their isolation might be prolonged because of the flooding from Gunnedah, which has peaked at 8.25 metres and has started to recede. Sign up for the Rural Network email newsletter Join the Rural Network group on Facebook to be part of the communityHello, my name is Ash Flanders and I love funny internet videos (I won’t say “content”, I’m 40) so much that I performed an entire show of them once. But the list below is not the 10 funniest things I’ve seen on the internet. See, the Guardian has rules around things that are offensive or mean-spirited, which meant my top 1,000 clips were ineligible. No Rhubarb Woman? No Anal Massage for Relaxation and Pleasure supercut? No falling runway models, vicious cats or injured skateboarders?!? Fine. Those clicks could’ve really helped. Just sayin’. I guess next time we meet and you hear me say, “The doorbell makes the rosebud hungry,” just pretend you know what I’m talking about. Lastly, I’m sure you’ve seen some of these before but I didn’t want to risk it if you hadn’t. It’s vitally important we get to 90% of people having seen This is Hip-Hop. 1. Mom Commercial I picked this video but really you should just watch everything Cole Escola has ever put online. No one does it better than them. Their Instagram is worth your time too. Sorry, this is my least funny description because Cole makes me feel deeply inferior. 2. This is Hip-Hop This forever altered the way my friend Nick and I speak to each other. If we were facing certain death we’d still be shrieking “look at my feet!” or “I’m into points a lot but they’re not your average points” at each other as the car filled with water and we met the end we deserved. 3. Gay couple spends nearly 30 years spoiling a plastic baby doll A very wealthy, very obnoxious, very NEW YORK gay couple got so sick of hearing about their friends’ children they got a child of their own – a doll named Digby that they found in a Parisian flea market because of course. This is funny in the exhausting, droll way incredibly wealthy people always are. What started as an inside joke has now ruled this couple’s lives for almost 30 years, while their friends with real children have very much moved on. Try to keep your food down when a neighbour, who must be on the payroll, says, “Digby always surprises me with his style, his élan, his je ne sais quoi.” That said, when I do die in that car accident, I’m coming back as Digby – he’s travelled more than I have and wears much fancier clothing. 4. Dad Pranks Son with Shower Scare And yet, look at what actual parents do to their actual children. I laugh at this clip only because I know the terror firsthand. My brother would do this to me constantly when I was a kid, only I was singing Enya instead of Katy Perry. Don’t ask. 5. How to Make Chicken Bone Broth Recipe THE BEST Nutritious Recipe Inexpensive to Make “Close enough for government work!” our chef gushes, looking at the shredded chicken carcass beneath her with a pride and confidence I will never possess. OK, what’s really in that broth? 6. Werner Herzog on Chickens Oh god, I’m in a chicken hole again, aren’t I? Well, apparently I’m not the only one as Werner clearly spends a lot of time thinking about – and hypnotising – chickens. But in defence of poultry, who isn’t hypnotised by that wonderfully clipped German monotone? 7. Stop It – Episode #3 Mike Rose’s satire of intervention is impeccable. In this episode of STOP IT, Mercedes is addicted to wearing the same outfit (relatable, I was just called “an outfit repeater” in rehearsal and felt very attacked) and it’s destroying the lives of everyone around her. CAN SHE BE STOPPED!?!? Mike is also the genius behind queer internet canon Fagney &amp; Gaycey and Planet Unicorn. I love him so much I demanded he meet with me in LA. Sometimes he even comments on my Instagram!! Hi, Mike! 8. Every woman in a 70s movie Lauren’s here to share what the modern cinematic woman from the 70s wants outta life. She’s done a lot of analysis, smoked a little grass and is ready to give Neal, Michael, Alan, Steven, Paul, Harry, Buster and Ted a piece of her mind. Does that blow your mind, square? 9. Courtney Love gatecrashes Madonna’s interview A literal crash course in diva physics – this is what happens when an unstoppable force meets an immovable object … KABLAM! This video is living proof that men are deeply unnecessary. Courtney’s line to the host after Madge leaves is one for the ages: “Was I bumming you out? Were you guys, like, talking astrophysics and stuff?” 10. Rory McClory’s Hidden Gems My loving take on shows like Postcards or Getaway, a stream of infotainment that has always fascinated me. In this episode of Hidden Gems, Rory meets Michael, a man with a very strange and sad museum that began as a form of therapy. I will always be indebted to Laura Imbruglia for helping me make this. And with 1K views, it’s the most viral thing a theatre actor like me has ever achieved! I’m definitely coming back as Digby next time. • Ash Flanders’ cabaret comedy SS Metaphor is on at the Malthouse in Melbourne 5-19 DecemberAustralian engineer Robert Pether has penned a handwritten note to Scott Morrison from his Iraqi jail cell, pleading for the prime minister to intervene and warning he is effectively being held hostage. Pether has been behind bars for almost eight months after being lured to Iraq and arrested in relation to a dispute between his firm and the Central Bank of Iraq over the construction of its new Baghdad headquarters. In August, Pether was sentenced to five years in an Iraqi jail and fined $US12m over allegations his firm, CME Consulting, spent money that should have gone to an architect and a subcontractor. The sentence devastated his Ireland-based family, including his wife, Desree, and three children, who say Pether has been punished for what is effectively a contractual dispute that belongs in civil courts. Pether said he’d been tricked into signing a confession – written in Arabic – in front of a judge after being told it was a routine court record. “Two months later I learned the document was my alleged confession,” he wrote. “The first time I saw a translation of this document was four months after this date and it was nothing like the statement I had given during the interrogation process.” Pether said his family wasn’t told of his whereabouts for three weeks and he was not allowed to contact the Australian embassy until he’d spent four weeks behind bars. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The initial charges against him, he wrote, were disproven easily within 24 hours, but he and his colleague were held regardless. The new charges against him were only made clear when he got to his hearing. Pether said he was only permitted to meet with his lawyers four months after his arrest and three days before his hearing. “The lawyers were only provided with a portion of the case file prior to the hearing,” he said. Pether said his legal team was denied access to documents that would have disproven the case against him. “It would seem that we are effectively being legally held as hostages in order to force our employer to make a substantial payment to the [Central Bank of Iraq],” he said. Pether acknowledged it was unusual for a prime minister to get involved, but he said the case had been politicised and required intervention above the foreign minister level. “Your support and assistance in finding a solution to such a novel and unique situation is greatly appreciated,” he wrote. Desree Pether said her husband feels abandoned by Australia. She said her husband has lost 30kg while in custody and fears for his health, given he had a melanoma previously and is now long overdue for a skin check. The Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne, has previously raised the case with the Iraqi government. “We have sought clarity about, as I’ve said, the nature of the complaints that have resulted in Mr Pether’s detention,” Payne told Perth radio in May. “And if it is indeed a civil matter, a contractual matter, then we would seek for it to be treated in that way.”The advance of renewable energy across Australia is driving down household electricity bills, and will result in average savings of about $77 a year by 2024, the Australian Energy Market Commission said in its annual survey. Queensland is projected to lead the way among the states in the National Electricity Market, with a typical household’s bill to drop by 10%, or close to double the national average fall of 5.7%. That will cut the typical Queensland residential bill from $1,226 in 2020-21 to $1,100 by 2023-24. Victoria is forecast to have the next largest drop, of 8%, trimming the average cost of power from $1,290 in the most recent year to $1,191 by 2o23-24. NSW consumers would be paying 4% less – shaving $50 from the $1,253 paid now – but ACT would buck the trend, with the bill swelling by 4% to $2,081. While the three-year trend would deliver residential bills back to 2017 levels, the downward direction is likely to be disrupted in 2022-23 when the 1,680-megawatt Liddell coal-fired power is scheduled to shut down. That closure is forecast to contribute to a rise in wholesale power prices, the commission said. The main driver of lower prices will be the addition of new large-scale solar plants. Developers have committed to 2,671MW of new solar and 1,393MW of new windfarms. They have also committed to 904MW of new gas-fired capacity and 470MW of large batteries across the NEM. Of the new plants, NSW leads with 2,287MW ahead of Queensland’s 1,557MW and Victoria’s 1,354MW. “We are starting to see increases in the cost of network investments, and this is likely to accelerate over the next decade as more network investment is required to connect dispersed new generation to the grid,” the AEMC said. The energy minister Angus Taylor said further falls in electricity prices “will put more money in the hip pockets of families and households, [which is] critical as we recover from the impact of Covid.” “Our actions have supported a 10 per cent drop in household electricity costs under this government – that’s 11 quarters in a row of falls in year-on-year household electricity costs across the country,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The price projections follow the release from the Australian Bureau of Statistics on Wednesday showing renewable energy supplies increased by 15% in 2019-20, extending the five-year trend. Solar, wind and hydro contributed 222 petajoules of energy to domestic supplies, the ABS’s Jonathon Khoo said. “[A] single PJ could provide 47,000 Australian homes with electricity for 12 months,” he said. “Solar drove this increase with an expansion of large-scale solar photovoltaic power stations.” Interestingly, household energy use and the aggregate energy intensity use by industry both extended their downward trends. In 2019-20, average households used 5.4% less energy, totalling 125 gigajoules, while industry used 3.6% less per dollar-unit of output. On the export front, Australia’s black coal shipments eased 0.6% to 11,062 petajoules in 2019-20 from a year earlier. Liquefied Natural Gas exports rose 6% in the year to 4,393 PJs in 2019-20, the ABS said.All the jigsaws, craft projects and home-based hobbies of lockdown are now gathering dust, forgotten; a product of a cursed time that we don’t want to think about again. But there was one pandemic pastime that I was really fond of, and hope to continue through: listening to music. Like properly, deeply listening to it. This week Spotify bowed to a request from Adele, and removed the shuffle button from album pages. I can understand the artist’s desire to preserve their tracklist: before lockdown I was haphazard and random in my listening. It was on in the background: ambient noise as I did the dishes, providing a tempo to the stirring of the risotto. When I felt in the mood for proper listening, I would return to old favourites. But during Sydney’s long lockdown I decided I wanted to mix it up. Each weekday for a couple of months I would wake up, pick one artist, and just stick with them all day: going on my little walk, or even just sitting in a chair listening, giving the music my total attention. I’d start with the most popular songs and then make it through the top albums (yes, with their intended tracklisting); as the day went on – and the Spotify algorithm led me deeper into their catalogue – I’d stay listening while doing housework and workouts. I shared what I was listening to with Twitter each day; my account’s not up at the moment, but during lockdown followers could join me, and spend their own day with the same artist. People who knew a lot more about music than I did would urge me away from the algorithm and recommend which albums to start with, what tracks to focus on. To narrow it down, I set a couple of rules: focus on the canon – music others are passionate about but passed me by the first time around; and don’t spend too much time revisiting old favourites: this is about discovery. The other stipulation: the music couldn’t be too gloomy. I grew up loving the Smiths and the Cure, but I didn’t want to be pulled down too far; and sorry Leonard Cohen, but a surfeit of minor chords were too much for my fragile equilibrium. We have a pandemic to get through! Here are some other discoveries – and a song to start with for each artist. Nina Simone is EVERYTHING Of course I had heard Nina Simone – but until lockdown I had never really heard her. I never let her seep into my bones; invited her in to some interior world where music works its magic. Waking up in the depth of lockdown – case numbers high, people freaking out on Twitter, a bad vibe out there on the almost-empty streets – on Nina Simone Day everything was transformed. I challenge anyone to be in a negative frame of mind waking up to Feeling Good at high volume. I bounced out of bed and walked down the rain-soaked gloomy streets of Kings Cross; they suddenly seem romantic when soundtracked by Put a Spell on You. Sublime. Ray of Light is a GREAT album On my Madonna day, it took a while to get to the goods. Her early pop stuff was a fun, nostalgic listen but it sort of slid off the surfaces; the latter Madonna was too overproduced for my tastes. But the sweet spot? Ray of Light: a perfect balance of pop, dance and melody. Pitchfork described it as “channeling acid electronica, Kabbalah, and motherhood”; I prefer to describe it as the Dorito of Madonna’s career. The perfect blend of sugar, fat and spice; you just have to consume the whole, satisfying tasty thing in one go. The Mamas &amp; the Papas backstory is almost as good as the music Their best song, California Dreaming, comes in at just two minutes 25 seconds. Enjoying the sweet delights of these four-part, sunny harmonies, I was sad to discover that the band were also over too soon: only active for a few years, 1965–1968, and briefly in 1971. After devouring the Mamas &amp; the Papas back catalogue, I watched Laurel Canyon on Netflix and then went down an internet rabbit hole about the band members and their big, chaotic, 1960s lives. (And no: Mama Cass did not choke to death on a ham sandwich in London.) Johnny Cash was my least favourite day When I put the call out for recommendations, a largish number of (mostly) men were emphatic: Johnny Cash MUST be on the list. But waking up, the first song on his Spotify profile was Hurt. The lockdown had just been extended. It was raining. It was the kind of unloveable day that goes for a week. I sang along – “I focus on the pain, the only thing that’s real”. That set the tone for a fairly somber day. Gorillaz lyrics are on another planet I love Gorillaz, but this was the first time I listened to the lyrics. “I’m a scary gargoyle on a tower / That you made with plastic power / Your rhinestone eyes are like factories far away”? OK sure! And is Feel Good Inc the only song to reference windmills and arse cracks? Pet Sounds is some sort of pinnacle Canon for a reason: this Beach Boys album exists outside time, space, trends, fashion or politics. While fans urged me to explore their whole back catalogue, I was too in love with this album to move on – and spent the whole day (and subsequent months) with it on repeat. Brigid’s list (in order of appearance) Prince Fiona Apple Gil Scott Heron Joni Mitchell Nina Simone The Mamas &amp; the Papas Stevie Wonder Nick Cave Rihanna Amy Winehouse Gurrumul Radiohead Madonna Johnny Cash Drake The Weeknd Fleet Foxes Massive Attack Velvet Underground Simon and Garfunkel Taylor Swift Beach Boys Aretha Franklin Yothu Yindi Sufjan Stevens Beck Rolling StonesMy husband and I are retired teachers. He is 81. He had a devastating stroke four years ago, and I have been his 24/7 caretaker ever since. (He also has diabetes, cancer, epilepsy and pulmonary fibrosis.) His illnesses have destroyed our life savings, and we are running out of money. His two adult children, both very well off, have abandoned him. His sister has $60m in the bank, and will not lift a finger to help. My question, and it’s a serious one: how do I not hate them? Eleanor says: You’re allowed to hate these people. This is a terrible abandonment. People say hatred is a destructive emotion, “like drinking poison and expecting your enemy to die”. I know they’re right, sometimes – I know mentally litigating the same argument in the shower persuades no one, that picking at the same memory means it’ll never heal. But I also know there are ways to hate that don’t erode your character – there are forms of hatred that insist on it, affirm it, defend it. Hatred can make us feel powerful when everything else wants us to feel small. Contempt lights a fire inside us – when we hold on to that fire, refusing to extinguish it, knowing what we could burn down if we chose to – that can make us feel like a decider again, instead of someone who gets buffeted around and has to say “thank you”. Think about your situation: you chose to be merciful to these relatives. You didn’t have to. At any point you could have hurled your molten fury at them, but you didn’t. The fact that you feel hatred towards them reveals what exceptional self-control it required to choose mercy instead; that would have been easy, if you’d felt nothing but love. Feeling the fire of hatred and knowing we can control it sometimes restores a sense of power and dignity, when other people would like us to feel neither. Hatred can also be a way of forging self-esteem. You might not be the perfect this, or the best possible that, but anger can buy us a blistering kind of self-confidence: at least you’re not them. I think one way we get misled is by thinking the emotional pendulum of anger has only two resting places: loathing (self-defeating, tiring, preoccupying) and forgiving (beatific, peaceful, unburdened). As long as we think those are our only options, we’ll deny ourselves those more productive kinds of hatred. We’ll bounce between two ways of being unhappy: feeling the hate but being consumed by it, or trying to quell it and feeling walked on. There is a place to rest between these positions – something I think of as “disinterested dislike”. In it, you don’t think about these people, but what you think of them is roughly “yeuch”. You usher thoughts of them and their vices out of your mind, the way you’d reach to mute the TV when a politician whose voice you don’t want in the living room comes on air. Aiming at a more detached disliking is a less Herculean emotional feat. You will let yourself preserve the parts of your emotion that just feel true; these people aren’t helping. You won’t ask yourself to change your mind about them – you’ll ask yourself to change how much of your mind you give them. I find the key here is to do something that rules the matter “proved”, so you can stop spending your energy re-proving it. Pronounce these people contemptible so resolutely that you don’t need to think about it any more; make it part of the historical record, a testimony that lives outside you. Ceremonies really help, even if they feel silly at first. Write down everything they haven’t done and set that list on fire. Walk up to a tree and tell one of its knots who you hate. Etch your loathing onto a stone and leave it somewhere beautiful. Externalise the record, then walk away. You don’t need to walk to a place unmarred by hatred. You just need to be sure it’s peripheral to your view. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereExpansion periods can be hugely disruptive to playing lists in the AFLW. Just ask the Brisbane Lions. The Queensland team – who have arguably been one of the strongest teams in the competition since its inception – have previously been rocked by back-to-back expansions; first in 2019 with the entry of North Melbourne and Geelong, which saw Brittany Gibson, Jamie Stanton, Tahlia Randall and Kaitlyn Ashmore leave to help start up the Kangaroos; and then in 2020, when the club lost eight players to the Gold Coast Suns, along with stars Kate McCarthy to St Kilda and Sabrina Frederick to Richmond. Brisbane AFLW CEO Breanna Brock said earlier this month that the 2019-2020 expansions decimated their playing list and left them feeling like they were starting again. “In that two-year phase of bringing in those extra six teams, we lost 16 players”, which she recalls was “really, really hard”. And although the team remained a top side, they had to rebuild and the one that took home the 2021 premiership was a very different playing side to a few years earlier. Only seven players who took to the field for the Lions 2017 grand final remained for the 2021 decider. Taking this as a fable, the looming expansion period – which will see the introduction of Hawthorn, Essendon, Port Adelaide and Sydney Swans for the 2022-23 season – may mean that the upcoming sixth season will be the last chance for existing clubs to utilise their current playing list strength before players leave to help build the newcomers. Who will go where and how clubs will be affected won’t be known until next season’s premiers are crowned and the AFL confirms list building and contracting rules. However, based off past expansion periods – where existing clubs have lost a certain number of players before compensation has come in – there will likely be a shuffle of players as they leave for expansion teams. This expectation is strengthened by AFLW contracts currently being capped at a maximum of two seasons, with draftees only on one-season deals. A similar fate to the Lions may be awaiting Adelaide with the introduction of local rivals Port Adelaide. The Crows have been a constant powerhouse in the league since its inception, boasting a well-rounded and solid playing side. Yet this upcoming season may be the last with the same group strength before the Power’s introduction at the end of next year, which could see some current Crows switch guernseys. Greater Western Sydney find themselves in a somewhat similar boat, with one last season to work with their current list in a bid to make finals again before Sydney enter. After that, the Giants can expect to have increased competition for new home state talent and may lose some key players to the red and white. GWS also may lose some of their newest recruits with their rival New South Wales’ entry. Jess Doyle was drafted to the Giants this year, but comes from captaining the Swans academy Under-19s. As a draftee, she is only contracted to the Giants for a year, meaning she could go back to the Swans as a foundation player. Fellow 2021 draft pick Georgina Fowler is in a similar situation, having also formally been part of the Swans academy, and it may well come down to the club this season to prove why the orange guernsey is the one for them and convince these players to stay put on a longer-term basis. The imminent arrival of two new Melbourne teams, Essendon and Hawthorn, means Victorian team lists should also expect some movement before the 2022-23 season. At The Kennel, the Western Bulldogs lost top-tier players Emma Kearney and Jenna Bruton to North Melbourne and Katie Brennan and Monique Conti to Richmond in the previous expansion periods. It is anticipated high-profile names and impact players will again make moves after the upcoming campaign. For each of the existing AFLW clubs then, the forthcoming sixth season shapes as a critical one – with four teams across three different states to enter afterwards, player movement is inevitable. How the 14 current teams prepare for the turbulence on the horizon could determine their immediate and future success.Britain’s factories are struggling to meet the record demand for their goods as severe supply constraints put a brake on production lines, the latest snapshot of activity has shown. The Confederation of British Industry (CBI) said manufacturers were running down their stocks of finished goods to meet the strongest order books since records began in 1977. In its monthly health check, the employers’ organisation expressed concern that the increase in demand was being accompanied by heightened inflationary pressure. Availability of finished goods was the weakest since 1977, while expectations of future price increases were at their highest. Almost half (46%) of firms said order books were above normal, while 20% said they were below normal. Export order books were at their strongest since 2019, with 24% of firms saying they were above normal and 21% saying they were below. Production has picked up to meet stronger demand from domestic and overseas markets as economies open up post-lockdown. The CBI said 38% of firms reported output had increased in the past three months against 21% that recorded a decline. Anna Leach, the deputy chief economist at the CBI, said: “It’s good to see strong order books and output growth in the manufacturing sector holding up as we head into winter. Output growth has been steady for three months now and remains quicker than its long-run average. “But intense supply side challenges continue to put pressure on firms’ capacity to meet demand. Alongside record order books, stock adequacy was the weakest on record in November and manufacturers are increasingly having to pass on significant cost increases to customers.” Only 9% of firms were comfortable with their stocks levels, and 69% said they were likely to raise prices for their domestic customers in the next three months. Leach said the strains on business showed the government was right to set up a supply chain taskforce to address acute challenges. The CBI data is the latest evidence of mounting inflationary pressure and will fuel speculation that the Bank of England will raise interest rates at the next meeting of its monetary policy committee on 16 December. Threadneedle Street left borrowing costs unchanged at a record low of 0.1% earlier this month but said they would be raised over the coming months if the jobs market remained strong. Samuel Tombs, chief UK analyst at Pantheon Macro, said the CBI’s price expectations were consistent with an 8% annual increase in the cost of goods leaving factory gates by January. The cost of manufactured goods leaving manufacturing plants are seen as a guide to prices in the shops a few months later. Tombs said 8% factory gate price inflation would mean consumer price inflation rising above 5% in the spring.Germany’s new three-way coalition government of Social Democrats, Greens and liberals has addressed the public for the first time, pledging to put climate protection at the top of its agenda but stressing its first priority was to control the coronavirus pandemic. Replacing Angela Merkel as chancellor after 16 years, Olaf Scholz of the Social Democrats used his opening speech to deliver a dramatic appeal to Germans to get vaccinated, announcing a seven-point plan to tackle the health emergency, which he called “very serious”, stressing that hospitals were close to capacity, and that his government would be considering the introduction of a vaccine mandate. The three parties, known as the “traffic light coalition” owing to their colours – red, green and yellow – hammered out the deal during two months of intense negotiations after the Social Democrats (SPD) won a slim margin in the 26 September national election. Under Scholz, the acting finance minister, as new chancellor, Annalena Baerbock of the Greens is widely expected to become foreign minister – the first female in the role – and Robert Habeck, her partner as co-leader of the party, will receive a new “super minister” role combining the economics ministry with environmental protection goals. Christian Lindner, leader of the pro-business Free Democrats (FDP), will become the new finance minister. Hubertus Heil of the SPD is reported to be the only minister from the old government – a grand coalition between the SPD and Merkel’s conservative CDU/CSU – who will retain his post, as labour minister. The SPD will also fill the roles of the health, interior and defence ministries. It will be the first three-way alliance on a national level in modern German history, the first two postwar governments having included small minority parties that were later partially incorporated into the CDU. It will also be the first to put tackling the climate emergency, which will be a priority in each of the ministries, at the top of its agenda. As part of the goal for Germany to become climate neutral by 2045, the parties have agreed to commit to phasing out coal by 2030, outlaw combustion engines in principle, and end gas power generation by 2040. Renewable energies are to be expanded considerably, to cover 80% of all energy needs by 2030. Social policies include increasing the minimum wage to €12, which Scholz said would benefit 10 million Germans. A newly founded housing ministry will oversee the construction of 400,000 new homes, a quarter of which are to be publicly subsidised to tackle a growing housing crisis by creating more affordable homes, in what the agreement refers to as “the social question of our age”. An insurance policy for children, promoted by the Greens, is to be introduced to tackle growing child poverty, as well as a heating subsidy for low-income households. But the government’s most immediate challenge will be to control Germany’s worst wave of Covid-19 since the pandemic began, especially increasing vaccinations. Scholz said he would establish a crisis management team reporting to his chancellery, to be made up of virologists, epidemiologists, psychologists and sociologists, to advise on a way out of the emergency. He said €1bn would be set aside to fund bonuses for health workers. The government will be one of Germany’s youngest in terms of its members’ ages. There is much speculation as to how the three parties will cooperate, owing to their considerable differences. The Greens have pushed for a huge investment programme to fight the climate crisis, as well as to spruce up Germany’s out-of-date infrastructure. During the election campaign they pledged to raise taxes and loosen debt rules to free up money to cover increased spending. Leading economist Marcel Fratscher called the coalition deal “very very ambitious”, but “well thought through”. But he added he believed that its economic goals were “not forward-thinking enough”. But the FDP, which is known for its fiscal caution, has repeatedly ruled out tax increases. With Lindner of the FDP having secured the finance ministry, its preferences are likely to shape the new government’s monetary policy more than those of the Greens, after Scholz announced debt rules would not be relaxed. The party leaders looked relieved after two months of intensive talks as they posed for photographs on the banks of the River Spree in Berlin, ahead of setting out their plans under the slogan “embrace progress”. The coalition negotiations involved 22 working groups and 300 negotiators. Unusually, next to no information was leaked, even though some participants, most recently Baerbock, admitted there had been some exasperating moments. Habeck said the talks had been “extremely strenuous” at times. He said the new government was aware of the scale of the challenges it faced as it took over power “at a time of crisis … of fear, worry and insecurity”, but “we’ll do everything to break the fourth wave [of Covid]”. The new government is expected to be sworn in during the week of 6 December. Before that, the coalition agreement has to be approved at the SPD and FDP party conferences, while the Greens will put it to a members’ vote, a 10-day process expected to start on Thursday. Scholz said that the “traffic light” name given to the coalition would stand it in good stead. “In 1924 the world’s first traffic light was erected on Berlin’s Potsdamer Platz. It was considered an unusual bit of technology, and people asked: ‘can it work?’ But now we cannot imagine life without it: it helps us to get to where we want to go in a fast and safe manner.” He said his goal was “that this coalition is similarly pioneering for Germany”. • This article was amended on 26 November 2021 to clarify the history of political alliances in Germany.It’s not just Wales that is depleted of curlews (New initiative aims to save curlew from extinction in Wales, 22 November). Forty years ago, I regularly walked stretches of Hadrian’s Wall in the Northumberland national park to the constant warbling of curlews, which was almost deafening. This year, I did some of the same walks in total silence. I was deeply saddened by the absence of the beautiful, haunting song of the curlew, which is, ironically, the symbol of the Northumberland national park. John Rippon Durham • Alice Renton makes a good point about solar panels in new-build homes (Letters, 23 November). But I recently saw an electric van with solar panels taped and tied to the roof and bonnet – the driver claimed it extended his range by five or six miles, even though it was just a rough-and-ready job. When will electric vehicle manufacturers start building solar panels into the bodywork? Stephen Ingamells Ilford, London • David Lipsey explains that poorer people won’t have to sell their homes to cover care costs: their children will (Letters, 21 November) . Oh right. Problem solved. Big fuss about nothing. Why did no one explain earlier? Chris George Seaford, East Sussex • An interesting article (‘People are nasty as hell on there’: the battle to close Tattle – the most hate-filled corner of the web, 24 November), but what on earth is an “influencer”? Allan McRobert Kirkcaldy, Fife • My aunt, aged 104, still irons her sheets (Letters, 23 November). Kate St John London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.It is a sad commentary on the economics and practices of the food industry that free-range or organic chicken is considered to be outside the reach of so many consumers, even though it reflects price inflation of the past 50 years (The £3 chicken: how much should we actually be paying for the nation’s favourite meat?, 24 November). While it seems there is growing interest in animal welfare and better eating habits, too many of us are governed by “knowing the price of everything and the value of nothing”, ie rubbish in, rubbish out. Les Bright Exeter, Devon • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Re ancient Christmas puddings, (Letters, 22 November), during the second world war my grandmother sent a year-old pudding to my dad in the Royal Navy. The pudding turned up 18 months later while he was on HMS Victorious in the Pacific. By this time it had grown a covering of green mould. Undeterred, Dad shaved it and ate the remains seated on the mess piano (which was floating at the time due to a storm). Jane Ghosh Bristol • My father was in Malta in the second world war and one of his favourite tales was about the Christmas parcel my mother sent. It had taken so long to arrive that the carefully knitted socks had rotted around the Christmas pudding that they were meant to protect. Simon Fowler Lamberhurst, Kent • In answer to Anne Cowper, the blackened but intact-looking loaves uncovered and displayed in Pompeii predate bread rolls from the opening of Wagner’s Parsifal by some 1,800 years. Dr Anthony Cheke Oxford • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I fail to recognise the village described in Steven Morris’s article (‘It’s cultural genocide by bank transfer’: the Welsh speakers campaigning against second homes, 17 November). On a recent Sunday evening I attended a packed quiz night with bilingual questions. Teams of Welsh and non-Welsh speakers mingled happily. The local pub exists again because of the dedication of a small mix of locals and incomers. It’s now a community-owned pub. Yes, there is a problem with affordable housing, but please don’t use the emotive language of “cultural genocide” to describe a village that buzzes with life. Morris should observe the village school and listen to the mix of Welsh and English spoken. He should meet the families who have moved in and have their children educated in Welsh, entering the Eisteddfod, playing football and rugby, and keeping this village alive. Hardly cultural genocide. At the weekly market, he could be greeted in both languages. Young people across the UK face the same problem: they can’t enter the housing market where they live because of incomers driving up prices. The problem lies with our greed in wanting the best price for a house we’re selling. Blame government decisions to sell off social housing without replacing it. Visitors bring in revenue, supporting our shops and restaurants, the butchers and bakers and candlestick makers. If we become so parochial that they no longer want to visit, the economy will suffer. Using the word “genocide” so glibly in this context is surely unacceptable in anyone’s book. Sian Harris St Dogmaels, Pembrokeshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Andy Beckett is not a writer with whom I would normally disagree, but as a retired BBC journalist and former foreign correspondent, I challenge his assertion that the BBC is not properly fulfilling its role to scrutinise arguments, question consensus and hold power to account (The BBC is finding out the hard way you can’t do ‘balance’ with this government, 19 November). Where is the evidence that BBC news has played down the excesses and disasters of Boris Johnson’s government? Beckett seems to find it in a Radio 5 breakfast broadcast where the presenter Rachel Burden said there were MPs from right across the political spectrum who have second jobs. She was right. But Beckett further accuses her of having “almost completely obscured” the fact that the vast majority of MPs with second jobs are Tories. What does “almost completely obscured” mean? Either she mentioned the fact or she didn’t. She did. Is Beckett serious when he says that the corporation does not depict the realities of power? There are many ifs and buts in this criticism. Having worked for the organisation for 28 years, I know that its journalists have it drilled into them that they must report facts, events and speeches, accurately, impartially and objectively. That is what BBC journalists do all the time. They are not instructed to look for “balance”. They are also often obliged to do the job in dangerous circumstances. Beckett suggests that if the BBC does not do what he believes it is not doing, then the public will look elsewhere for a broadcaster to hold power to account. Where will it find that broadcaster? Not, I think, in any of the other available options, not even at ITN or Sky or even Al Jazeera. And certainly not in some of the worms that have recently emerged from the media woodwork. Jack Thompson Dulwich, London • As someone who has followed the news for some 60 years, I entirely agree with Andy Beckett’s conclusion that the BBC fails to hold power to account. Despite huge resources, its mainstream news programmes take their cues from a largely Tory press, Westminster, Whitehall and business. Behind a pretence of impartiality, the BBC assiduously suppresses news that would betray the inequalities of wealth and power that shape our society, offend foreign allies or undermine the myth of a benign national past. It doesn’t report on the devastating impact of austerity that tears our social fabric and costs tens of thousands of lives, or on the brazen corruption of granting contracts to Tory party cronies. It is an institution dependent on the government to secure its income stream, and for its key appointments, whose golden rule has always been not to rock the boat. The director generals who did so, Alasdair Milne and Greg Dyke, were swiftly defenestrated. The first director general, Lord Reith, wrote in his diary during the 1926 general strike that the government “know that they can trust us not to be really impartial”. Nothing fundamental has changed since, nor will it. Chris Donnison Sheffield • Andy Beckett concludes his article with the sentence: “If you want a broadcaster that will always ‘hold power to account’, look somewhere else.” Where? All suggestions gratefully received. John Beck Llangain, Carmarthenshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The first time it happened to me I was staring at a blank wall. It was nearly 30 years ago now and I was presenting a new live programme called Working Lunch on BBC Two, my first on-screen gig. After each of the first few shows I’d literally had to wring out my sweat-soaked shirts, but now I was past the terror stage; I thought I knew what I was doing. Fatal. I was interviewing two people. One of them was in the studio with me. The other was elsewhere; to the viewer it looked as if he was on a giant screen behind me but, as this was one of the first virtual reality studios, all I could see was a featureless wall. I can’t now remember who the interviewees were; crucially, I couldn’t remember then either. I introduced the chap whom I couldn’t physically see on the blank wall and asked him a question. I then invited the man in the studio with me to respond. I then turned back to the first guy and realised, in a moment that haunts me to this day, that my mind had gone as blank as the wall I was looking at. I knew not what his name was, what he was talking about, what the other guy had just said and, indeed, what the whole item was about. What I didn’t do was say “Forgive me” over and again, but what I did do was probably worse: I said “er”. Under the circumstances, this wouldn’t have been unusual, but once I got into this particular “er” I couldn’t get out of it. I didn’t go: “er, er, er”; I just emitted one long “er” that went on for ever. It might well be the longest “er” ever uttered on television anywhere. “Shame, that,” said my editor, whom I revered, afterwards. “Ruined the item.” The trouble is that once a public brain freeze has happened, you’re never free of the fear it will happen again. After you’ve lost the plot once without warning, you know it’s always a possibility. And there’s not a lot of point worrying about it because, as with most things, worrying about it only makes things worse. I know this because I did worry, and it did make matters worse. When things were going badly in my career, I really started getting the fear. My particular concern was coming out of ad breaks at half-time during live coverage of Champions League football matches and completely forgetting what the score was, and even who was playing and where. This did happen. To buy myself thinking time I developed a conversational kind of delivery featuring lots of ums and ahs. This had the advantage of sounding quite natural but eventually stuck, to the extent that sometimes it felt – or certainly my critics felt – that once you took the ums and ahs out, there wasn’t a lot left. And on the occasions when I did, occasionally, calamitously, go blank, no amount of umming and ah-ing would get me out of the hole. In fact, it just sounded worse. In the same way, it didn’t help the prime minister one jot that, at the best of times, when his speeches are going down a storm, his delivery has a certain engaging, meandering chaos to it. For a flawless, some might say dull, orator to lose their thread is certainly shocking, but for someone like Boris Johnson it was in many ways worse, because it threw his normal, authentic-sounding, stuttering, idiosyncratic delivery into sharp relief. I’m not saying it has always been some kind of affectation, but this week we saw the stark difference between real, harrowing, hopelessness and a moment of the entertaining, astutely feigned variety. • Adrian Chiles is a Guardian columnistDollar Tree, a popular store among bargain shoppers in the US, has a small name problem in these inflationary times. It plans to raise its prices from a dollar for typical items to $1.25, the company announced on Tuesday. The retailer will introduce the new price point in more than 2,000 stores by December and complete the rollout across all of its 8,000 stores by the first quarter of 2022. For 35 years, the company has managed to hold down prices through inflationary periods. Dollar Tree is making its pricing increase amid the trend of rising inflation in a growing US economy, which in recent months has increasingly affected low-cost retailers that are struggling to maintain low prices. But in a statement, Dollar Tree said: “The Company believes this is the appropriate time to shift away from the constraints of the $1.00 price point in order to continue offering extreme value to customers. This decision is permanent and is not a reaction to short-term or transitory market conditions.” Michael Witynski, the company’s president and CEO, added: “Our Dollar Tree pricing tests have demonstrated broad consumer acceptance of the new price point and excitement about the additional offerings and extreme value we will be able provide.” Although some items in its stores cost more than $1 and can be found in the $3-$5 range, Dollar Tree is predominantly known for its goods that sell at the $1-per-unit price point. In addition to seasonal decorations, the retailer sells a variety of household products ranging from paper plates, stationery and beauty supplies. In a poll conducted by the company, 77% of shoppers indicated they were almost immediately aware of the new price point when visiting the store. The company’s third-quarter net income totaled $216.8m, down from $330m the previous year.Environmentalists are demanding urgent action to halt an aquatic gold rush along one of the Amazon River’s largest tributaries, where hundreds of illegal goldmining dredges have converged in search of the precious metal. The vast flotilla – so large one local website compared it to a floating neighbourhood – reportedly began forming on the Madeira River earlier this month after rumours that a large gold deposit had been found in the vicinity. “They’re making a gram of gold an hour down there,” one prospector claims in an audio recording obtained by the Estado de São Paulo newspaper. Danicley Aguiar, an Amazon-based Greenpeace activist who flew over the mining flotilla on Tuesday, said he had been stunned by the magnitude of the illegal operation unfolding just 75 miles east of the city of Manaus. “We’ve seen this kind of thing before in other places – but not on this scale,” Aguiar said of the hundreds of rafts he saw hoovering up the Madeira’s riverbed near the towns of Autazes and Nova Olinda do Norte. “It’s like a condominium of mining dredges … occupying pretty much the whole river.” Aguiar added: “I’ve been working in the Amazon for 25 years. I was born here and I’ve seen many terrible things: so much destruction, so much deforestation, so many illegal mines. But when you see a scene like that it makes you feel as though the Amazon has been thrust into this spiral of free-for-all. There are no rules. It’s as if we’re living in Mad Max.” There was outrage as footage of the riverine gold rush spread on social media. “Just look at the audacity of these criminals. The extent of the impunity,” tweeted Sônia Bridi, a celebrated Brazilian journalist known for her coverage of the Amazon. André Borges, another journalist whose story helped expose the mining flotilla, tweeted: “We are witnessing, in 2021, a goldminers’ uprising with all the aggressiveness of the days of discovery.” Brazil’s multimillion-dollar illegal mining industry has intensified since the 2018 election of Jair Bolsonaro, a far-right nationalist who backs the wildcat garimpeiros who trawl the Amazon’s rivers and rainforests for gold. As many as 20,0000 garimpeiros are believed to be operating within the supposedly protected Yanomami indigenous reserve in Roraima, one of nine states that makes up the Brazilian Amazon. Deforestation has also soared under Bolsonaro, who has stripped back environmental protections and been accused of encouraging environmental criminals. Amazon destruction rose to its highest levels in 15 years between 2020 and 2021 when an area more than half the size of Wales was lost. Last week the Bolsonaro administration was accused of deliberately withholding new government data laying bare the scale of the deforestation crisis to avoid international humiliation during the Cop climate summit, which Brazil’s president declined to attend. Aguiar, a Greenpeace spokesperson for the Amazon, said Bolsonaro’s pro-development rhetoric was partly to blame for the gold rush playing out on the Madeira River. He also pointed the finger at regional politicians in the Amazon who supported plans to allow miners to exploit gold deposits in riverbeds. In a recent interview, the former head of Brazil’s environmental agency Ibama, Suely Araújo, said she saw only one way of saving her country’s environment: electing a different president. “It’s hard to believe that this government is going to look after the environment because they are destroying everything,” said Araújo, a public policy specialist for the Observatório do Clima environmental group.The actor Henry Woolf, who has died aged 91 after a series of heart operations, was also a poet, playwright and teacher, besides making a second career in Canada. But in Britain he is fated to be best remembered as the lifelong friend of the playwright Harold Pinter. He was one of the “Hackney gang” of boys who bonded with Pinter at Hackney Downs grammar school in east London – a fiercely independent group who were as much at home discussing James Joyce and Buñuel as getting into street fights with Mosleyite thugs, and who cast a shadow over Pinter’s work from his early novel The Dwarfs to his last play, Celebration. That was the first stage of the friendship (and I got to know Henry when Pinter introduced us). Stage two came when Henry, as a postgraduate student at the drama department of Bristol University, recommended a play by an unknown author and was asked to direct it. The author was Pinter, and the play did not exist; but within a week he had written it and in 1957 The Room made a modest stir in a converted squash court in a production by Henry, who also created the role of Mr Kidd the loquacious landlord. He returned to the role at the Almeida in 1999, by which time Pinter’s work was falling victim to what Henry called the “grim hand of reverence”, which could give his texts all the appeal of a building obliterated in scaffolding. Barely five feet in height, Henry had weight and authority on stage (aided by a raspingly resonant baritone), and it was a treat to hear the rhythms of the comic speech coming through as naturally as breathing. He repeated this effect eight years later as Tubb in the National Theatre production of The Hothouse (a play dedicated to him). Tubb speaks for “the whole of the understaff” in the sinister Ministry of the play’s setting; and Henry made his entry with a long downstage march, wreathed in smiles and bearing a lighted birthday cake as if he owned the place. For anyone still in doubt, he clearly stamped the play as a sublime instance of a Carry On film gone wrong. To limit any account of Henry’s life to his public performances would be a myopic misreading, as he was just as much an off-stage performer. With Pinter, he had developed a verbal shorthand dating back to the Hackney days, which formed one of their strongest links. There were other close points of contact – both nonbelieving Jews, both instinctively siding with the world’s underdogs, both poets. Pinter became a man of wealth while Henry was often broke. But there were still moments of role reversal. Pinter paid for the publication of Henry’s first collection of poetry. In the 1960s Henry was co-habiting with a pet rat called Henrietta in a Kentish Town bedsit with paper-thin walls. Pinter summoned him to meet a friend and explained that he and Joan Bakewell were “in a bit of a fix ... we have nowhere to go.” Henry opened his doors to them, and then found himself in buses cruising round uncharted areas of Plumstead until the visitors retired to their grand houses and let him go home. The friendship survived that test only to face another after Henry’s marriage to the much admired modern repertory actor Susan Williamson, whose career at the RSC had been cut short by Pinter. She saw him as a rank-pulling bully; which drove Henry into offering defensive concessions – “Be fair, Susan, he’s much nicer since he’s had cancer.” Perhaps what finally kept their show on the road was an intimately shared language. When they said their last goodbyes, so Henry told me, it was in catchphrases from the wartime radio show Itma (It’s That Man Again). Henry was born in Holborn, London – the youngest of six children in an immigrant Romanian family – to Caesar Woolf, a multilingual bookkeeper and his wife, Marie (nee Brill). As evoked in Henry’s 2017 memoir, Barcelona Is in Trouble, the household was one of much philosophising, little money and endless cups of tea. One early memory, foreshadowing the future, was of Henry’s first job at Paddington public library, which he recalls – rather than the theatre – as a “temple of magic”. By his 30s, Henry had built an impressively eclectic acting record, from children’s television to working with stars and appearing in historic productions such as Peter Brook’s Marat/Sade (1964) and US (1966), and playing alongside Laurence Olivier in Ionesco’s Rhinoceros in 1960. But only once – as Toulouse-Lautrec in the musical-biopic Bordello at the Queen’s theatre, London, in 1974 – had he secured a lead on a major stage. He was known as a scene-stealing cameo artist, and seemingly forever confined to that platform. Then, in 1978, he followed his scientist brother Louis to Canada, where he promptly won the Edmonton Critics award in 1979 for his solo performance in Heathcote Williams’s Hancock’s Last Half Hour (another piece dedicated to him), before finding a lasting home in Saskatoon at the University of Saskatchewan from 1983 until retirement in 1997 as head of drama. In the academic world he did become a star. He could act, stage his own plays (notably Bim and Bub, a fable on the perils of belonging) and new work, such as the North American premiere of Pinter’s Ashes to Ashes. Most important, he discovered a love of teaching, and passing on his art and confidence to students. He invited me to Saskatoon in 1998 and showed me over the campus, meeting ex-students whom he treated with a gentle authority I had not seen before. I also saw his production of The Merchant of Venice in which he played Shylock. A portrait of him in that role hangs outside the university’s Henry Woolf theatre. The production is the only one I have seen presented from Shylock’s viewpoint; I found it utterly convincing. Henry was the funniest person I have ever met and an incomparable raconteur. Once begun, he would start building an endless crescendo which left his audience limp with laughter and begging for mercy. His comedy was perhaps linked to his interest in military history; an instrument of conquest. His poems could be funny too, but at their core was an Arctic of frozen despair; the sense of being cheated at birth into a game he was bound to lose. This gradually changed into a posture of defiance, with the advice to “become a secret agent in your own life”, and cultivate an inviolable inner space so as to make the best of the game. From his life as a courageous artist, a joyously married man and the best of friends, it almost seems that he won. He is survived by Susan, their four children, Sebastian, Marie, Hilda and Benjamin, and eight grandchildren. • Henry Woolf, actor, director and writer, born 20 January 1930; died 11 November 2021The British Horseracing Authority said on Monday that the long-awaited hearing of a disciplinary case against the jockey Robbie Dunne, who is the subject of a complaint of bullying by his fellow rider Bryony Frost, will begin on 30 November, with five more days set aside for the case if necessary. Dunne will face a series of charges at next week’s hearing, several of which fall within the scope of Rule (J)19, covering conduct prejudicial to horse racing. In addition to an overall charge that he engaged in “bullying and harassing a fellow licensed jockey between 13 February 2020 and 3 September 2020”, further charges relate to alleged incidents at Stratford on 8 July 2020, Uttoxeter on 17 August 2020 and Southwell on 3 September 2020. The BHA’s case is that Dunne’s behaviour on the days in question involved “verbally abusing and threatening a fellow jockey”, and was a breach of both Rule (J)19 and J(20), which covers “acting in a violent or improper manner”. The existence of a possible disciplinary case involving Frost first became apparent after her success on Frodon in the Grade One King George VI Chase at Kempton on 26 December 2020, the highlight of the Christmas programme. It was then reported in February that the complaint was against Dunne, and involved a race at Southwell last September in which Dunne’s mount, Cillian’s Well, suffered a fatal fall. Extensive details of the case were then revealed when a 120-page report, compiled by BHA investigators looking into Frost’s complaint, was leaked to the Sunday Times last month. This included an alleged threat by Dunne to “hurt” Frost during a race, which followed an earlier threat to “put [Frost] through a wing [of a fence]”. The report also suggested investigators had struggled to obtain evidence from other jockeys, and that “there is a cultural issue [in the weighing room] in which threatening behaviour is condoned and not reported”. Dunne denied the allegations against him when interviewed by the investigators and neither rider has made any comment since the report was leaked last month.Universities in England have been told to set ambitious targets to support students into graduate jobs, as the universities minister urged vice-chancellors to make social mobility “as much about getting on as it is about getting in”. Under plans to be overseen by the Office for Students (OfS), the higher education regulator, universities will face sanctions if they fail to reduce dropout rates among disadvantaged students and set targets for the proportion going on to well-paid jobs at the end of their course. “It is a fantastic achievement that so many disadvantaged students get into university but it is unacceptable that so many still find themselves on courses where fewer than 50% of those who start have good outcomes after leaving, or are encouraged on to courses that providers know have poor completion rates,” Michelle Donelan, the universities and colleges minister, told university leaders at a conference in London. The changes will require universities to design new five-year access and participation plans, which Donelan stressed would need to be easily understood by potential applicants. Institutions will be able to take into account their own circumstances. “From now on universities with poor outcomes will have to set ambitious targets for reducing dropout rates and improving progression to graduate employment,” Donelan said. “But they must be ambitious or the plans will not be approved by the OfS. And the OfS will then hold you to account for meeting those targets, with consequences if they are not met.” Donelan also used the event to unveil some details of the government’s promised lifelong loan entitlement, which was announced by Boris Johnson in September 2020 but will not be in place until 2025. Once operating, the entitlement will offer funding for up to four years of education for adults in England, which can be used to pay for undergraduate or postgraduate courses or split over several modules and courses below degree level, as well as technical or vocational qualifications. Donelan promised a consultation on the policy and said successful bids for piloting short courses would be announced shortly. Describing the loan entitlement as a revolution similar to the founding of the NHS, Donelan said: “It will usher in a complete culture shift … toward fulfilling the needs of those who stand to benefit from higher education and higher technical education but who at the moment do not see it as an option for them.” She added: “I am calling on the entire sector to partner with us to help shape, publicise and deliver this once-in-a-generation reform.” Steve West, the president of Universities UK and vice-chancellor of UWE Bristol, said: “It is positive to see a focus on part-time courses, higher technical qualifications and degree apprenticeships and we look forward to working with government to boost demand for more diverse and flexible ways of learning.” He said universities remained “committed to accelerating access to higher education, particularly for those from disadvantaged backgrounds, while ensuring students have a high-quality university experience”.Mayors and council leaders in northern England have refused to give up on a new high speed east-west rail line, calling for talks with the government to discuss alternative funding models. A meeting of politicians on the board of Transport for the North, the statutory body created to advise the government on the region’s transport needs, was held on Wednesday in Leeds. They discussed the announcement by the government of its new integrated rail plan, which has been condemned as a “betrayal” of the north. One of the biggest omissions is a scaling back of the Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR) project, including the axing of a new high speed line from Manchester to Leeds via Bradford. Andy Burnham, the metro mayor of Greater Manchester, said to admit defeat would be “to fail generations to come”. He added: “We would be accepting a smaller economy in the north of England for the rest of our lives. This is not politics … this is about doing us doing what is right.” He proposed a motion, agreed unanimously by Labour and Conservative members, to approach the government asking for a process of mediation. “I would be prepared to consider ways of unlocking local contribution to improve what is being proposed and get us towards the right solution,” he said. “I didn’t hear any minister last week say anything other than cost was the reason why we could not have a new line via Bradford. If that is the case let us sit down with ministers and talk about how we bridge that gap.” Burnham said the money could come from capturing the rise in land value that a new line would bring. Bradford is seen as one of the biggest losers from last week’s rail announcement. Burnham said people in the city were “getting pretty much nothing. Third class … forgotten.” Labour mayors and council leaders took turns to express their anger at the government’s rail plan. Tracy Brabin, the mayor of West Yorkshire, called it a “betrayal of levelling up” that was not fair, transparent or clear. In the north-east of England there has been huge disappointment that a £600m plan to reinstate the axed Leamside Line through County Durham, using existing infrastructure, is not in the plan. Jamie Driscoll, the north of Tyne mayor, said the area was “getting nothing” from the government’s plan. “I’m getting so hacked off that I’m thinking the best thing we can do is get all of this money devolved to the north and let us decide how to spend it,” he said. Daren Hale, the leader of Hull city council, said the plan was “almost a Beeching moment” that in effect removed Hull “from the rail map of the UK”. A dissenter was the Conservative North Yorkshire councillor Don Mackenzie who said: “If I were a member of the government listening in to what is being said today, well-rehearsed political statements … I would want as little to do with this board as possible.”With help from volunteers at the Guardian Foundation, the Guardian News &amp; Media Archive conducted an oral history project in April and May of 2021 to capture working life at the Guardian in its bicentenary year. Over 30 members of staff, including colleagues from the Guardian US office, were invited to tell the archive what it was like to work at the Guardian in 2021. Interviews were conducted with both editorial and non-editorial departments, with contributors including Katharine Viner, Max Sanderson, Daniel Boffey and Theresa Malone. Of course, due to the pandemic, this snapshot fell in a year where the world had to adjust to remote working, meaning the interviews were carried out virtually. These half-hour conversations included thoughts on the biggest news stories of 2020 and 2021, such as the Covid-19 pandemic, the US election, and the impact of Brexit. They also look at the siginifcant challenges faced and conversly, the different opportunities that arose from working in such different circumstances. Andrew Sparrow, political correspondent, outlines the process of writing the Guardian’s politics live blog, his favourite story and how he interacts with readers through the blog’s comments. Meanwhile, Danielle Stephens, audio producer involved in many of the podcasts that kept listeners entertained through lockdown, recounted how it all came together behind-the-scenes. Guardian publishing director, Mylene Sylvestre shared her thoughts on the importance of the Guardian’s values and how she would like to encourage young readers in 2021 to take up the paper now. Recorded just two weeks before the Guardian’s 200th anniversary, Executive editor for reader revenues, Mark Rice-Oxley discusses running the Guardian’s bicentenary project and hopes for its legacy. These interviews were recorded for posterity and will be available for researchers to look back on in ten years’ time - but a few interviewees opted to open theirs early as part of the Guardian’s 200th birthday celebrations. For details of the audio interviews available to researchers, please consult our online archive catalogue. This series of interviews builds on the existing oral history collections of the GNM archive, details of which are available on our website and online catalogue.Keir Starmer has called Boris Johnson’s social care plan a “working-class dementia tax”, accusing the prime minister of breaking the Conservatives’ manifesto promise that no one would have to sell their home to pay care costs. No 10 has said that Boris Johnson will be chairing a meeting of the government’s Cobra emergency committee this afternoon to discuss the situation in the Channel. It follows a report that more than 20 people have died after a boat carrying refugees sunk. My colleague Caroline Davies is covering the latest developments on a separate live blog. The House of Commons will review rules that led to the Labour MP Stella Creasy being reprimanded for bringing her young baby while she spoke at a debate in parliament, the Speaker has announced. Boris Johnson once again flouted official requests to wear a mask as he watched a performance of Macbeth at a busy theatre in north London on Tuesday night, witnesses say. David Cameron lobbied a director of Lloyds Banking Group, whom the former prime minister had given a peerage, to reverse the bank’s decision to withdraw support from Greensill Capital, which it later did. The shadow social care minister, Liz Kendall, is expecting to be the first serving MP to have a child through surrogacy. Boris Johnson will chair a meeting of the government’s Cobra emergency committee this afternoon to discuss Channel crossings, No 10 has said. The announcement follows the news that many people - more than 20, according to some reports - have died tried to cross the Channel today. Savanta ComRes has released some new polling showing Labour ahead of the Conservatives, but with its lead narrowing compared to earlier this month. The polling also shows Boris Johnson well ahead of Keir Starmer on who would make the best PM. Speaking at the Operation Pitting reception at the House of Parliament, to honour civilians and members of the armed forces who worked on evacuation of Britons and others at risk from Kabul in August, Boris Johnson described this as one of the greatest achievements of the armed forces in the postwar era. He said: What really struck me talking to you was the professionalism, the care, with which you dealt with human beings in an extreme state of fear and distress and the diplomacy with which you worked with those Afghans, Taliban or otherwise. And it was a quite amazing thing to see what you did, and I believe that the safe passage of 15,000 people - 15,000 people - to this country, as well as helping 36 other countries to move those to whom they owe their own debts. That operation – Operation Pitting - will go down as one of the great achievements of our UK armed services in the whole of the post war era. Johnson used a similar line in his party conference speech. His comment was judged hubristic and misleading, not because of any doubts about the professionalism of those involved in Operation Pitting, but because the airlift was only necessary after the Taliban swept to power, the 20-year Nato deployment in Afghanistan having ended in what was widely seen as failure. Stephen Chandler, the president of the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services (Adass), has said the money pledged by central government for social care over the next three years is “grossly inadequate”. As PA Media reports, Adass has called for £1.5bn emergency funding for the winter and a further £1.5bn to help family carers. Speaking at this year’s National Children and Adult Services Conference, Chandler said his organisation was hearing reports from across the country of staff quitting for better pay and less responsibility, in sectors such as retail and hospitality, while unpaid carers are “buckling under the strain”. He told the conference: So far, our calls seem to have fallen on deaf ears. Which is a tragedy, because that £3bn would be less than 1% of what the government has spent in response to the Covid pandemic and yet it would see us safely through the months ahead. The government has pledged £5.4bn to social care over the next three years, out of a total £36bn to be raised from the new health and social care levy. The latest edition of the Guardian’s Politics Weekly podcast is out. Heather Stewart and Polly Toynbee discuss the government’s narrowly approved social care plan and Boris Johnson’s bizarre CBI speech. Plus: Can Priti Patel solve the issue of Channel crossings? Rowena Mason is joined by Rajeev Syal and Sunder Katwala. Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, has accused Sir Geoffrey Cox of “taking the mick” after it emerged that today he has again been taking part in the British Virgin Islands commission of inquiry, via video link. Revelations earlier this month about Cox working on the inquiry, on behalf of the BVI, from the Caribbean, and about the amount he was paid, were a major factor in persuading Boris Johnson to come out in principle in favour of tightening the rules on MPs having second jobs. Although today’s ONS figures show that the number of domestic abuse-related crimes in England and Wales went up by 6% in the year ending in March (see 10.07am), Labour has pointed out that the number of prosecutions was down by 10%. Jess Phillips, the shadow minister for domestic violence, said: Staggeringly, this government has overseen yet another rise in the number of victims experiencing domestic abuse. Police recorded cases have doubled in the last five years and yet prosecutions for this crime continue to plummet. We are seeing women and girls being failed at every step of their journey by this government. These figures are a damning indictment of the inaction by this Conservative government which show that while the number of victims rise, fewer perpetrators are being brought to justice. The government must stop making excuses and immediately implement the measures in Labour’s violence against women and girls green paper including making misogyny a hate crime, increasing the minimum sentence for rape and stalking, and introduce a new law on street harassment - as well as implementing the urgent recommendations of the recent HMICFRS inspection. No country has shown an interest in hosting offshore processing centres for people seeking asylum, a Home Office minister has admitted. Asked if a country has shown serious interest in working with the government on its plan, Kevin Foster told Radio 4’s World At One: We haven’t had a country say to what you’ve suggested yet, but certainly we are in conversations with a number of partners, but for obvious reasons I’m not going to get into the details of them. Foster’s statement follows multiple reports citing Home Office and Whitehall sources that the UK has been in talks about “outsourcing” recent arrivals. Priti Patel, the home secretary, is under pressure to come up with a solution after she pledged 11 times to make the Channel route by small boats ‘unviable’ for those seeking asylum in the UK. In evidence to the Commons international trade committee this morning, Anne-Marie Trevelyan, the international trade secretary, rejected suggestions that the free trade deal with New Zealand would disadvantage British farmers. She said New Zealand farmers were unlikely to flood the UK market with their produce because currently they do not use the full tariff-free quota they already have. She told the committee: In terms of New Zealand trade, they have a big WTO [World Trade Organisation] quota at the moment which they don’t use with us anyway. In and of itself, this particular trade deal is not in any sense something that will cause great anxiety because they have tariff-free quota which they don’t use here because they are focused towards those Asia-Pacific markets. And if New Zealand did export more beef to the UK, it would probably be at the expense of EU producers, she said. She said the UK currently imports more beef from the EU than from New Zealand, and she went on: Any increased exports from New Zealand, should there be a shift away from other markets they want to use for their sales, it will be likely to displace those imports rather than hurt UK farmers. The Foreign Office has issued a statement urging all Britons in Ethiopia to leave the country now, while commercial flights are still available, because rebel forces are getting closer to the capital. Vicky Ford, the Africa minister, said: The conflict in Ethiopia is deteriorating quickly. In the coming days we may see the fighting move closer to Addis Ababa, which could severely limit options for British Nationals to leave Ethiopia. I am urging all British Nationals – whatever their circumstance - to leave immediately, while commercial flights are readily available and Addis Ababa Bole International Airport remains open. Interest free loans are available to help British Nationals to return to the UK who may otherwise struggle to afford flights. Those who choose not to leave now should make preparations to shelter in a place of safety over the coming weeks. We cannot guarantee there will be options to leave Ethiopia in the future. Boris Johnson once again flouted official requests to wear a mask as he watched a performance of Macbeth at a busy theatre in north London on Tuesday night, witnesses say. My colleague Rowena Mason has the story here. Keir Starmer’s spokesman has said that Labour supports enabling parents to combine work with caring responsibilities, but that it is for the Commons to decide if MPs should be allowed to take babies into the chamber. Asked about Starmer’s personal views on this matter, the spokesman said: If you look at our overall approach, you will have clearly seen that we are supportive when it comes to wanting people to be able to juggle their work and caring responsibilities. And there are a whole range of measures on flexible working that the Labour party has proposed over the course of the summer, but specifically in terms of prescribing what should happen in the House of Commons chamber, then that is a matter for the procedure committee of the House of Commons to look at, as has been mandated by the Speaker. And so it’s right to let them report. Nearly half of British adults lack confidence that the Government will succeed in levelling up parts of the UK over the next decade, PA Media reports. PA says: The survey, from research agency Public First, found that a majority of people think their own area needs levelling up (65%), with the proportion highest in Yorkshire and The Humber (82%). But only 23% are confident the government will successfully help level up areas in the UK in the next 10 years. Nearly half (48%) are not confident of this, and the remainder either do not lean one way or the other, or do not know. Of all the British regions, only people in London were confident, on balance, that the government would succeed. Here are the main lines from the post-PMQs Downing Street lobby briefing. No 10 signalled its support for a change to the rule banning MPs from taking babies into the Commons chamber. The PM’s spokesman noted that the Speaker has announced a review of the rule (see 11.40am) and he said this was a matter for the Commons, not the government. But he also said: We want the workplace in any circumstances to be modern and flexible and fit for the 21st century. The exact way that operates is rightly a matter for the house. No 10 rejected suggestions that the prime minister and the chancellor’s teams are not working well together. Responding to reports covering this topic (see 9.31am and 11.47am), the PM’s press secretary said: I’ve seen various anonymous source briefings that I’m not going to get into. But the prime minister and the chancellor and the entire government is focused simply on getting on with delivering on the people’s priorities. Asked if No 10 and the Treasury were working well together, the press secretary replied: “Yes.” The press secretary would not comment on reports that some Tory MPs have written to Sir Graham Brady, chair of the 1922 Committee, asking for vote of no confidence in Johnson. (See 11.47am.) But Johnson has not spoken to Brady about the reports. “The prime minister is entirely focused on delivering his ambitious agenda,” the press secretary said. Here is my colleague Heather Stewart’s story on PMQs. Superficially, it seemed to go a lot better for Boris Johnson this week than last week. That was because Conservative backbenchers actually turned up in the usual numbers - last week many of them staged a rare boycott, leaving empty spaces on the green benches (not explained by a sudden conversion to the merits of social distancing) - and because they cheered Johnson loudly. But noise in the House of Commons needs careful interpreting; sometimes MPs are cheering because they think their leader is doing well, but sometimes it’s the opposite; the volume goes up because the leader is in trouble and needs support. Today seemed to be a good example of the latter - comfort chuntering, rather than enthusiasm chuntering. Johnson did manage to bluster his way through his exchanges with Keir Starmer with some confidence and the occasional effective counter-punch. But, on the substance of the exchanges, he lost more or less 6-0, and Starmer was able to land three quite important messages. Starmer started by asking Johnson to admit that people will have to sell their homes under his plans for social care, contrary to the promise in the Conservative election manifesto. He asked the same question two months ago, at PMQs the day after the plan was first announced, but on that occasion Johnson simply ignored the question. However, yesterday for the first time Downing Street effectively admitted that its plan could lead to some people having to sell their homes. Johnson was not prepared to say as much at PMQs, but it was implicit in the language he used to defend his plans. Starmer was right, and he knew it. The Labour leader made three broader points, which made his questions particularly effective. First, he turned this into a wider argument about broken promises. It is not the first time he has accused Johnson of breaking promises, of course, but this is an accusation that becomes more compelling, not less, every time the catalogue of examples gets longer, and when Starmer asked how voters will believe anything Johnson said at the next election, there must have been a few Tories thinking he had a point. He said: Strip away the bluster, strip away the deflection, strip away the refusal to answer the question, there’s a simple truth and this is why the prime minister won’t address it, people will still be forced to sell their homes to pay for care. It’s another broken promise, just like he promised that he wouldn’t put up tax, just like he promised 40 new hospitals, just like he promised a rail revolution in the North. Who knows if he’ll make it to the next election, but if does how does he expect anyone to take him and his promises seriously? Second, Starmer coined a new phrase to attack the social care plan. He called it a “working class dementia tax”, arguing that the working class would pay because it would be the assets of the middle class that would be protected, not theirs. It is not the catchiest slogan ever, but the “dementia tax” tag worked brilliantly against Theresa May’s 2017 social care plans and this works as plausible attack line against Johnson’s. And, third, Starmer argued that this was a plan that would involve people paying twice. He said: Working people are being urged to pay twice. During their working lives they’ll pay much more tax in national insurance whilst those living off wealth are protected. Then when they retire, they face having to sell their home when the wealthiest won’t have to do so. Starmer went on to use a vivid metaphor to describe what was going on. It’s a classic con game. A Covent Garden pickpocketing operation. The prime minister is the frontman, distracting people with wild promises and panto speeches whilst his chancellor dips his hand in their pocket. “Working class dementia tax” and “paying twice” are both ways of presenting the same critique. But they are both imaginative, and potentially persuasive. Starmer’s main weakness, though, is that Labour has not yet got an alternative to the government plan, and Johnson was at his strongest making this point. At the next election, attacking Johnson as someone who has broken his promises, and whose social care plan is flawed, will take Labour a long way, but ultimately people want to be able to vote for something positive too. Miriam Cates (Con) asks about funding in the budget for the start for life programme. Will it be extended more widely? Johnson praises Andrea Leadsom for promoting this, and he says if it works it will be rolled out across the whole country. John Nicolson (SNP) says the PM has abandoned his plan for a bridge to Ireland. Perhaps he will replace them with hot air ballons, that he can fill himself. Johnson says the government is delivering the first thorough review of union connectivity. Sir Mike Penning (Con) claims local NHS management is blocking a new hosptial for Hemel Hempstead. Johnson says he will arrange a meeting on this. John Spellar (Lab) says he will introduce a bill to ban the import of hunting trophies. Will the government let the bill go forward? Johnson says the government will introduce its own legislation to ban this. Layla Moran (Lib Dem) asks what the government will do to encourage businesses to give away spare food at Christmas. Johnson says he thinks businesses do a good job already. He cites Iceland as an example. On supply chain problems, he claims they are starting to ease. He claims they are the result of the economy bouncing back, which would not have happened under Labour, he claims. Sir David Evennett (Con) asks if the PM will continue to implement the 2019 manifesto. Johnson says he will. He is delivering on his agenda for London, he says. And he will opposed the proposed outer London tax that would penalise motorists for driving into their own city, he says. Alan Brown (SNP) asks the government to back a tidal power scheme in Scotland. Johnson says the government will include support for tidal stream, to the value of £20m, in the forthcoming contracts for difference auction. Matthew Pennycook (Lab) asks if plans for a Chinese company to operate a nuclear power station in Bradwell have been abandoned. Johnson says the government does not want to allow potentially adversarial countries to have undue influence over national infrastructure. He says, on Bradwell, more information will be forthcoming. But he says he does not want to “pitch away” all Chinese investment. Nigel Mills (Con) asks the government to speed up payments to people who have suffered very rare, adverse reactions to vaccines. Johnson says more money is being put into the system for this. Hannah Bardell (SNP) asks about the decision not to approve the Valneva vaccine. Johnson says he was very disappointed when this could not be approved. But the government is investing massively in the country’s vaccine capacity ahead of a possible future pandemic, he says. And he says he hopes Valneva will be part of that. Karin Smyth (Lab) asks why the government has relaxed the rules for people wanting a licence to tow a trailer. Johnson says the government wants to free up time for driving test centres to focus on HGV drivers. But it will keep this under review, he says. Johnson says the government will use freeports to suppor the processing of critical minerals in the UK. Caroline Lucas (Green) asks why the government is proceeding with oil, gas and coal developments. Johnson says the government is powering past coal and wants to end fossil fuel reliance. Jonathan Lord (Con) asks if the government will protect BTechs. Johnson says the government will keep some of them, but it is promoting T-levels, he says. Ian Blackford, the SNP leader at Westminster, says the past few weeks have seen the Tories at their worst: a corruption scandal, broken promises, tax rises, and a cancelled bridge to Ireland. Has the PM considered calling it a day? Johnson says people want to know what the government is doing for the people of Scotland. He says on Friday, or later this week, the union connectivity review will be published, showing what the government will do for rail links to Scotland. Blackford says, while the PM is hunting for chatty pigs (a nickname given for the person responsible for the anti-Johnson Downing Street briefing on Monday), people are giving up on him. Why is he clinging on? Johnson asks why Blackford is asking about party politics when people want to know what the government is doing for Scotland. He claims the SNP are falling in the polls. Starmer says working people are being asked to pay twice. They pay national insurance when they work, and when they retire they will have to sell their homes, because they will not be protected. He says it is a classic Covent Garden pick-pocketing operation. The PM entertains the crowd, while the chancellor picks their pocket. He quotes from what Tories have said attacking Johnson’s operating, and he ends with the words of the TV reporter after the CBI speech - is everything okay? Johnson claims that line of attack is not working. He claims the government is fixing problems no one tried to fix. And he ends saying if we had listened to Captain Hindsight, the country would still be in lockdown. Starmer says the only thing Johnson is delivering is high taxes, high prices and low growth. He says the social care plans will protect the wealthy. But everyone will have to pay for it. How could he have possibly delivered a working class dementia tax? Johnson says the government is doing more for working people than Labour ever did. Starmer says people will still be forced to sell their homes to pay for care. This is another broken promise, like his promise not to put up tax, his promise of 40 new hospitals, and his promise of a rail revolution in the north. He says if Johnson makes it to the next election, how will anyone take his promises seriously? Johnson says he is promising three new rail lines. He says there has been nothing like this for a century. He says last week he learned that Starmer campaigned against HS2. It runs through his constituency too, he says, but he backed it, even though it caused his constituents problems. Starmer asks who people will be able to afford £86,000 without selling their home. Johnson says Labour has not put forward any plans. He again defends his plan. Starmer says Johnson is describing the broken system he claims to be fixing. With Tory MPs shouting, he jokes that this week they have turned up. (Last week many Tories stayed away.) Starmer says Johnson used to say no one would have to sell their home to pay for care. Has he done that. Yes or no? Johnson says your home will be disregarded. You will have to contribute if you have assets worth more than £100,000, but he says homes are not included. (Johnson seems to have quoted the wrong figure. You start contributing at a level well below that.) Keir Starmer asks the PM to confirm that, when he promised at the election that no one would have to sell their home to pay for care, that was a broken promise. No, says Johnson. He says homes will be disregarded if people are still living in them. And there is a deferred payment scheme, that allows people to stay in their homes while they are alive. He says the government is taking away the anxiety around this. Felicity Buchan (Con) says her Kensington constituency suffered devastating flooding this summer. Does the PM agree Thames Water need to invest in infrastructure to stop this happening again? Johnson says she is right. He says he instituted the Thames tideway tunnel, which will address this. Chris Bryant (Lab) asks about a constituent whose son has seizures from a brain injury. She backs the acquired brain injury bill, he says. He asks if the government will back the bill. He says 1.4 million people are affected. Boris Johnson thanks Bryant for his commitment to this vital cause. The government is studying the bill, he says. He says he can pledge at this point that DHSC will lead on the development of a cross-departmental government strategy on this. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, starts by saying at the requiem mass for Sir David Amess there were many reflections on his kindness and decency. He says he hopes those qualities are reflected in the proceedings today. PMQs is about to start. Here is the list of MPs down to ask a question. And here are two of the more interesting columns in today’s papers on the situation in the Conservative party. Daniel Finkelstein in the Times (paywall) says it is absurd to expect Boris Johnson to change the way he operates. He says: Just before Gordon Brown became prime minister I had lunch with Philip Gould, the strategic adviser who was central to the creation of New Labour, and reviewed what was to come. “Gordon knows he will have to change now,” he said. And the moment he said that I realised the whole thing was going to be a fiasco. Because people don’t change ... Few people are less reliant upon their advisers than Johnson. People always say they want their politicians to write their own speeches and Peppa Pig is what happens when they do. Johnson finds it hard to let go of his script and doesn’t want to mouth platitudes written by someone else. So he scribbles all over the draft, shuffling the pages and adding in metaphors. It was a mess, but a genuine mess. He also doesn’t have any close political friends, similar in age and status to him. He does have people who will tell him the truth to his face. That’s not the problem. The problem is whether he will listen, believing his own political instinct to be stronger than those of other people. I heard it said yesterday that it was the performance of someone who had lost confidence. This is utterly wrong. It was the performance of someone who has supreme confidence in their own ability. You’d have to have such confidence in order to wing it in front of the CBI. Sebastian Payne in the FT (paywall) says economic problems pose the biggest risk to the Conservatives. While Farage and small boats are grabbing the most attention, another revolt on the right should not be Johnson’s chief fear. The bigger electoral challenges come from the fragile economy — rising inflation and interest rates, plus sluggish growth — and his seeming lack of governing grip, with a threat of winter shortages. Johnson’s policy outlook and style risks losing those voters his party picked up in 2005 and 2010. The battleground which may soon dominate British politics is the set of middle-class, middle-income, middle of the road, middle England seats which voted Tory because they were fed up with Labour. After 11 years in power, the cycle could be about to go into reverse. As discussed earlier, there are plenty of stories in today’s papers relating to the Conservative party, and their ongoing difficulties. Here is a selection. Jason Groves in the Daily Mail says Boris Johnson’s allies are blaming the Treasury team for a hostile briefing given to the BBC’s Laura Kuenssberg on Monday. He says: Several sources yesterday pointed the finger at the unit’s chief Liam Booth-Smith, who is said to make little effort to disguise his disdain for the PM. The former thinktank boss affects the same scruffy look as Mr [Dominic] Cummings and is said to share at least some of his criticisms of Mr Johnson. One former colleague claimed he was ‘not discreet’ about his criticism of the PM. Allies last night did not deny that Mr Booth-Smith has made disparaging remarks about Mr Johnson in the past, but insisted he is not the Chatty Pig. One said that, far from being unhelpful, he had spent Monday afternoon ringing round MPs trying to help the Government win a crunch vote on social care. ‘This is not from Liam or anyone else at the Treasury,’ said one source. ‘That suggestion is just an attempt to deflect the blame.’ The Telegraph says (paywall) there are claims that some Tory MPs have submitted letters to the chairman of the Conservative backbench 1922 Committee calling for a vote of confidence in Johnson. One Tory whip told The Telegraph it was now an “assumption” that some disgruntled MPs had submitted no confidence letters to the 1922 Committee. The committee, made up of Tory backbenchers, collects any no confidence letters. If 15 per cent of sitting Conservative MPs submit them, a leadership contest is triggered. The Tory whip said: “There is an assumption someone has put in a letter. The rumour is persistently around. It will not get anywhere near the 50 letters you would need, but it does cause angst.” A second Tory MP said several of the “usual suspects” were believed to have lost confidence in Mr Johnson and submitted letters. Harry Cole in the Sun says Johnson told Tory donors at an event last night: “We will cut taxes ... soon.” The Financial Times (paywall) says David Cameron lobbied a banker whom he had placed in the House of Lords on behalf of Greensill Capital. It says: David Cameron lobbied Lloyds Banking Group to reverse a decision to cut ties with the ailing Greensill Capital, appealing to a board member whom he had ennobled while prime minister. Cameron lobbied Lloyds in January, according to people familiar with the matter, when he contacted Lord James Lupton, a director of the bank who had previously been a Conservative party treasurer, in a successful attempt to persuade the bank to continue doing business with Greensill. Lupton, Tory treasurer from 2013 to 2016, has donated more than £3m to the Conservative party and was appointed to the House of Lords in 2015, sparking accusations of cronyism against then-prime minister Cameron from rival politicians. Cameron earned millions of pounds as a boardroom adviser to Greensill, the supply-chain finance company whose unravelling earlier this year dragged the former prime minister into Westminster’s biggest lobbying scandal for a generation. Sir Lindsay Hoyle, the Speaker, is making a statement to MPs at the start of proceedings about the rules relating to babies in the chamber. He says he was not aware of the advice given to Stella Creasy until last night. He says what she was told reflects the rules. But he says rules have to be taken in context, and they have to change with the times. He says the chamber has to be able to function professionally and without disturbance. But the chair should be able to exercise discretion, he says. He says there are differing views on this matter, and that there are likely to be consequences from what is decided. So, he says, he has asked the chair of the procedure committee, Karen Bradley, to look into this and to make recommendations. Ultimately it will be for the Commons to decide, he says. Shane Brennan, chief executive of the Cold Chain Federation, a trade body representing the temperature-controlled logistics industry, told MPs this morning that there would be fewer food items on the shelves this Christmas because of supply chain difficulties. He told the Commons transport committee: People have made decisions about what they think is achievable, and so we’ve got quite a significant scaling back in the amount of work we’re trying to do, particularly around Christmas. The food supply chain gears itself up to deliver at Christmas, and it’s quite a lot [to be] scaling back at the ambition of that. Whereas normally it’d be get as much out as possible, to sell as much as possible, to make as much revenue as possible for customers that time, we’re having to sort of scale that ambition back to try and deliver what we absolutely can. Brennan said this would mean a smaller range of items being available. It’s not about shortages, it’s about simplifying, so having less range obviously is one of the key decisions you can make in trying to make supply chains more efficient. And it’s about reducing the amount of goods you’re expected to put on the shelves and then working with the customer base to actually make that clear. We are very good at piling high and selling cheap at Christmas time. What we have to do is strategically scale that back in order to meet the promise that there will be the stuff you expect to see on the shelves, but not necessarily all the extras. Many countries around the world are experiencing supply chain problems as the global economy recovers from the impact of the pandemic, but in the UK the difficulties have also been exacerbated by Brexit. Liz Kendall, the shadow social care minister, has announced that she will be taking maternity leave next year because she is having a baby through surrogacy. Last night the Labour MP Stella Creasy revealed that she has been told by the Commons authorities not to take her three-month old baby into the chamber. My colleague Peter Walker has the full story here. This morning Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy PM, indicated that he would support Creasy in getting this rule changed. He told BBC Breakfast: Quite what the right balance is in terms of the chamber, let me leave that to the house authorities, but frankly I’ve got a lot of sympathy for Stella Creasy on all of these things because I’ve seen her with her young child, I’ve seen many other MPs on all sides of the house balancing this, and it’s difficult. I think we do need to make sure our profession is brought into the modern world, the 21st century, and can allow parents to juggle the jobs they do with the family time that they need. Raab also said that he would not mind seeing a backbencher with a baby in the chamber if he were speaking from the dispatch box. He said: When you see your colleagues with their children, given the rough and tumble of politics, I just always think it brings out the best in people. Whether it’s the right thing in the chamber, there will be different views on that, it will be for the house authorities to decide but it certainly wouldn’t distract me or get in the way of me doing my job. The Office for National Statistics has published figures this morning showing that the police recorded 845,734 domestic abuse-related crimes in England and Wales in the year ending March 2021. That is a 6% increase on the figure for the previous year, although the ONS also says this “may reflect improvements seen in reporting over the last few years”. An analysis published by the ONS last year said it was not possible to directly attribute the increase to lockdown because of improvements to the way these crimes are recorded. A separate report published by the ONS this morning says that, according to the crime survey (which measures people’s experience of crime, not crimes recorded by police), an estimated 1.6 million women between the age of 16 and 74 - around 7% of the female population - experienced domestic abuse in the year ending March 2020. And 3% of women in that age range experienced sexual assault, and 5% experienced stalking. The ONS says these trends have remained broadly similar over the past decade. The chancellor Rishi Sunak’s “tax cut for the low paid” announced in the October budget comes into force today with the promise that almost 2m low-income working households will get an average £1,000-a-year cash boost. With many less affluent households struggling with a cost of living crisis driven by soaring food and energy bills, ministers will make much of the move, pointing out some beneficiaries will see an income boost before Christmas. Sunak reduced the universal credit taper rate (the amount in benefits a claimant loses for each pound earned above the work allowance) from 63p to 55p in the pound – a policy actually floated two months prior to the budget by the Labour party. The government move, costing £2.2bn, was supposedly a way to soften the blow to families of the reversal of the universal credit £20 a week uplift put in place for the first 18 months of the pandemic (a cut which saved the Treasury £6bn). Critics point out the majority – 3m – families on universal credit will get zero financial benefit from Sunak’s taper rate “tax cut” adjustments – including those who can’t work, such as carers, parents of very young children, and sick and disabled people. Meanwhile, latest data from the Trussell Trust highlights how the tide of UK destitution continues to rise. The trust’s UK food bank network gave out 935k food parcels between 1 April and 30 September – a 74% increase on the same period five years ago. That’s the equivalent of 5,100 food parcels a day this year - up 11% on the same period in 2019 (though lower than 2020 lockdown crisis levels). And things aren’t getting any better: it expects to give out an average of 7,000 a day by December. And here is the story from my colleagues Rowena Mason and Heather Stewart on Dominic Raab’s defence of the PM in his morning interviews. Good morning. Early this week many Britons received their first introduction to Peppa Pig World. Borisworld is even more peculiar, and only in this environment could a speech now labelled after a cartoon character provide the trigger for a debate about the dysfunctionality of central government. Many papers are still carrying articles about why Downing Street is performing so badly, and in the Guardian we report on the frustrations in the Treasury at No 10’s inept handling of important decisions. Later Boris Johnson will have an opportunity to reset the narrative at PMQs. He will be hoping it goes better than last week’s, which was rather dismal. This morning Dominic Raab, the justice secretary and deputy prime minister, was defending the PM on the airwaves and essentially his argument what was widely described as an amateurish and eccentric speech to the CBI on Monday was essentially just evidence of the PM’s “Tiggerish” personality. Raab told Times Radio: The prime minister is on great form ... The prime minister is an ebullient, bouncy, optimistic, Tiggerish character and he livens up his speeches in a way that few politicians past and present have done but actually there is a steeliness to him as a prime minister and indeed his team, and we work as a team. In an interview with the Today programme, where he made a similar argument, Raab also said: We are building back this country stronger, better, fairer, and [Johnson, in his Peppa Pig speech] wanted to make that point about the optimism that defines this country, both domestically and abroad. We do too much, frankly, self flagellating in Britain. It’s partly the result of the Brexit debate. I don’t want to get dragged back into all of that. But we’ve got a huge amount going for ourselves and I think that’s the essence of what this prime minister reflects. David Lammy, the shadow justice secretary, accused Raab of “insulting people’s intelligence”. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.15am: Senior DWP officials give evidence to the Commons work and pensions committee on universal credit. 9.30am: The Cold Chain Federation, the Road Haulage Association and Logistics UK give evidence to the Commons transport committee about the road freight supply chain. 10.30am: Anne-Marie Trevelyan, the international trade secretary, gives evidence to the Commons international trade committee about the trade deal with New Zealand. 11am: Northern mayors and council leaders hold an open meeting in Leeds to discuss the integrated rail plan. 12pm: Boris Johnson faces Keir Starmer at PMQs. 2pm: Permanent secretaries from the Cabinet Office, HMRC, Defra, and the Department for Transport give evidence to the Commons public accounts committee about Brexit and border issues. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comNew York Mets owner Steve Cohen took to Twitter on Wednesday morning to express his displeasure with the agent for left-hander Steven Matz. “I’m not happy this morning,” Cohen said in his post. “I’ve never seen such unprofessional behavior exhibited by a player’s agent. I guess words and promises don’t matter.” Matz, a former Met who pitched for the Toronto Blue Jays last season, reportedly agreed to a four-year, $44m deal with the St Louis Cardinals on Tuesday. Cohen told the New York Post that Matz and his agent, Rob Martin, had reached out to the Mets about wanting to return and that they were his first choice. New Mets general manager Billy Eppler also told the Post that he thought the team would get a chance to make an offer to Matz before he made his final decision. The Mets traded Matz, 30, to the Blue Jays prior to the 2021 season and he posted a 14-7 record with a 3.82 ERA in 29 starts. A second-round pick in 2009, Matz pitched for six seasons in New York and had a 31-41 record with a 4.35 ERA and 552 strikeouts in 579 and two-thirds innings with the team. “(Matz) was a good Met when he was here,” Cohen told the Post. “I only wish him well. This was about the interaction with the agent.”Officers from Portugal’s tax and customs authority conducted more than 20 searches on Wednesday in connection with its investigation into tax evasion and money laundering at top-flight clubs, as well as the super-agent Jorge Mendes. The headquarters of Primeira Liga sides Braga and Vitória de Guimarães were searched, as was the Porto office of the Gestifute player agency that was established by Mendes. The homes and offices of Deco, the former Portugal midfielder who now works as an agent, and businessman Bruno Macedo were also reported to have been searched in the latest stage of Operation Fora de Jogo (Operation Offside). “The facts under investigation are likely to include crimes of tax fraud, social security fraud and money laundering,” read a statement from the Central Department of Investigation and Penal Action (DCIAP). “There is suspicion of simulated business, entered into between football clubs and third parties, which had in view the concealment of income from dependent work, subject to declaration and withholding tax.” As well as Manchester United’s Cristiano Ronaldo, Gestifute represents José Mourinho and several members of the Wolves squad, where Mendes also acts as an adviser to the club and to its owner, the Chinese conglomerate Fosun. He has yet to comment on Wednesday’s developments. In March 2020, almost 300 tax and police inspectors from the public prosecutor’s office conducted 76 searches in the first stage of Operation Fora de Jogo, including the offices of Gestifute and two homes owned by Mendes. It was claimed authorities were looking into potential money laundering relating to the transfers of players including Radamel Falcao, James Rodríguez and Iker Casillas acting on information disclosed by Football Leaks, although Porto denied anyone at the club had been questioned. According to Portuguese magazine Sabado, the homes of Casillas, Jackson Martínez, Maxi Pereira and Danilo Pereira were also searched. On Monday, as part of a separate investigation by the public prosecutor’s office called “Operation Red Card”, officers looking into the payment of commissions exceeding €20m related to football transfers searched the headquarters of FC Porto and its president Jorge Nuno Pinto da Costa.Russia may dissolve Memorial, the country’s premier human rights group, in an attack on civil society and symbolic reversal of the freedoms won by dissidents at the fall of the Soviet Union. A supreme court case, to be heard on Thursday, may mark a watershed in Vladimir Putin’s campaign to recast Soviet history by banning International Memorial, which began meeting in the late 1980s to shed light on atrocities and political repression under Joseph Stalin and other Soviet leaders. A second case that began on Tuesday accuses Memorial’s Human Rights Centre – the other main branch of the organisation – of “justifying extremism”, by which a prosecutor argues is grounds for its dissolution. Prominent Russian activists and western governments have protested against the cases, with the European Council commissioner for human rights calling the organisations “a symbol of the relentless fight for freedom, democracy and human rights in the post-Soviet area and beyond. Dissolving them would have significant negative consequences for civil society as a whole and human rights protection in the country.” Oleg Orlov, a Memorial board member, called the government’s case under the controversial “foreign agents” law baseless but said the ultimate decision would be a political one. “Anything is possible in today’s Russia,” he said in an interview. “The public support we have and the noise around this case leave us some kind of hope.” Memorial’s advocacy for human rights and political prisoners, such as jailed opposition leader Alexei Navalny, had angered the government, said Orlov. But it had faced equal wrath for its research and educational activities on state-sponsored crimes under the Soviet Union, focusing not just on the millions of victims of gulag camps, forced deportations and violent purges, but also on the executioners and officials who ordered the atrocities. “[The government] is ready to grieve for the victims of repressions, to say good things about them, remember them, but all of these words about the victims of repressions are almost like they’re talking about the victims of an earthquake, or of a flood. An accident,” said Orlov, a veteran human rights advocate, who joined the organisation in 1988. “That a government can be criminal … That’s unacceptable for them in principle. Russia is not ready to say these words. But we say them.” Both branches of Memorial were early additions to Russia’s register of “foreign agents”, a punitive label that has been applied to much of the country’s independent media and NGOs. Increasingly, prosecutors have wielded the law as a cudgel to silence independent voices. And yet, Memorial’s national network had survived Russia’s reactionary turn under Putin in the past decade, continuing to popularise its research into Soviet-era atrocities as it built a database of more than 3 million victims of political repressions. That mission has grown more controversial as Russia has further tied its state identity to the Soviet victory in the second world war and as its conflicts with other post-Soviet and former communist states, as well as the west, often required historical arguments favouring itself rather than statements of contrition. Nikita Petrov, a historian and researcher at Memorial, said in recent years government archives have increasingly blocked access to researchers as primary documents from the Soviet era have once again been shrouded in secrecy. “We were enthusiasts who wanted to know more about history, tell people about their history,” said Petrov of joining the organisation in 1988. “When Russia chose to take a democratic, legal path forward, I couldn’t in my darkest dreams have imagined that everything would eventually start going in reverse. Probably I was naive then.” Memorial was already at odds with the administration of Boris Yeltsin by the mid-1990s, as the group expanded into documenting state-sponsored crimes during the first Chechen war. Its continued activism has come at great personal risk: Natalia Estemirova, a human rights activist and former board member of Memorial, was abducted in Chechnya and murdered in 2009. Orlov was acquitted of slander in 2011 for accusing the head of the Chechen Republic, Ramzan Kadyrov, of being personally involved in her killing. Its advocacy has continued to anger the government. Its human rights centre is under threat for including Jehovah’s Witnesses, members of a religious group that is considered extremist by the government, on its tally of more than 400 political and religious prisoners. That list also included Navalny. Pressure has increased on the organisation since it released that list in August. In October, masked men raided Memorial’s headquarters during a screening of the film Mr Jones, about Welsh journalist Gareth Jones and his reporting on the Holodomor, the Stalin-era famine that killed millions of peasants in Soviet Ukraine during the 1930s. “This is one of the last remaining places in Moscow where we can hold open, public talks,” said Orlov, saying the organisation could lose a place to house its archive, library and museum of gulag artefacts. “And of course it will be very hard for the human rights centre … a lot of people will be left without help.” Robert Latypov, the head of Memorial’s organisation in the Perm region, said the attack on International Memorial could threaten a “whole network of public organisations” across the country. He first joined Memorial in 1995 as a volunteer at Perm-36, a former gulag labour camp that has been turned into a museum. “When you meet true dissidents who were imprisoned there, prisoners of conscience, and you speak to them in real life, it completely changes your perspective,” he said. Local officials had often been supportive of Memorial’s mission, Latypov said, including taking part in reading names of victims of repression during an annual day of remembrance. But others have undermined independent efforts at documenting Soviet repressions, he said. Control over Perm-36 was wrested from local activists in 2014. The gulag camp became a state museum with “no people, no excursions, no life”. And then there is Latypov’s own experience – his home and office were raided by the FSB after a Memorial expedition to a monument devoted to people from Lithuania and Poland exiled to the region. “There are some lines, some taboos that you can’t cross,” he said. “They are always moving. They are hidden. But as soon as you cross them, the state lets you know immediately.”A standoff with bailiffs ended in victory for renter activists in south-east London on Wednesday when they blocked the latest in a rising number of evictions triggered by the unwinding of national measures to prevent homelessness during the pandemic. Twenty members of the London Renters Union stood in the way of three county court-authorised bailiffs who arrived to evict George Smith, 28, and his partner Paul MacKinnon, 35, in Abbey Wood. MacKinnon was the household’s main breadwinner but lost his job at the start of the pandemic and the pair sank into £12,000 of arrears. Smith, who spent Wednesday fearing he could be thrown out of his two-bedroom terrace house at a few minutes’ notice, said: “Even though the pandemic is still ongoing, [the government] refused to renew the protections. I feel very let down. This has probably been the most anxious time of my life so far.” The action came as official figures showed the threat of no-fault evictions returned towards pre-pandemic levels despite government promises in 2019 to ban the practice. There were 3,280 households in England put at risk of homelessness because of no-fault eviction notices between April and June, double the number at the start of the pandemic and up from 2,650 in the previous quarter. A ban on bailiff evictions, introduced by ministers last year to protect tenants struggling during the pandemic, was lifted in England in June, and in October eviction notice periods reverted to two months, having been extended to four. In July to September, the first full quarter since the ban on bailiff actions lifted, there was a 207% increase in landlord repossessions, to 4,853. Bailiffs arriving in Abbey Wood just before 10am told union activists that the tenants “will have 10 minutes to take a bag of essential clothing and medicine. If they are not ready they will be taken out of the property.” But the bailiffs could not get up the front steps, which were blocked by activists holding placards that read “power to the renters” and “housing is a human right”. They went away, meaning they will have to seek a new court order for another day. Grace Black, 24, an activist in a neon “eviction resistance team” tabard, said: “There are thousands of people whose current cases have been delayed. It means people at risk of having their lives ruined.” Myriam Kane, 26, an organiser for the London Renters Union, said: “We think this is something we are going to have to do more. We have seen more people going through evictions having received a section 21 [no-fault eviction notice] or caught up in arrears during the pandemic.” Housing campaigners believe the true impact of the ban lifting is yet to be seen because many cases are caught in a courts backlog. Smith said: “We are facing an unprecedented eviction crisis in this country as a result of a lot of people losing their jobs in the pandemic and the rental sector doing everything in their power to kick people out as soon as possible.” In Wales and Scotland, landlords will have to give six months’ notice until 1 January 2022 and 1 April respectively. A renters reform bill promised by ministers to tackle no-fault evictions has been delayed until next year. “For many renters, the eviction ban was the only thing standing between them and homelessness,” said Jon Sparkes, the chief executive of Crisis. “With this protection now gone, once again people are being needlessly forced from their homes into an unpredictable and unaffordable rental market.” A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said: “Our actions during the pandemic have helped keep renters in their homes and provided an unprecedented package of financial support. As we emerge from the restrictions we are also providing councils with an additional £65m to help vulnerable households with rent arrears. “Evictions are down by 64% compared with the same period in 2019, and the number of people at risk of homelessness due to section 21 notices was down by 34% compared to the same quarter in 2019.”Turkey’s president is gambling that a strong economic recovery from the pandemic will stay on track despite rocketing inflation that has hit living standards and sparked protests in major cities. The $750bn economy is on course to expand by 9% this year following a return of tourism and a surge in demand for exports that has pushed factory output to pre-pandemic levels. However, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s declaration of an “economic war of independence” has pitched him against many in his own party and the country’s technocrats who fear an inflation rate running at 20% will create further bouts of social unrest. “Some people who wanted to convey the opinion to the president that a different policy should be followed were not successful in this,” a senior official in the ruling AK party told Reuters, requesting anonymity. Three central bank governors who stood against Erdoğan’s demand for lower interest rates have been sacked since mid-2019, leaving the way clear for the governor since March, Şahap Kavcıoğlu, to bring down the base rate in three separate cuts from 19% to 15%. Rather than prompt a revival of foreign investment, lower interest rates have confirmed to investors the government’s lack of resolve in tackling inflation, causing the currency to fall further. Small protests in Istanbul and the capital, Ankara, on Tuesday called for an end to policies that have led to an inflationary spiral and a 40% slump this year in the lira to below 8 US cents. Police erected barriers in parts of Istanbul, the commercial capital, as protesters vented their fury against the AK-led coalition government, reported Bloomberg. Erdoğan, though, remains defiant. On Wednesday he sought to deflect attention from his economic woes with a visit from the de facto leader of the United Arab Emirates, Abu Dhabi crown prince Mohammed bin Zayed al-Nahyan. A series of deals between the two sides, including a $10bn investment fund, pushed the lira up 6%, ending the longest losing streak in two decades. Paul Jackson, global head of asset allocation research at Invesco, said any respite was likely to be shortlived, with the currency falling further in the coming months. “There are worrying signs of instability from strong monetary growth, an inflation rate that has hit 20% and house price growth that has jumped to 35%. And even though the money supply has come down lately, successive cuts in interest rates mean the inflation rate will remain high. “It all means that what the president is doing is dangerous and damaging for the economy,” he said. Erdoğan came to power as prime minister in 2003 and engineered a change in the constitution that transferred most powers to the president in 2014. In the same year he was elected president, and was re-elected in 2018. In both roles, Erdoğan has always prioritised jobs and growth. Concerned that the nation’s young population might be restless without employment, he handed huge tax breaks to international firms looking to build manufacturing bases outside high-cost Europe. After the 2008 banking crash, he relied on figures such as the finance minister Mehmet Şimşek, a former UBS and Merrill Lynch banker, to reconstruct the economy. Galip Dalay, an associate fellow at the thinktank Chatham House, said the period when Erdoğan surrounded himself with experts to chart economic policy was long gone. “The whole economic team he built in 2011 has gone. The most important qualification now is loyalty,” he said. The president’s version of economic independence rests on a theory that low interest rates will fire up investment to boost jobs and growth. Jason Tuvey, a Turkey expert at the consultancy Capital Economics, said that in the run-up to the 2018 election campaign, interest rates fell and the economy boomed, yet the lira fell, ushering in high inflation. After the economy was allowed to overheat, there was a return to more orthodox central bank policies. But the president’s erratic policymaking discouraged foreign investment and the lira continued to fall, ushering in further bouts of inflation through high import costs. Tuvey said: “Turkey’s banks are in better shape than in 2018 when a borrowing spree in foreign currencies made them vulnerable to a slump in the lira. But if households lose confidence, there could still be a run on the banks.” Dalay said the president’s situation was becoming precarious. Elections are due in 2024, but could be brought forward if the economy looks like deteriorating further. “What you are seeing now is not part of a grand strategy, but a huge gamble that could come unstuck,” he said.Firefighters have been sent to tackle a huge blaze and apparent explosions on an industrial estate near Hull. Some residents were evacuated from nearby houses and emergency services warned residents to keep their doors and windows closed as they responded to the incident in Hessle. Daren Hale, the leader of Hull city council, said he understood that everyone had got out of the factory safely. “Everyone is accounted for, is our understanding, but there’s a toxic plume which has gone up into the sky which the Environment Agency are currently analysing to work out what is in it,” he said. He said it was the Thompsons plastic factory on the Priory Park estate that had caught fire. Humberside fire and rescue said they were in attendance, adding: “We advise local residents to close windows and doors. Please avoid the Priory Way to A63 area and be mindful there is a large amount of smoke in the area and surrounding roads.” Humberside police also warned members of the public to avoid the area. NHS Yorkshire Ambulance Service said it received reports of a large fire at at 3.53pm. It dispatched its hazardous response area team, along with two ambulances and a manager, to the scene. Footage posted to social media showed flames and loud explosions near residential housing, with a large plume of smoke rising into the sky. An eyewitness told Radio Humberside that after the initial explosion clumps of what felt like polystyrene fell from the sky. “They have apparently showered #Hessle. It feels like polystyrene,” tweeted reporter James Hoggarth. Hale said that the fire had “taken out” an electricity substation. That caused the power cuts, including to the Priory Park traffic lights, which was causing additional jams, he added. Emma Hardy, the MP for Kingston upon Hull West and Hessle, also said there were power cuts in Hessle as a result of the fire. She lives within a mile of the industrial estate and said her partner rang asking where the candles were. “Northern Powergrid is sorting it out,” she said. Grace Grant, 25, told the PA news agency that she heard explosions coming from the fire. “It was huge, smoke could be seen from miles away. As I moved off, explosions were happening around every 10 seconds”, she said. Anthony Whitley, who lives in Hessle, told the BBC he saw the roof of the factory near Saxon Way go up in flames. Caroline Frost, a manager at the Hessle preschool nursery, told the broadcaster: “It’s quite scary actually, you can hear the explosions. It is a huge plume of black smoke so we’re just moving as quickly as we can to get things organised.”A judge has ruled that a number of passages in the bestselling book Putin’s People convey a defamatory meaning against Roman Abramovich, including a claim that he bought Chelsea football club on Vladimir Putin’s orders. The Russian oligarch said he was defamed by 26 specific passages in the book by the journalist Catherine Belton, all of which he says convey untrue meanings about him. In a preliminary ruling on Wednesday, Mrs Justice Tipples said an ordinary reader would understand those sections to mean Abramovich had bought the Premier League club for £150m in 2003 “under the Kremlin’s direction”. She said the book suggested Abramovich was “under the control of Putin” and that the oligarch was obliged “to make the fortune from his business empire available for the use of President Putin and his regime”. If Abramovich failed to do so, the book implied, he could have “lost his wealth to the Russian state” or been exiled or jailed, the judge said in a 34-page ruling. Tipples emphasised that the court was only, at this stage, adjudicating on meaning. It was not deciding whether the allegations made about Abramovich or anyone else were true. Abramovich is one of three Russian tycoons who initiated libel proceedings against Belton and her publisher, HarperCollins, over a book widely acclaimed as the definitive work on the Putin era. The Russian state oil company Rosneft, run by Putin’s close ally Igor Sechin, has also sued. The case prompted press freedom organisations to call on the UK government to examine how foreign billionaires are using libel courts. Two of the oligarchs have since settled their legal actions. But Abramovich and Rosneft pressed ahead with their complaints, which are likely to be heard next year in the high court. On Wednesday, in a decision on what the disputed paragraphs meant, the judge ruled that three out of four passages complained of by Rosneft were not defamatory. They included arguments that the passages said Rosneft had appropriated the Yukos oil company and gobbled up its assets at a knockdown price in a rigged auction. The judge said Putin’s People also alleged Rosneft’s 2006 listing on the London Stock Exchange was a success only because the “Kremlin or KGB” had put pressure on potential investors to buy shares. This meaning was “not defamatory” of Rosneft, she ruled. A claim Rosneft overpaid for an oil company in a 2003 deal was potentially defamatory, she said. In a statement HarperCollins emphasised that Abramovich “has not won his claim” and said Putin’s People was an “acclaimed work of considerable public interest”. The publisher added: “The judge found, in relation to the majority of Mr Abramovich’s complaints, that he had exaggerated the meaning of the words he complained about and rejected one complaint in its entirety. Today’s preliminary judgment only decides what ordinary readers would understand the relevant passages in the book to mean. Any trial is not expected to take place for at least a year.” A spokesperson for Abramovich said he welcomed the ruling, which found that Belton’s book made “nine defamatory allegations” about the oligarch including “false allegations” about the nature of his purchase of Chelsea. The judge said Belton’s account of recent events in Russia, as argued by her lawyers in relation to meaning, was “in my view, the right one”. But she also said the defence relied on a “too forensic” and “overelaborate” interpretation of what the book said. Abramovich complained of several other matters. They included that the book suggested he had bought $300m of Rosneft shares “under the Kremlin’s direction” so the company’s flotation would not fail, and that he had moved to New York “at the direction” of Putin so “Russia could influence the family of Donald Trump”, the judge said. Both sections were defamatory, she ruled. So was a further claim that Abramovich had acted as “cashier to the former Russian president Boris Yeltsin and his family providing them with money from his own business empire to use for their own private purposes”, the judge wrote. At the initial hearing, Abramovich’s lawyer said the book repeated “lazy inaccuracies about Abramovich’s role in various events” and made false and damaging statements about him which were “completely without foundation”. Neither Belton nor HarperCollins have yet been required to file a defence so no substantive defences have been raised. Belton spent seven years writing Putin’s People and was based in Moscow as the bureau chief for the Financial Times. Last week she was named the 2021 outstanding investigative journalist in awards named after Sergei Magnitsky, a Russian anti-corruption lawyer who died in jail.North Atlantic fishing nations have pledged to ban catches of the shortfin mako, the world’s fastest shark, in an attempt to save the endangered species. Conservationists, who have for years sought to better protect the mako, said the ban was a “critical breakthrough”. The effort to ensure agreement between fishing nations was led by the UK, Canada and Senegal. At the annual meeting of the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT) this week, countries agreed “to end overfishing immediately and to gradually achieve biomass levels sufficient to support maximum sustainable yield by 2070” for the mako shark. The shortfin mako, sometimes referred to as the “cheetah of the ocean”, can reach speeds of about 45mph (72km/h). Prized for its meat, fins and for sportfishing, it is classified as endangered on the International Union for Conservation of Nature’s red list of threatened species and is considered exceptionally vulnerable in the North Atlantic. Worldwide concern over the decline was highlighted in 2019, when a record number of countries voted to regulate trade under the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species (Cites). ICCAT scientists have recommended a ban on taking makos since 2017, to reverse the decline and rebuild the population. Shannon Arnold, marine programme coordinator at Ecology Action Centre, said: “We congratulate Canada, the UK, Senegal, and Gabon, for leading the charge to secure this historic, science-based protection for endangered shortfin mako sharks. We celebrate this critical step today, mindful that the fight to bolster it begins tomorrow.” Ali Hood, director of conservation at the Shark Trust, paid tribute to the “conservationists, divers, scientists” and others who had helped pressure fishing nations to reach this “critical breakthrough”. The ICCAT, a coalition of more than 50 countries, including some of the world’s largest fishing nations, also agreed measures to conserve bigeye and yellowfin tuna, as well as plans to tackle illegal, unregulated and unreported fishing. It set itself a quota of 62,000 tonnes for bigeye tuna and 110,000 tonnes for yellowfin tuna in 2022, and said it will review these measures next year in order to set new catch limits in 2023. Grantly Galland, an officer at the Pew Charitable Trust, said: “This is a remarkable list of improvements that will contribute to the successful management and conservation of tunas, sharks and billfishes in the Atlantic Ocean. “By nearly any measure, this meeting was a success, shows that real progress can be made despite the challenges of the pandemic, and the fishing operations, other stakeholders, and wildlife impacted by ICCAT decisions will be better for it.”Scientists have said a new Covid variant that carries an “extremely high number” of mutations may drive further waves of disease by evading the body’s defences. Only 10 cases in three countries have been confirmed by genomic sequencing, but the variant has sparked serious concern among some researchers because a number of the mutations may help the virus evade immunity. The B.1.1.529 variant has 32 mutations in the spike protein, the part of the virus that most vaccines use to prime the immune system against Covid. Mutations in the spike protein can affect the virus’s ability to infect cells and spread, but also make it harder for immune cells to attack the pathogen. The variant was first spotted in Botswana, where three cases have now been sequenced. Six more have been confirmed in South Africa, and one in Hong Kong in a traveller returning from South Africa. Dr Tom Peacock, a virologist at Imperial College London, described the new variant on a scientific website after analysing genomes released by Gisaid, a global community of scientists that shares virus information. The “incredibly high amount of spike mutations suggest this could be of real concern,” he warned. In a series of tweets, Peacock said it “very, very much should be monitored due to that horrific spike profile”, but added that it may turn out to be an “odd cluster” that is not very transmissible. “I hope that’s the case,” he wrote. Dr Meera Chand, the Covid-19 incident director at the UK Health Security Agency, said that in partnership with scientific bodies around the globe, the agency was constantly monitoring the status of Sars-CoV-2 variants as they emerge and develop worldwide. “As it is in the nature of viruses to mutate often and at random, it is not unusual for small numbers of cases to arise featuring new sets of mutations. Any variants showing evidence of spread are rapidly assessed,” she said. The first cases of the variant were collected in Botswana on 11 November, and the earliest in South Africa was recorded three days later. The case found in Hong Kong was a 36-year-old man who had a negative PCR test before flying from Hong Kong to South Africa, where he stayed from 22 October to 11 November. He tested negative on his return to Hong Kong, but tested positive on 13 November while in quarantine. England no longer has a red list to impose restrictions on travellers arriving from abroad. People who are not fully vaccinated must test negative before flying and arrange two PCR tests on arrival. Those who are fully vaccinated need to have a Covid test within two days of landing. Scientists will be watching the new variant for any sign that it is gaining momentum and spreading more widely. Some virologists in South Africa are already concerned, particularly given the recent rise in cases in Gauteng, an urban area containing Pretoria and Johannesburg, where B.1.1.529 cases have been detected. Ravi Gupta, a professor of clinical microbiology at Cambridge University, said work in his lab found that two of the mutations on B.1.1.529 increased infectivity and reduced antibody recognition. “It does certainly look a significant concern based on the mutations present,” he said. “However, a key property of the virus that is unknown is its infectiousness, as that is what appears to have primarily driven the Delta variant. Immune escape is only part of the picture of what may happen.” Prof Francois Balloux, the director of the UCL Genetics Institute, said the large number of mutations in the variant apparently accumulated in a “single burst”, suggesting it may have evolved during a chronic infection in a person with a weakened immune system, possibly an untreated HIV/Aids patient. “I would definitely expect it to be poorly recognised by neutralising antibodies relative to Alpha or Delta,” he said. “It is difficult to predict how transmissible it may be at this stage. For the time being it should be closely monitored and analysed, but there is no reason to get overly concerned unless it starts going up in frequency in the near future.” • This article was amended on 29 November 2021 to add information crediting Gisaid as the source of the genomes analysed by Dr Tom Peacock.Activists who reopened a disused homeless shelter in Glasgow to accommodate visiting climate campaigners during Cop26 are to be evicted immediately, a court has ruled. The Glasgow city council property in Tradeston, nicknamed Baile Hoose, was restored to habitability by a group of local activists frustrated at reports of visitors having to sleep rough because of a chronic shortage of accommodation in the city. After the conference finished, some activists and others in need of a safe place to sleep remained there, and the occupation took on a more overtly political tone as a “protest against the lack of accessible and emergency accommodation in Glasgow”. The activists vowed to continue their fight to put buildings such as Baile Hoose back into the hands of the local community after it opened on the third day of the climate summit. The protest garnered cross-party and public support, with the Scottish government minister and Scottish Greens co-leader Patrick Harvie voicing solidarity with the activists. Squatters do not have rights under Scottish properly law and on Wednesday afternoon a sheriff granted a decree allowing the council to employ court officers to take back possession of the building and evict the remaining occupants. Ryan McNaughton, speaking for the group at Baile Hoose, said they would continue their fight to return the building to public use and planned to request that the Scottish government transfer the site to the community. “We have a homelessness and refugee and migrant housing crisis and Glasgow city council is not tackling these issues,” he said. “We keep seeing buildings being sold to private developers who continue to profit off the systematic destruction of community spaces in Glasgow.” Betty, from West Lothian, who arrived at Baile Hoose during Cop26 and has remained there since, said the group included three homeless people with nowhere to stay on Wednesday night. “We’d like to set a precedent that squatting should be legal in Scotland. I come from the London squatting scene, and it’s a really good way to live and a training ground for activism. It’s about living as a community, and being the change you want to see.” Betty questioned why the building was standing empty, although the council has said there are concerns about fire safety and possible asbestos. According to a recent Scottish government survey, in 2019 just over half of Glasgow’s population lived less than 500 metres from vacant and derelict land. A Glasgow council spokesperson said: “The council has been clear throughout the occupation that the building is not suitable or safe to be used as accommodation, and it welcomes the court’s decision to grant the decree. It would be in the best interests of all concerned if the occupiers now vacated the premises. “The council and HSCP [Glasgow City Health and Social Care Partnership] remain ready to provide appropriate support to those on site, including anyone who is homeless.”Geoffrey Cox has again appeared as a lawyer for the British Virgin Islands (BVI) inquiry while parliament is sitting, calling into question whether he is meeting the prime minister’s demands for MPs to put their duty to their constituents first. Cox, who has earned about £1m from legal work over the last year, joined the BVI commission of inquiry into allegations of corruption for two hours while the House of Commons was sitting on Wednesday afternoon. Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, said Cox was “taking the mick” and called it a “test of leadership” for the prime minister. “The prime minister is letting him get away with it,” she added. Cox has come under scrutiny over his outside earnings since it emerged that he had been voting by proxy in parliament from the BVI during the pandemic. It subsequently became clear he had skipped at least 12 votes on days when he was doing paid legal work, after the proxy voting allowances ended. Since then, Boris Johnson has backed the idea of banning MPs from working as paid parliamentary consultants or advisers and said that anyone “prioritising outside interests” and neglecting their constituents should face investigation. However, it is not clear exactly how many MPs and their second jobs this could cover. A Guardian analysis found it would be likely to affect fewer than 10 of those with outside interests if the limit were set at 20 hours a week as suggested by the cabinet minister Ann-Marie Trevelyan. Cox’s average time spent on legal work is only slightly more than that amount, raising the prospect that he could just reduce his hours by a bit. Cox has been approached for comment. He previously defended his outside interests by arguing that “it is up to the electors of Torridge and West Devon whether or not they vote for someone who is a senior and distinguished professional in his field and who still practises that profession”. He was asked to advise the BVI government and has described his role at the hearings as being “to assist the public inquiry in getting to the truth”. The most recent update to the MPs’ register of interests shows that Cox earned £54,404.49 in August for approximately 45 hours of legal work. His salary as an MP is £81,932 a year. The Commons standards committee is conducting a review of the MPs’ code of conduct rules, including the rules around outside work, and is due to publish a report on the issue on Monday, according to its chair, Chris Bryant.The Liberal Democrats are in with a chance of taking the ultra-safe Tory seat of North Shropshire, as “soft Conservative” voters turn against Boris Johnson, party leader Ed Davey has claimed. The seat has been vacant since Owen Paterson resigned, after being found to have broken House of Commons rules on paid lobbying. A byelection is being held on 16 December. The Lib Dem hopes of challenging the Conservatives in their home territory were boosted after they overturned a majority of 16,000 in the Buckinghamshire seat of Chesham and Amersham earlier this year. Winning North Shropshire would represent an even more dramatic electoral earthquake, however. Paterson’s majority in 2019 was almost 23,000, and the Lib Dems took just 10% of the vote, coming behind Labour. Nevertheless, hopeful party strategists point to a stronger performance at last year’s local elections, where they gained seats at the expense of the Conservatives. They also claim detailed canvassing data is stronger than expected, putting them potentially within reach of a win, particularly if they can persuade Labour and Green voters to back them. “It’s tougher than Chesham and Amersham, but we’ve made a really good start, we’ve got a really good candidate,” said party leader Ed Davey. He has already made three visits to North Shropshire to support the Lib Dem candidate, Helen Morgan. Despite the byelection having been triggered by Paterson’s disgrace, Davey said sleaze has barely come up in conversations with voters. Instead, he said they want to talk about long waits for local ambulance services, the NHS – and potholes. “What we’re finding is that there’s a lot of soft Tory voters out there: much softer than we expected. There’s a feeling the Tories have taken them for granted. They’re very open to the idea of voting for us,” he said. “Without prompting, we’re finding people saying on the doorstep, my neighbour had to wait eight hours for an ambulance, or my sister had to wait two hours.” “It’s much more about Boris Johnson’s incompetence, than sleaze,” he added. “We’re really clear that the Lib Dems are the challengers: if you want to send a message to Boris Johnson, vote for us.” One canvasser reported that Johnson’s “Peppa Pig” speech earlier this week had come up, with voters mentioning it as the final straw that meant they could no longer support the Tories. The Conservative candidate is Birmingham-based lawyer Neil Shastri-Hurst, an army veteran and former surgeon who has been supported on recent canvassing sessions by Conservative chair Oliver Dowden. Shastri-Hunt has made what he called a “cast iron commitment,” not to take a second job, after Paterson resigned rather than submit to a 30-day suspension from the House of Commons over paid lobbying. Labour is standing a local candidate, Ben Wood, from Oswestry – but is pouring more resources into next week’s byelection in Old Bexley and Sidcup, the seat made vacant by the death of former minister James Brokenshire. The pair of byelections will be the first electoral test for Johnson since the Paterson affair, which has undermined his authority with Conservative backbenchers and led to questions about his grip on government. A significant swing against the Conservatives would raise questions about the party’s ability to hold on to Tory seats with smaller majorities. After the Chesham and Amersham defeat highlighted concerns among former Tory voters about the government’s proposed radical overhaul of planning rules, the plans were put on pause by the levelling up secretary, Michael Gove.The crisis in the UK’s energy market has been growing in scale and seriousness for months. This week it claimed its latest corporate victim – and reached a tipping point. Bulb is the 23rd energy supplier to fail since August, but, unlike minnows such as Igloo and Neon Reef, it cannot easily be taken over by a rival. With turnover of £1.5bn, it is simply too big. Bulb will instead enter “special administration” and be run on behalf of the government until it can be broken up or sold off. Meanwhile, its 1.7 million customers will remain with the company and get the same corporate branding on their bills, even while taxpayers stump up for any immediate costs. Any final losses will be passed on to households through their fuel bills. Like the other corporate failures before it, Bulb has been quick to blame the government-imposed cap on fuel bills, which limited how far it could pass on the soaring costs it faced in the wholesale market. But Bulb’s directors and investors have their own case to face. Founded in 2015, the startup posed as less of an energy company and more of a tech firm – the Deliveroo or Uber of the fuel market that would challenge the old logic of the sector. Like any Silicon Valley wannabe, it was more bothered about market share than profit – which was handy, as it never made one. Instead, it took on households and business customers at below cost and sported groovy advertising. A triumph of marketing, it brought no real innovation to the industry. For government ministers, this was the hungry young competitor from central casting. Its east London offices were visited this July by Boris Johnson who, with his customary restraint and financial acumen, declared it a “wonderful company”. Its chief executive, 38-year-old Hayden Wood, was placed on the government’s Sustainable Business Council. Sadly, his own business has proved wholly unsustainable. There is about this whole sorry affair a strong whiff of Northern Rock. In the 2000s, that was a challenger bank offering cheap mortgages, indulged by a dopey regulator and all the while relying on a precarious business model. Just like the old Newcastle bank, Bulb’s collapse raises some serious questions about the true purpose of competition in what is a utility sector. If a taxi app collapses, it ultimately does not matter as much as the failure of a supplier of finance or fuel. In the short term, one obvious solution is for the watchdog Ofgem to pay far more attention to the financial viability of businesses in its sector. That will frankly make it harder for smaller players without ready access to a cash fountain. So over the long run there is a big question about how the sector can deliver lower prices and energy security while helping the UK move towards a lower carbon future. The answer to that will probably not lie wholly through a market solution. It may involve a much larger role for the state, either through further regulation and funding, or even a public sector entity. Someone should tell Sid. • This article was amended on 25 November 2021. Northern Rock was based in Newcastle, not Gateshead as stated in an earlier version.There is a growing chorus in the Conservative party calling for the prime minister to be less like Boris Johnson. That does not mean MPs are ready to replace him, but his style, once cherished for campaign effectiveness, is now seen as a governing liability. Disillusionment over the prime minister’s handling of the Owen Paterson lobbying scandal and its aftermath has been compounded by a vacuous, poorly delivered speech to business leaders on Monday. Hostile briefing from inside the government has created the impression of profound dysfunction at the top. Such things are often signs of a regime in terminal decline, but not always. Mr Johnson is a resilient politician whose appeal to voters is not dependent on qualities prized by Westminster veterans. A chaotic digression on the subject of Peppa Pig where there should have been an economic strategy was not some rare unprofessional lapse. Clowning is Mr Johnson’s vocation. It has worked for him before, which is why the Tory party made him leader. It is disingenuous of Conservatives to complain now about a method of governing that was the inevitable consequence of giving power to a man who is allergic to responsibility. To ask whether Mr Johnson is underperforming relative to his usual standard poses the wrong question. It makes issues of immense substance – the absence of a credible plan for “levelling up”; systemic tolerance of corruption – subordinate to Westminster’s fixation on political theatre. The practice of MPs taking second jobs, for example, or the pattern of Tory donors taking seats in the House of Lords, long predates Mr Johnson’s administration. It was revealed this week that David Cameron successfully lobbied Lloyds Banking Group to reverse a decision to cut ties with Greensill Capital – a finance company that had developed close ties to Downing Street and then employed the former prime minister after his retirement. The point of contact at Lloyds was a peer, a previous Tory treasurer who had given millions to the party and whom Mr Cameron had himself ennobled in 2015. It is absurd that seats in the UK legislature are apportioned that way. The blurring of boundaries between government, party finance and private business discredits British democracy. If Mr Johnson’ inept handling of one case has meant that the whole tawdry apparatus comes in for more scrutiny he will, perversely, have performed a kind of public service. If Conservative MPs are angry with their leader for making them vulnerable to that scrutiny, they are rather missing the point about his moral and administrative lapses. On the question of whether levelling up is more than a slogan, Tory disquiet over the truncation of high-speed rail plans for northern England might just as readily be directed at the chancellor as the prime minister. It is Rishi Sunak’s attachment to hawkish fiscal discipline that checks Mr Johnson’s more munificent impulses. The same might reasonably be said of shortcomings in the health and social care bill, which provoked a substantial backbench rebellion earlier this week. The proposed law does not match Tory election pledges to protect homeowners from having to cash in their assets when paying for care. Such betrayals by No 10 are a joint enterprise with the Treasury. It is hardly surprising that Mr Johnson’s disorderly behaviour is causing problems for his MPs. The fault is theirs for collaborating in the fiction that he was a suitable candidate to run the country. The Tories were happy when his incompetence was more competently masked. Mr Johnson is not the cause of Conservative problems. His leadership is a symptom of a deeper rot in the party.Italy is to bar unvaccinated people from popular social and sports activities, as governments across Europe scramble to tighten Covid-19 restrictions amid record-breaking numbers of infections in parts of the continent. The Italian “super green pass” will take effect from 6 December and require people to prove they are vaccinated or have recovered from Covid to access cinemas, theatres, gyms, nightclubs, ski lifts and stadiums, as well as to be served indoors at bars and restaurants. Current rules in Italy and many other EU countries with health passes also allow people who provide proof of a negative test taken within the previous 48 hours to use recreational venues, a regime that has become known as 3G, but the Italian “super green pass” removes that third option. The Netherlands and France are among those thought likely to also adopt a stricter so-called 2G regime within days. 3G refers to the German words geimpft (vaccinated), getestet (tested) and genesen (recovered); 2G is vaccinated or recovered. Italy’s prime minister, Mario Draghi, has been under pressure from regional governors to impose a stricter health mandate against people who have not been vaccinated. He said on Wednesday it was essential to mitigate the risk of coronavirus infections surging and preserve normality as his government tightened regulations against unvaccinated people by barring them from an array of social and recreational settings. “We want to be very careful and also to preserve what we have achieved this year, to preserve this normality,” he said. In a surprise move, people will also have to show proof of vaccination, recovering from Covid-19 or of a negative test taken within the previous 48 hours when using public transport such as buses or metro trains. The measure is already in place when travelling on long-distance trains and domestic flights. The government has also extended the obligatory vaccine requirement, already in place for health workers, to the police force, military and teachers. Draghi said that while the coronavirus situation in Italy is currently under control, “outside of Italy, the situation is very serious, while ours is steadily worsening.” Italy registered 12,448 new infections on Wednesday, up from 10,047 on Tuesday, and 85 deaths. In the Netherlands, the Dutch health minister, Hugo de Jonge, spoke on Wednesday of a “gloomy and worrying” rise in cases, and said tough measures could be announced within days despite four nights of rioting and more than 170 arrests over a partial lockdown imposed last week. De Jonge declined to specify what the restrictions, likely to be announced on Friday, could entail, but Dutch media said they could include school closures and 2G curbs, allowing only those vaccinated or recovered from Covid to access bars and cafes. Restrictions introduced on 13 November oblige Dutch bars, restaurants, cafes and supermarkets to close at 8pm, sports matches to be played behind closed doors, and limit domestic gatherings to four people. France will announce new Covid containment measures on Thursday, a government spokesperson, Gabriel Attal, said. While aiming to avoid “major curbs on public life”, the government has said stricter social distancing requirements and tougher health pass rules are inevitable. “We must protect the French people by building on what we have, to save the end-of-year festivities and get through the winter as well as possible,” Attal said. The president, Emmanuel Macron, has said the pass, which currently applies 3G rules, is a key reason why France is doing better than some of its neighbours. Olaf Scholz, who is to replace Angela Merkel next month as Germany’s chancellor, called on Wednesday for vaccinations to be made compulsory for targeted groups, saying that fighting the pandemic would be his top priority. “Vaccination is the way out of this pandemic. In institutions where vulnerable groups are cared for, we should make vaccination compulsory,” he told a news conference. Several German states have already imposed a strict 2G regime for access to entertainment and leisure venues. The Netherlands, Slovakia, the Czech Republic and Hungary all reported record daily infections on Wednesday as colder weather pushed people to gather indoors rather than on cafe terraces, providing a perfect breeding ground for the virus. Italy introduced its green pass in August and made it mandatory for workplaces in October. The workplace mandate intensified protests across Italy, especially in the northern city of Trieste, where there has been a sharp rise in infections and hospital admissions in recent weeks. Calls for tighter rules have been led by Massimiliano Fedriga, the president of Friuli Venezia Giulia, the region surrounding Trieste. This month Fedriga, a politician with the far-right League, described the anti-vaccination and anti-green pass protests as “idiocy”. He said on Sunday the super green pass was not discriminatory and the only alternative would be another lockdown. Umberto Lucangelo, the head of an intensive care unit at a hospital in Trieste, recently said 90% of Covid patients were unvaccinated and many had been involved in the protests. The tougher rules have been supported by regional presidents from across the political spectrum. Stefano Bonaccini, the centre-left Democratic party president of Emilia-Romagna, told Ansa: “I think people who are vaccinated should have a preferential path in those places of social and cultural life, in particular, in order to prevent them from having to close.” Giovanni Toti, the Forza Italia president of the Liguria region, said any further restrictions should apply to “people who have not had the vaccine, not to people who have done so correctly”. As of Wednesday just over 84% of Italy’s population over the age of 12 were vaccinated.