The last decade and a half has seen a string of procurement disasters at the Ministry of Defence, where schemes have had to be scrapped, costs overrun or plans deemed vital to national security delayed. Warrior armoured vehicle – £430m wasted A long planned upgrade to the Warrior armoured vehicle was scrapped in March, after £430m had been spent on an attempt to upgrade the weapon and turret of the vehicle. Lacking a stabilised gun, the Warrior could not fire while moving, identified as a major problem as long ago as during the first Gulf war. The procurement programme began in 2009 and a contract was awarded to Lockheed Martin in 2011. But despite spending over half of the allocated budget of £800m, no manufacturing contract was ever awarded. When scrapped the upgrade had a planned in-service date of 2024 – seven years late. The programme was described as an “abject failure” by the Commons defence select committee in March – which was “symptomatic of the extremely weak management of army equipment programmes … in recent years”. HMS Queen Elizabeth and HMS Prince of Wales aircraft carriers – £2.5bn overspend The cost of building two largest ships in the history of the Royal Navy soared from an initial estimate of £3.9bn – when the project was commissioned under Labour in 2007 – to £6.4bn. A “pain sharing” agreement had to be signed by the MoD in 2013 with contractors – BAE Systems, Babcock and Thales – in which the total budget was first increased to £6bn, before ending up at £6.4bn. But in procuring the carriers – both of which have now been accepted into service – the MoD had to make cuts. The original plan was to equip both vessels with catapult launchers for aircraft, but they were abandoned on grounds of cost, leaving the new UK ships lagging behind capabilities boasted by the US and China. A further £10.5bn has been set aside to equip the carriers with F35 Lightning II jets from Lockheed Martin, although approved budget has increased four times since 2017, by a total of £1.4bn. Meanwhile, a related Crowsnest radar system for the carriers and allied ships is 29 months late because, the National Audit Office said, “neither the department nor industry understood the complexities of delivering the capability”. Dreadnought nuclear submarines – seven years delay Britain’s £31bn replacement for its ageing Vanguard class Trident nuclear submarines has been plagued by delay since first approved in 2007. The first submarine was initially due to come into service in 2024, then 2028, and now the “early 2030s” according to the MoD. The four existing Vanguard submarines, each carrying Britain’s independent nuclear submarines, were originally built to last 25 years, meaning they would have been out of service between 2017 and 2024. Their life has been guaranteed by a series of extensions, but they will have to last well over 30 years. Poor management of other aspects of the nuclear weapons programme led to a £1.35bn in costs, the National Audit Office found last year, when it looked at the upgrade programme for three key weapons sites in Burghfield, Berkshire, Raynesway, Derbyshire and Barrow-in-Furness The MoD was continuing to repeat mistakes made in the last cycle of investment in the nuclear enterprise in the 1980s and 1990s, the auditors found.The heatwaves and wildfires that caused devastation in Europe this summer would not have happened without global heating, new analysis shows. The summer of 2021 was the hottest on record in the continent, with average temperatures about 1C above normal. The elevated heat caused wildfires and premature deaths. Researchers have calculated how much more likely the climate crisis made the high temperatures. For almost all of the past 150 years, the expected frequency of a European summer as hot as 2021 was no higher than once every 10,000 years. But since the 1990s, as carbon emissions continued to soar, the expected frequency has rocketed to reach once every three years. The analysis is a stark reminder to the leaders meeting at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow that global heating is causing terrible damage to lives and livelihoods. If countries do not achieve drastic reductions in carbon emissions by 2030 and hit net zero by 2050, the record heat of 2021 will strike every year by the end of the century, the scientists say. Despite the extraordinary increase in likelihood of record heat in recent years, Nikos Christidis at the Met Office, who led the analysis, said: “These kinds of results are no longer surprising. Climate change is already making our weather extremes more severe.” “Extreme events are the new norm,” said Prof Petteri Taalas, the head of the UN World Meteorological Organization. A European temperature record of 48.8C was set in Sicily in August. “Cop26 is a make-or-break opportunity to put us back on track,” Taalas said. The analysis used 14 climate models and scores of model runs to calculate how frequently the record summer of 2021 is expected to occur in today’s human-influenced climate, compared with a climate with no human influence. The research analysed the period from June to August and covered all of Europe, as far east as Yekaterinburg in Russia. For large stretches of the 20th century, the estimated frequency of such a hot summer in a world without climate change was more than one in 10,000 years. “This event was so rare, it was nearly impossible to calculate a probability,” Christidis said. The same scientific approach has shown clear links between global heating and other severe weather. The record-breaking heatwave in the Siberian Arctic in January and February 2020 was made at least 600 times more likely, while the terrible floods in Germany and Belgium in July were made up to nine times more likely. Prof Peter Stott, also at the Met Office, said: “We can be more confident than we have ever been about linking extreme weather events to climate change. The science is clear that the faster we reduce our emissions of greenhouse gases, the more we can avoid the most severe impacts.” “The new study is another stark reminder of just what 1.2C [of global heating to date] means,” said Friederike Otto, at Imperial College London, who conducted the Siberian study. “I really do not want to imagine the summers we’d have at 2.7C.” She said looking at large regions gives a stronger climate change signal than smaller areas. Bob Ward, a policy director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change at the London School of Economics, said: “The study shows clearly that the severe intensity of this summer’s heatwave was due to man-made climate change resulting from the burning of fossil fuels and other human activities. “The cost to humans and wildlife was substantial, with heatwave conditions killing people across the continent, and the enhanced evaporation of higher temperatures turning forests into fuel for devastating wildfires. “These extreme temperature events in Europe will continue to increase in severity and frequency for at least the next 30 years, until the world reaches net zero emissions of greenhouse gases.” Other previous studies have shown an extreme heatwave in 2017 that saw deadly forest fires blazing in Portugal and Spain was made 10 times more likely by global warming. In Portugal, 64 people died. Previous work has also demonstrated floods in England and France – as far back as 2000 – were made significantly more likely by global heating.A massive stunt loop track for Hot Wheels toy cars to race round and “farting” board game Gassy Gus are predicted to be among the must-have toys this Christmas. This year the DreamToys list, drawn up by the Toy Retailers Association, is heavily influenced by spin-offs from major films and TV shows with trucks, figurines and Lego sets inspired by Star Wars, Jurassic World and Paw Patrol all making the cut. Nearly £1bn will be spent on toys between now and Christmas Eve and Gary Grant, the chair of the DreamToys selection committee, said the toy industry was working hard to overcome the supply chain crisis and ensure “there will be toys on shelves” throughout the festive period. The Hot Wheels brand has been around for decades but fans are always eager to up the ante, with the £55 “massive loop mayhem” offering a more than 70cm-wide stunt track. With families also keen on games they can play together, the £25 game Gassy Gus is tipped for big things. Players take turns to feed Gus, who has an inflating belly, but you do not want him to let rip on your turn. To satisfy younger children there is a £45 transforming car that had a starring role in the recent Paw Patrol movie as well as toys linked to other hit children’s TV shows CoComelon and Bluey. The average price across the dozen toys is £36. Another predicted bestseller is the Magic Mixies Cauldron, which has been described as the “wow toy of 2021”. The set, which costs £70, comes with a wand, spell book, potions and interactive toy, and manufacturers expect to sell 70,000 in the UK in the last three months of 2021. Grant, who is also the chair of The Entertainer toy chain, said that while toy shop shelves looked full now, with the biggest sales weeks of the year still to come, the industry’s stock levels would soon be depleted. “There is no obvious shortage of toys in the industry today but you have to bear in mind that from the first week in November through to Christmas Eve we have roughly 40% of the annual toy industry turnover,” he said. “It’s a huge, really intense period.” Grant said that come December more of the must-have toys than usual would be hard to come by. There would be no shortage of toys, he said, however a greater number of the must-haves “you won’t be able to buy”. “There’s no reason to panic but we are saying if children have already made up their mind what they want it would be prudent to buy earlier than later,” he added. DreamToys Top 12 Barbie Dreamtopia Colour Change Mermaid £25 Bluey Family Home Playset £40 CoComelon JJ Doll £40 Gassy Gus £25 Hot Wheels Massive Loop Mayhem £55 Jurassic World Scorpios Rex £32 LOL Surprise Movie Magic Doll £11 Little Live Pets My Pig Piggly £25 Magic Mixies Cauldron £70 Paw Patrol Chase’s Deluxe Transforming Vehicle £45 Pokémon 8” plush Pikachu £14 Star Wars Boba Fett’s Starship Lego £45She admits that, to the human eye at least, her new installation may turn out a little garish – clashing colours, odd shapes, curious juxtapositions – but the artist Alexandra Daisy Ginsberg doesn’t mind that at all. Ginsberg’s 55-metre long piece, which is taking shape at the eco-visitor attraction the Eden Project in Cornwall, is not designed, like most art, to please humans, but rather to appeal to bees, butterflies, moths, wasps and other endangered pollinators. “It means that I’ve ended up with this mad-looking design,” said Ginsberg in a break from the chilly, muddy business of autumn planting. “There are strange juxtapositions of shapes and patterns and colours that no gardener would think of planting. It is designed to be of greatest benefit to pollinators, suiting their tastes rather than ours.” The piece, Pollinator Pathmaker, should be in full bloom by late spring or early summer and new editions of the work are to be planted in London and Berlin. Ginsberg was originally trying to dream up a piece on pollinators when the thought struck her: “Why not create a sculpture for the pollinators rather than about them?” At Eden, Ginsberg has worked with professional gardeners, experts in pollination and a master beekeeper, Rodger Dewhurst, but a surprising team member is the string theory physicist Przemek Witaszczyk, of Jagiellonian University, Kraków, who helped create an algorithm for the piece. Witaszczyk factored in elements such as the shape and style of journeys taken by different pollinators and when individual flowers come into bloom to make sure conditions are good for as long as possible. “We want to serve the greatest number of pollinators,” said Ginsberg. Horticulturists, students, apprentices and volunteers have braved dismal conditions to plant thousands of plants, which will erupt into crazy colours at the Eden Project’s Wild Edge Zone, stretching around the perimeter slopes of the gardens and visible from across the site. Another crucial element of the project is the launch on Wednesday of a website allowing people to use the algorithm to design their own unique version of her work. Users can input the size of the patch they want to plant, the position of their garden and soil conditions, then see a 3D visualisation of their unique garden bloom on their screen. The images that emerge are in themselves a work of art, each plant hand-painted by Ginsberg. Some of the specimens included on the site are as extraordinary as the pollinators that will benefit from them, such as Echium pininana, a rare example of a plant that produces nectar across the whole day, and Cynara cardunculus, the artichoke thistle, which is a valuable source of nectar for bumblebees. Ginsberg sees this as “an international cultural campaign” and an “interspecies art experiment” to help save endangered species of pollinating insects. She hopes people will grow these in whatever space they have available – at home, in fields, community gardens, even in a window box if this is all the space they have. The artist admits the gardens could be expensive if they covered a large, intensively planted area, but the cost could be kept down in more modest schemes. “I hope we can create the largest ever climate-positive artwork together by planting living artworks for pollinators around the world.” The Pollinator Pathmaker project is part of Create a Buzz, a three-year programme for the Eden Project that includes new plantings of fields of wild flowers and a range of community and education projects. Misha Curson, senior curator at the Eden Project, described Pollinator Pathmaker as a “mould-breaking commission”, combining technology, conservation, horticulture and visual arts. “It’s a really powerful way of helping us as human beings think beyond our own needs and wants and consider the impact of our actions,” she said.Hundreds of the world’s biggest banks and pension funds with assets worth $130tn have committed themselves to a key goal in limiting greenhouse gas emissions, the UK government will announce on Wednesday. The pledge by more than 450 financial institutions in 45 countries is intended to be one of the top achievements by the UK hosts of the Cop26 summit in Glasgow, and comes as some of the other aims of the summit – chiefly, setting the world on a path to limit global heating to 1.5C – are looking hard to reach. Finance is key to the massive economic transformation required to move away from fossil fuels and reach net zero so the global economy can be run without damaging the climate. But experts and campaigners cast doubt on the government’s finance claims, pointing out that the banks making the pledge are still free to pour cash into fossil fuels, and need only divert a small slice of their funding to low-carbon ends in the next decade. News of the pledge came at the end of the second full day of the Cop26 conference in Glasgow as world leaders finished their addresses and negotiators were preparing to thrash out details that could form the basis of a final communique next weekend. On another frantic day of announcements, the key developments included: UK prime minister Boris Johnson said he was “cautiously optimistic” about reaching a deal to keep the 1.5C target on track. Returning to a football analogy in which he had said the world was the equivalent of 5-1 down, he declared on Monday evening that the score was now “more like 5-2 or 5-3”. US president Joe Biden announced a plan by 90 countries to control methane, a powerful greenhouse gas. Under the agreement, which does not include major emitters Russia and China, emissions of methane would fall 30% by the end of the decade. In another multinational deal, more than 40 countries including the UK, US, EU, India, China and Australia signed up to a plan to coordinate the introduction of clean technologies around the world. By collaborating on things like hydrogen production and electric vehicles, the members of the Breakthrough Alliance hope to bring forward the “tipping point” at which green technology is more affordable than fossil-fuel technology. The group of countries with the most ambitious climate targets, known as the High Ambition Coalition, were boosted by the announcement that the US would be rejoining their ranks after withdrawing from the Paris agreement entirely under former president Donald Trump. Observers said the move would strengthen efforts to stay on track for the target of 1.5C of heating. On Tuesday night, Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the exchequer, said the City of London would become the world’s first “net zero finance centre”, and set out new rules forcing public companies to report on their plans to achieve net zero emissions. He said: “I’m proud that under the UK’s leadership, the number of financial firms committed to net zero plans has tripled, with the assets now covered totalling $130tn. Harnessing the trillions of dollars controlled by these companies in the fight against climate change is crucial. So I’ve announced new requirements for firms to publish their net zero transition plans. Together we can provide the cash the world needs to stop catastrophic climate change.” The finance pledge, known as the Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ), will mean that by 2050 all of the assets under management by the institutions involved will be aligned with net zero emissions. Economists have estimated that about $100tn in investment is likely to be needed in the next three decades to meet the net zero goal, so in theory GFANZ will provide more than enough cash to meet the goal. Mark Carney, former governor of the Bank of England, now a UK and UN climate envoy, said: “The architecture of the global financial system has been transformed to deliver net zero. We now have the essential plumbing in place to move climate change from the fringes to the forefront of finance so that every financial decision takes climate change into account … [This] rapid, and large-scale, increase in capital commitment to net zero, through GFANZ, makes the transition to a 1.5C world possible.” But experts told the Guardian the claims were overblown. The $130tn figure refers to the assets the firms have under management, only a small proportion of which – about a third – will be devoted to low-carbon investments in the crucial next decade, when emissions must be halved to keep temperatures from rising by more than 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. Simon Youel of the Positive Money campaign group said: “Banks may be preparing to scale up investment in ‘green’ activities, but this announcement says nothing about financial firms’ investments in new fossil fuel projects. States must introduce restrictions against new fossil fuel investments if we are to have a chance of keeping 1C alive.” Sunak has been accused of blocking green measures and is said to oppose the net zero agenda within government. He barely mentioned the climate in his recent comprehensive spending review, his budgets have contained few green measures and many high-carbon policies, and his speech in Glasgow is virtually the first time he has acknowledged Cop26. Sam Alvis, head of economy at the Green Alliance thinktank, said: “It is definite progress that the chancellor has got the Treasury on the pitch at Cop26. But trillions of dollars are still flowing to fossil fuels every day and voluntary measures have not got us far enough. To keep the 1.5C target alive, governments will need to regulate companies not just to publish transition plans but have strict criteria with legal bite on their credibility and pace.” Given the failure of wealthy nations to live up to their finance promises, diplomats from other parts of the world have turned the credibility tables on the donors. The foreign secretary of India, Harsh Vardhan Shringla said it was time for rich nations to face the same credibility checks on finance that developing countries are expected to accept on emissions cuts. “There are a lot of commitments that are made, but not seen through,” he said. “The pressure on climate action should be equal to the pressure on climate finance. It is not enough just to set the targets, there also needs to be a means to deliver. There should be tangible timelines, tangible monitoring.”Women diagnosed with breast cancer under the age of 35 face a higher risk of it spreading, according to the first global study of its kind. Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer, with 2.3 million people diagnosed every year. Survival rates are generally good, which is largely because of screening, early diagnosis and improved treatment. However, until now, little has been known about the risk of secondary breast cancer, where the disease spreads to other parts of the body and becomes incurable. A meta analysis of more than 400 studies has found the risk of breast cancer spreading to another part of the body ranges from 6% to 22%. The results of the study are being presented at the sixth International Consensus Conference for Advanced Breast Cancer . The findings also suggest certain women face a higher risk, including those diagnosed with breast cancer under the age of 35, those with larger tumours when initially diagnosed and those with specific types of the disease, for example luminal B. Kotryna Temcinaite, senior research communications manager at the charity Breast Cancer Now, said the analysis “provides helpful insight into who is most at risk”. “About 1,000 women in the UK die each month from incurable secondary breast cancer,” she said. “We desperately need to learn more about this devastating disease so that we can find new ways to improve treatment, care and support for people living with it, and for those living in fear of a diagnosis. “The data shows that people diagnosed with primary breast cancer aged 35 years or younger have the greatest chance of developing secondary breast cancer. The study also highlights that the size of the tumour, the type of breast cancer and the length of time since primary diagnosis can impact a person’s risk. “Secondary breast cancer can develop many years after an initial cancer diagnosis, so it’s vital that we understand it better and find new ways to prevent it.” For the study, researchers analysed data on tens of thousands of women across more than 400 studies from North and South America, Europe, Africa, Asia and Oceania. The analysis suggests the overall risk of metastasis for most breast cancer patients is between 6% and 22%. Researchers say the range is broad because the risk varies significantly depending on a whole range of different factors. For example, women first diagnosed under the age of 35 have a 12.7% to 38% risk of their breast cancer coming back and spreading to other parts of the body, while women aged 50 years or older have a risk of 3.7% to 28.6%. “This may be because younger women have a more aggressive form of breast cancer or because they are being diagnosed at a later stage,” said the presenter of the study, Dr Eileen Morgan, of the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC). “Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer in the world,” she said. “Most women are diagnosed when their cancer is confined to the breast or has only spread to nearby tissue. But in some women, the cancer will grow and spread to other parts of the body or come back in a different part of the body several years after the end of their initial treatment. “At this point the cancer becomes much harder to treat and the risk of dying is higher. However, we don’t really know how many people develop metastatic breast cancer because cancer registries have not been routinely collecting this data.” The study also found women with specific types of breast cancer appeared to have a higher risk of it spreading, for example those with a type of cancer called luminal B. Those with this form had a 4.2% to 35.5% risk of it spreading compared with 2.3% to 11.8% risk in women diagnosed with luminal A cancer. Dr Shani Paluch-Shimon, a member of the conference’s scientific committee and director of the breast unit at Hadassah University hospital in Israel, who was not involved with the research, said the findings were “vital” for patients and doctors.Electric cars are used for fewer than one in every 20 miles driven by Uber drivers in major European cities, according to data that suggest the taxi app company must drastically accelerate its drivers’ take-up of zero-emissions vehicles to meet its environmental targets. Uber pledged last year that 50% of miles driven in seven European capitals by the end of 2025 will be in battery electric cars. The vehicles produce zero exhaust emissions, helping to address the impacts on health and the climate caused by urban transport. There were stark divergences among different European capitals. The usage of electric cars ranged from 9% of miles driven in Lisbon, to 6% in London and Amsterdam, and only 0.01% in Brussels, according to internal Uber data shared with Transport &amp; Environment (T&amp;E), a thinktank. The other laggards were Madrid, at only 0.15% of miles, Berlin at 0.55% and Paris at 1%. However, Uber’s data showed rapid increases in electric miles in some cities. In London only 1.6% of miles driven were electric in the first half of 2020, meaning the share more than tripled in the year since. In Berlin the share of electric miles fell during the same period. Uber faces a difficult task in electrifying quickly because the cars are bought by drivers. On Wednesday it announced that London Uber drivers could put money raised via the app’s clean air fee towards buying Tesla electric cars, adding to similar programmes giving discounts on Nissan, Kia and Hyundai electric cars. T&amp;E said the divergent paths taken by different cities highlighted the need for local and national regulations to promote electric cars. Saul Lopez, electric fleets programme manager at T&amp;E, said: “Uber should be doing more but so should governments. In Amsterdam and London it’s cleaning up its fleet faster because the authorities have set up electrification mandates and effective ultra-low emissions zones.” Uber, headquartered in San Francisco, introduced its 2025 target following criticism of its environmental credentials, along with rivals such as Bolt and Lyft. Uber is aiming for 100% electric cars worldwide by 2040. A taxi ride generally uses more energy than the same trip via public transport, although Uber and other ride-hailing companies argue they will contribute to lowering emissions through a more efficient transport system. Anabel Diaz, a regional general manager for Uber, backed the call for government action to promote the use of electric vehicles. She added: “These first steps towards our ambitious electrification commitments were always going to be the most challenging given the pandemic, but drivers in Europe are switching to EVs well ahead of the average European consumer.”The Ministry of Defence’s system of procurement is “broken” and is repeatedly wasting billions in taxpayers’ money, according to a scathing assessment by a watchdog committee of MPs. The Public Accounts Committee (PAC) said that the oversight in the department was so poor that it was unable to spell out what additional capability the country will get from an extra £16.5bn which was allocated by Boris Johnson last year. Of the current 20 largest projects, 13 were running behind, by a cumulative total of 21 years – including the £4bn-plus Ajax armoured vehicle, delayed due to excessive noise and vibration. There is “no timescale” when it will be ready for service. No firm figure was put on the amount of money lost, but the MPs said there had been “wastage of taxpayers’ money running into the billions” and that the MoD at times “lacks the skilled personnel” to manage its suppliers. “The department’s system for delivering major equipment capabilities is broken,” the committee added. Dame Meg Hillier, the Labour chair of the committee, said: “This committee is determined that this state of affairs cannot, and will not, continue” – and demanded that the Treasury conduct an emergency review of MoD project management. The senior MP said that PAC members feared that “last year’s lauded and substantial uplift” of £16.5bn over four years would “simply be used to plug financial holes across its programmes” because the MoD could not give assurances to the contrary. The prime minister announced the extra capital spending nearly a year ago, promising it would lead to “a once-in-a-generation modernisation of our armed forces” – including the introduction of laser weapons. But at the time the MoD also faced a £13bn shortfall in its equipment budget, stemming from historic overspending, which had forced it to reduce the numbers of new Challenger 3 tanks, P-8 submarine hunting maritime patrol aircraft and Type 26 frigates. A total of £4bn had already been spent on the heavily delayed Ajax out of “whole life costs of £5.5bn,” the committee noted, yet only 14 vehicles – 2% of the total requirement – had been delivered by contractor General Dynamics for testing. One year ago, the MoD thought Ajax would initially enter service in the summer of 2021 – but this date was not met and the issues over vibration and noise are so serious that 310 service personnel were undergoing tests to see if their hearing had been permanently damaged. The noise and vibration problems dated back to December 2018 but the MPs voiced concern that the MoD was still in the dark about the cause. “Despite the length of time the department has known about this issue, there is still no definitive information on the source of the noise and vibration,” the PAC said. Eight programmes were rated either “amber/red or red” by senior officials responsible for delivering them on a traffic light scheme used across government for rating the progress of major procurement projects. Of broader concern, the PAC said, was the MoD’s apparent inability to learn from its mistakes despite 13 formal reviews of defence procurement over 35 years. “We were therefore shocked to learn that the department had only established a central register of learning from experience (LFE) in December 2020,” the MPs added. “Experience shows that there is a need for reflection and openness earlier in the process to avoid further catastrophes like Ajax.” The MoD frequently cited the complexity of the programmes to explain why they had fallen behind, but sceptical MPs said this was not the case. Such arguments aimed to “excuse the fact” that the MoD and its suppliers “failed to produce more realistic costings and schedules”, the committee concluded. An MoD spokesperson said: “This report reflects the complex challenges of delivering defence capability for our armed forces, but also the commitment and professionalism required to keep our people and the UK’s interests safe, by purchasing world-class equipment such as Lightning II stealth fighter jets, and the Queen Elizabeth aircraft carriers.”That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today. I’ll be back a bit later with a new Covid blog to bring you all the latest developments. In the meantime you can follow along with all coronavirus news here. Australia is on track to reach the milestone of 80% of the population over 16 being fully vaccinated against Covid-19 in a matter of days. The latest vaccine figures show 78.1% of over-16s are fully dosed, while more than 88% have received one dose. Pressure has been mounting on states with zero Covid cases to boost their vaccination rates in order to reopen internal borders safely. Covid-affected jurisdictions continue their vaccination surge, with NSW now on the cusp of 90% fully vaccinated. There were more than 186,000 vaccines administered nationwide on Monday. It coincides with American manufacturer Novavax submitting their vaccine to the Therapeutic Goods Administration for final approval. If it gets given the green light by the regulator, it will become the fourth Covid vaccine to be made available in Australia. The UK government is increasingly worried that hospitalisations and deaths among double-vaccinated people could rise due to waning immunity as an estimated 4.5 million people have failed to get their booster shots despite being eligible. Downing Street sources told the Guardian that the gap between those eligible and those jabbed was too wide, ranking it as their major concern ahead of the winter months. They acknowledged more needed to be done to encourage take-up as waning immunity meant more double jabbed people could get sick and were at greater risk of dying without the extra protection of the boosters. Read the full story here: Hello from a very sunny morning over here in Sydney, Australia. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be with you for the next short while. Before I get going here are some case numbers out of Australia. The state of Victoria reports 941 new Covid cases, the second day in a row with fewer than 1,000 infections. It’s good news for the state which just came out of lockdown. NSW has reported 190 new cases overnight. A total of 93.6% of people aged 16+ have had one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and 88.3% of people aged 16 and over have had two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine Here’s a round-up of this evening’s Covid news. The UK has had its highest number of daily Covid deaths reported since late February, as another 293 people have died within 28 days of a positive Covid-19 test. UK government is increasingly worried that hospitalisations and deaths among double-vaccinated people could rise due to waning immunity as an estimated 4.5 million people have failed to get their booster shots despite being eligible. China urges citizens to stockpile daily necessities, prompting panic-buying, amid surging vegetable prices linked to recent extreme weather, fears of supply shortages and an ongoing Covid outbreak. Romania broke its daily death toll record, after another 591 people died from Covid. It has lagged behind on vaccinations and is well below the average within the EU. Greece has announced new restrictions on non-vaccinated people and increased fines for non-compliance. Public health officials in Ireland say that its case numbers are at their highest point since January, as another 3,726 were registered – 70% higher than a week ago. The Dutch government has reintroduced face masks in an attempt to stop rising Covid-19 cases. Prime minister Mark Rutte said the use of Covid passports would also be broadened out to include museums, gyms and outdoor terraces. A scientist has quit the UK government’s pandemic advisery body Sage, saying that the Covid crisis is “a long way from over”. Sir Jeremy Farrar, quit the body at the end of October. Children as young as 5 are one step closer to being vaccinated against Covid in the US, after the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) unanimously voted in favour of the broad use of Pfizer and BioNTech jabs for them. The UK government’s independent vaccine advisers recommended against Covid shots for healthy teenagers despite considering evidence that the jabs would reduce infections, hospitalisations and some deaths in the age group. A UK politician has put a bill to the House of Commons ensuring that any further closures to schools would have to be approved by Parliament. Robert Halfon, a Conservative MP who chairs the education select committee said the measure could avoid a repeat of the “disaster” of school closures. He added: “These closures wielded a hammer blow for students’ education and wellbeing. Their effect was apocalyptic, threatening the futures of millions of pupils and students and stopping them climbing the ladder of opportunity.” Children as young as 5 are one step closer to being vaccinated against Covid in the US, after the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) unanimously voted in favour of the broad use of Pfizer and BioNTech jabs for them. Shots could start going into arms of children aged from 5-11 from Wednesday, after the CDC said the benefits outweighed the risks of vaccination. Discussion looked at rare cases of heart inflammation which have been linked to the vaccine, Reuters reports. CDC director Rochelle Walensky accept the panel’s ruling before it can start giving out the drug. A scientist has quit the UK government’s pandemic advisery body Sage, saying that the Covid crisis is “a long way from over”. Sir Jeremy Farrar, quit the body at the end of October, Sky News has reported. It said that he was advocating for a “vaccine plus” strategy to deal with the high levels of Covid cases in the UK. Sir Jeremy, who is the director of the Wellcome Trust, a charity foundation health research, advocated for more mask wearing, ventilation and testing to tackle rising case numbers. Yet the government has not yet deviated from its current plans. The government’s independent vaccine advisers recommended against Covid shots for healthy teenagers despite considering evidence that the jabs would reduce infections, hospitalisations and some deaths in the age group. Modelling reviewed by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) in June showed that fully vaccinating 80% of 12- to 17-year-olds would lead to “large reductions” in infections and a “substantial reduction” in hospitalisations in the age group. The modelling from the University of Warwick was considered alongside calculations from Public Health England that found vaccinating healthy young people in an overlapping age group – those aged 15 to 19 – could reduce intensive care admissions and prevent two deaths per million in those who received the shots. The Dutch government has reintroduced face masks in an attempt to stop rising Covid-19 cases. Prime minister Mark Rutte said the use of Covid passports would also be broadened out to include museums, gyms and outdoor terraces. Infections have been rising for a month since most social distancing measures were lifted in late September. Cases have reached their highest levels since July, in the last week. In a televised press conference, Rutte called on all Dutch to stick to basic hygiene rules and to stay at home if they had a potential infection. Public health officials in Ireland say that its case numbers are at their highest point since January, as another 3,726 were registered – 70% higher than a week ago. The surge is despite more than 90% of adults now being vaccinated according to data released in late October by chair of the Irish vaccination task force Brian MacCraith. The 14-day incidence stood at 695 cases per 100,000 people, up 18% compared to last week. The country has dropped most of its restrictions to tackle coronavirus, but requires vaccine passports to enter bars and restaurants. Following Greece reporting a record-high number of new Covid cases, health officials have announced tighter rules for non-vaccinated people and heavier fines for people who do not comply. From Saturday, anyone who has not been vaccinated will have to provide a negative Covid test before they can enter public buildings, shops and banks, AFP reports. Workers in the public and private sectors will have to provide negative tests twice a week at their own expense. Fines for shops and restaurants which don’t follow the rules have been doubled to €5,000 (£4,253). Another country breaking its daily death toll records is Romania, as it registered another 591 deaths. The eastern European country has had a persistently low vaccination rate, according to Associated Press, and its health care system has become overwhelmed. The number of vaccinated adults is still well below the EU average of 75% at just 37%. Only its southern neighbour, Bulgaria has got a smaller share of its population vaccinated. Romanian authorities said on Tuesday that 541 of the latest 591 deaths were unvaccinated. More than 1,800 coronavirus patients are in intensive care. Harry Taylor here bringing you the latest coronavirus updates from the UK and around the world for the rest of tonight. If you have any comments, tips or suggestions - drop me an email or via Twitter. The UK has had its highest number of daily Covid deaths reported since late February, as another 293 people have died within 28 days of a positive Covid-19 test. The amount has been distorted by data from NHS England which was not provided on Monday, giving an artificially low number of deaths – 38 – but today’s figure is the largest amount since 21 February, when 325 deaths were recorded. Separate figures published by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) show there has now been more than 166,000 deaths registered with Covid-19 on the death certificate. Another 33,865 new coronavirus cases were confirmed earlier on Tuesday. The Dutch health council has advised the government to begin giving Covid-19 vaccine booster shots to everybody 60 and older and residents of nursing homes. The council said it was seeing indications that Covid protection was waning among older people. “To get ahead of an increase in serious illness, the council advises the health minister to start offering boosters now,” the council said. The government, which was set to reimpose some Covid preventive measures on Tuesday, usually follows the health council’s advice. In Greece, the public health body (EODY) has just announced an all-time record of 6,700 new coronavirus cases over the last 24 hours. This follows a record-breaking 5,449 new infections the previous day. An additional 59 Covid-related fatalities brought the death toll to 16,050 in a population of around 11 million. On 6 October, the country crossed the grim milestone of 15,000 deaths. Of the 434 people on life support, 370 (85.25%) are unvaccinated, or only partially inoculated with epidemiologists speaking of an “epidemic” amongst those who have yet to be fully jabbed. Alarmed by the steep rise in transmission rates the Greek health ministry is poised to unveil further restrictive measures for those who remain unvaccinated. An estimated 60.5 % of citizens in Greece have had the shot. The Netherlands health council has advised the Dutch government to begin giving Covid-19 vaccine booster shots to everybody 60 and older and residents of nursing homes, adding it was seeing indications that protection was waning among older people, AP reports. “To get ahead of an increase in serious illness, the council advises the health minister to start offering boosters now,” the council said. The government, which was set to reimpose some Covid-19 preventive measures later on Tuesday, usually follows the health council’s advice. Other European countries already have begun giving booster shots. France started giving boosters to people over 65 two months ago. Just under 80% of adults in the Netherlands are fully vaccinated. The government already has begun giving booster shots to people with severely compromised immune systems. Covid-19 cases have been rising sharply for weeks in the Netherlands. The country’s public health institute reported Tuesday that infections rose 39% compared to the week earlier and hospital admissions were up 31% amid a weeks-long rise that began soon after the government ended most remaining lockdown restrictions in late September. More than 50 million first doses of Covid-19 vaccine have been delivered in the UK, new figures show. A total of 41,928,327 doses had been given in England as of November 1, along with 4,320,370 in Scotland, 2,446,430 in Wales and 1,329,893 in Northern Ireland. The overall number of first doses – 50,025,020 – is the equivalent of 87.0% of people aged 12 and over in the UK, or 74.6% of the entire population. The figures have been published by NHS England, Public Health Scotland, Public Health Wales and the Northern Ireland Department of Health. Austria’s army has successfully trained two dogs to sniff out Covid, it said on Tuesday, adding to a mass of evidence that dogs can be deployed to identify carriers of the virus. Trials across the world from Thailand to the UK have found dogs can use their powerful sense of smell to detect the coronavirus with a high degree of accuracy, suggesting they could be regularly deployed as an additional line of safety at large events and border entry points. Airports in Finland began deploying dogs to screen arrivals for Covid last year. Austrian authorities have now fully trained two dogs, a Belgian Shepherd and a Rottweiler, to detect the scent of Covid after sniffing more than 3,000 samples including from used face masks, with a success rate “far above 80%”, the defence minister Klaudia Tanner said. “We have long known that our service dogs can sniff out various materials… But what we have achieved here is something very special,” she told a news conference. It takes a dog with previous sniffer experience for other materials around two weeks to be able to tell which samples have Covid, and a further three months to fully train it, the head of the army’s dog-training centre, Colonel Otto Koppitsch, told the news conference. Austria has no specific plans to deploy dogs trained to detect Covid, but will help train people in other countries how to teach dogs this skill, Tanner said. This is from Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, director-general of the WHO, calling for countries to pull together to get a greater number of people around the world vaccinated. More than 5 million people are known to have died of Covid-19 worldwide, 19 months since the pandemic began, according to Johns Hopkins University. Schools in England will struggle to keep classrooms open if staff absences due to Covid continue to rise, headteachers have warned, as government data revealed that one in 50 teachers were absent with confirmed or suspected Covid infections before the half-term break. The figures from the Department for Education show that Covid cases among staff and students continued to rise to record levels within England’s state schools. Paul Whiteman, the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers, said: These figures show just how bad things got at the end of last term, with both pupil and staff absence at their highest levels so far this year. As we enter the second half of the autumn term, school leaders are worried that unless the government does more, disruption is likely to continue for the foreseeable future. The survey of attendance up to 21 October found that 248,000 children – 3.2% of all pupils – were missing school for Covid-related reasons, a rise of 39,000 compared with the DfE’s previous survey on 14 October. That included 214,000 children with confirmed or suspected cases, compared with 192,000 the previous week. The overall absence rate at state schools climbed to 12% from 10% previously, and remained markedly worse at secondary schools where fewer than 86% of pupils were present. Whiteman said: A particular concern for school leaders is the ongoing impact of staff absence linked to Covid. We know that schools are finding it increasingly hard to cover staff absence and in many cases they simply cannot afford the cost of so many supply teachers. At the very least the government needs to re-establish the workforce fund that it abandoned last autumn. Without this crucial support there is a real risk that schools will struggle to keep all classes open as we move into the winter months. Mary Bousted, the joint general secretary of the National Education Union, said: As we enter the winter months, the government in England must adopt measures currently in place in Scotland on improved vaccination rates for the over-12s, masks in secondary schools, investments in ventilation, isolation of close contacts and increased [lateral flow] testing. MPs and peers are being told to wear face masks and tours of parliament have been cancelled amid a rise in Covid infections on the parliamentary estate. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said there was a greater risk of coronavirus transmission in parliament at the moment and has tightened up its restrictions. Face coverings are already compulsory for staff, contractors and journalists – although not MPs – and committee chairs will be urged to take a stronger role in ensuring MPs comply with the rule. People in parliament will also be asked to observe social distancing, particularly in committees where the risk of transmission is believed to be higher, and MPs’ staff are being advised to work home. All non-parliamentary business such as banqueting events and tours have been cancelled for the next fortnight. The UKHSA said the changes are effective immediately and will be reviewed in two weeks. Last week, face coverings became mandatory for staff employed by the House of Commons, unless they are exempt, but it was left up to individual MPs to decide whether to wear one or not. Most opposition MPs have opted to wear masks during Commons debates, but many Conservatives have refused. As MPs are not employed by the Commons authorities they can’t be forced to wear masks – but they have been encouraged to do so by the Commons Speaker Lindsay Hoyle as well as unions representing parliamentary workers. The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has also suggested that MPs should wear them to set an example to the country. However, the Leader of the Commons, Jacob Rees-Mogg, has claimed Conservatives did not need to wear masks because they knew each other well, and this meant they were complying with government guidance. The current advice says people in England should cover their faces around “people you don’t normally meet”. In a statement, a parliamentary spokesperson said “recent increases in Covid across the country … are also being reflected in parliament” and that their priority was “to ensure that those on the estate are safe”. The [UKHSA] has determined that the risk of transmission on the Parliamentary Estate is now greater. As a consequence, some further action is being taken to ensure that case numbers do not continue to rise. The proportion of children absent from school for Covid-related reasons in England rose in the week before half-term, UK government figures show. The Department for Education estimates 3.2% of all pupils – about 248,000 children – did not attend class for Covid-related reasons on 21 October, up from 2.6% (approximately 209,000 children) on 14 October. Among pupils absent, the main reason for absence was a confirmed case of coronavirus, with around 127,000 pupils off for this reason, compared to around 111,000 a week before. Overall, some 88.2% of students were in class on 21 October, which is down from 90% on 14 October. The US drugmaker Pfizer has lifted its 2021 forecast for revenues from its Covid vaccine to $36bn (£26.3bn), after bumper sales in the third quarter, Julia Kollewe reports. The Covid jab, called Comirnaty and developed with Germany’s BioNTech, contributed $13bn of revenues in the three months to 30 September. That was more than half of Pfizer’s total revenues of $24bn in the quarter, which rose 134% from a year earlier. In the first six months of the year, Corminaty revenues were $11.3bn. Pfizer raised its 2021 forecast for Corminaty sales from $33.5bn in July, as it expects to deliver 2.3bn doses this year. Together with BioNTech, it continues to expect to manufacture 3bn doses by the end of December, although not all of them will be delivered by then. Together with the US biotech Moderna, Pfizer accounts for the lion’s share of the pharma industry’s global revenues from Covid vaccines. Moderna will report its Covid vaccine revenues on Thursday, followed by Pfizer’s partner BioNTech and the UK’s biggest drugmaker, AstraZeneca, next week. Many western countries including the US, UK and Germany have started giving booster shots to elderly and vulnerable people. However, booster shots are controversial because in low-income countries only 3.7% of people have received at least one dose of a Covid vaccine. About 7.1bn doses have been administered globally, and nearly half the world’s population has received at least one jab. Read the full story here: The US could begin administering the Pfizer/BioNTech Covid vaccine to children aged five to 11 as soon as Wednesday after a panel of outside experts votes on Tuesday on how broadly the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) should recommend its use in the age group. The US Food and Drug Administration granted emergency use authorisation of the vaccine in the age group on Friday, but the CDC director Rochelle Walensky must make her recommendations before it can be rolled out. While the vote from the CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP) will be considered by Walensky, she disregarded their advice last month, when she issued a broader recommendation for booster doses of the Pfizer Covid vaccine than the panel had supported. After the FDA authorisation, the US government and Pfizer began distributing the vaccine in preparation for a broad rollout for children, many of whom are back in school for in-person learning. “Over the next couple of days, several million doses will start arriving at local paediatricians and family doctors offices, pharmacies, children’s hospitals, community health centres, rural health clinics and other locations,” White House coronavirus response coordinator Jeff Zients said at a press briefing on Monday. Zients said the US had enough supply of the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for all 28 million children aged five to 11. While some children may be able to get their first shots as soon as Wednesday, Zients said the US paediatric vaccine programme would be running at full strength by next week. The FDA authorised a 10-microgram dose of Pfizer’s vaccine in young children. The original shot given to those age 12 and older is 30 micrograms. Advisers to the FDA last week said the lower dose could help mitigate some of the rare side effects. At their meeting, they paid close attention to the rate of a heart inflammation called myocarditis that has been linked to the vaccines from Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna, primarily in young men. The FDA has not yet authorised Moderna’s vaccine in teenagers as it works to understand the rate of myocarditis linked to that vaccine. Moderna said on Sunday it will delay seeking authorisation of its vaccine in younger kids while the FDA completes its review for 12- to 17-year-olds that may take until January Myocarditis concerns will also be discussed during Tuesday’s ACIP meeting. While the rate of severe illness from Covid in children is much lower than in adults, it is still the eight highest killer of children in the age group in the United States this year, according to CDC data. Only a few other countries, including China, Cuba and the United Arab Emirates, have so far cleared Covid vaccines for children in this age group and younger. In the US, around 58% of the population is fully vaccinated, lagging other nations such as the UK and France. The share of young children who receive the shots may be even lower. The US vaccination rate for 12- to 15-year-olds trails other age groups at roughly 47%, and even some fully vaccinated parents may be reticent to inoculate their younger kids. US states with the highest adult Covid vaccination rates are planning a big push to get children inoculated compared to states where hesitancy remains strong, potentially widening the gaps in protection nationwide, public health officials and experts have said. The Irish prime minister Micheál Martin has said he is unable to guarantee Ireland will avoid the return of Covid restrictions. A further 2,855 cases were confirmed in Ireland on Monday. The latest figures indicate there are 515 Covid-positive patients in hospital, with 91 in intensive care. Speaking from the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow, Martin acknowledged the rise in cases is a concern. Asked whether it was possible to say restrictions will not be reintroduced, the taoiseach said: It is possible, but there are no guarantees in relation to Covid-19. And the modelling we receive from Nphet (National Public Health Emergency Team) was looking at a situation peaking towards the end of November. The Chinese government has told families to keep daily necessities in stock in case of emergencies, after Covid outbreaks and unusually heavy rains that caused a surge in vegetable prices raised concerns about supply shortages, Reuters reports. The commerce ministry directive late on Monday stirred some concern on domestic social media that it may have been triggered by heightened tensions with Taiwan, while some said people were rushing to stock up on rice, cooking oil and salt. “As soon as this news came out, all the old people near me went crazy panic buying in the supermarket,” wrote one user on Weibo. Local media has also recently published lists of recommended goods to store at home including biscuits and instant noodles, vitamins, radios and flashlights. The public response forced state media on Tuesday to try to soothe fears and clarify the ministry’s statement. The Economic Daily, a Communist party-backed newspaper, told netizens not to have “too much of an overactive imagination” and that the directive’s purpose was to make sure citizens were not caught off guard if there was a lockdown in their area. The People’s Daily said the ministry issues such notices every year, but had issued its instruction earlier this year because of natural disasters, the surge in vegetable prices and recent Covid cases. The ministry’s statement late on Monday urged local authorities to do a good job in ensuring supply and stable prices, and to give early warnings of any supply problems. The government typically makes extra efforts to boost fresh vegetable and pork supplies before China’s most important holiday, Lunar New Year, which in 2022 falls in early February. But this year those efforts have become more urgent after extreme weather in early October destroyed crops in Shandong – the country’s biggest vegetable growing region – and as outbreaks of Covid cases stretching from the north-west to the north-east of the country threaten to disrupt food supplies. Last week, prices of cucumbers, spinach and broccoli had more than doubled from early October. Spinach was more expensive than some cuts of pork at 16.67 yuan ($2.60) a kilogram, a vegetable price index in Shouguang, a trading hub in Shandong, indicated. Although prices have eased in recent days, economists expect a significant year-on-year increase in consumer price inflation for October, the first in five months. The pandemic has brought an increased focus on food security, with the government drafting a food security law and outlining efforts to curb food waste. The commerce ministry said local authorities should buy vegetables that can be stored well in advance and also strengthen emergency delivery networks. Information about prices and supply and demand of commodities should be released in a timely manner to stabilise people’s expectations, it added. China also plans to release vegetable reserves “at an appropriate time” to counter rising prices, according to a state TV report late on Monday. It is not clear which vegetables China holds in reserves and how big those reserves are. The state planning body has called for the timely replanting of vegetables, urging local governments to support fast-growing produce, according to the report. China has about 100m mu (6.7m hectares) planted with vegetables, the agriculture ministry has said. While shielding advice in England ended on 15 September, the Office for National Statistics has found that a huge number of clinically extremely vulnerable people were still taking extra precautions as of 11-16 October as Covid case levels remain high. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Japan has relaxed restrictions on mass gatherings and is poised to reduce quarantine for business travellers following a dramatic decline in cases of Covid-19. In China, a notice posted on the website of the Ministry of Commerce late Monday urged “families to store a certain amount of daily necessities as needed to meet daily life and emergencies” while instructing authorities to take steps to ensure adequate food supplies. Zhong Nanshan, a respiratory disease expert who helped formulate China’s Covid strategy in early 2020, has told state media the country will not give up on its zero-tolerance policy towards local Covid-19 cases any time soon. New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern had to abruptly halt a media conference after being continuously interrupted and heckled by at least two people, who appeared to be anti-vaxxers. The confrontation came as authorities planned to seal off the northern tip of New Zealand with police cordons, as they enforce a lockdown in the region over fears of an undetected community transmission of Covid-19 there. The rules about visiting the Houses of Parliament in London are changing, with increased Covid security being put in place, and all banqueting and tour events cancelled for a fortnight. The move comes as the UK government continues to take no further action over rising Covid cases. The UK’s Office of National Statistics (ONS) has said that the week ending 22 October deaths were above the five-year average in all UK countries. Deaths involving Covid-19 accounted for around 1 in 13 deaths (7.5%). The situation in Bulgaria continues to be a cause of concern for authorities. Yesterday, Bulgarian state media reported that all but two districts in the country are being classified as in the “dark red” zone, with infection rates above 500 infections per 100,000 people. In Russia, head of the Russian Association of Tour Operators Maya Lomidze said foreign visitors were being deterred because tourist attractions and venues do not recognise QR codes from vaccine passports using foreign vaccines. Iran’s foreign minister Hossein Amirabdollahian has tested positive for Covid-19. Two producers of Covid-19 tests in the UK said they had pulled some of their tests from the market after a new review system came into force, which has not yet granted approval for their previously accepted products. In New York 9,000 public workers have been put on unpaid leave for refusing Covid vaccine. Cambodia’s prime minister, Hun Sen, declared the country open and ready for a new way of life after hitting vaccination targets that made it one of the most vaccinated countries in south Asia. Greece has recorded 5,449 new coronavirus infections in the latest 24 hour period, the highest single-day figure since the pandemic began. Officials are poised to implement a new round of restrictive measures for those who remain unvaccinated. That is your lot from me today. I will be back tomorrow. Next up is Lucy Campbell. The Moscow Times is reporting today that the tourist industry is suffering there over Russia’s refusal to recognise vaccines manufactured and approved abroad. They write: The Russian Association of Tour Operators (ATOR) head Maya Lomidze said foreign visitors vaccinated with non-Russian jabs are not allowed to visit popular tourist destinations like museums and theatres in certain cities. “Most of the foreign tourists coming to Russia are vaccinated. But in Russia, QR codes don’t work for those who have received foreign vaccines,” Lomidze told Interfax. She added that Moscow allows foreigners to receive QR codes after submitting a negative PR test, but other regions have not made that option publicly available. “You can’t guarantee that QR codes won’t be required upon arrival at hotels. It’s unknown what sights foreign tourists will be able to visit and what documents they’ll need,” Lomidze said. Russia is in the grip of a surge of cases and deaths which are regularly setting daily records, as the country struggles with a low vaccination rate of around one-third of adults, despite being one of the first countries in the world to licence a domestically-produced vaccine. Two producers of Covid-19 tests in the UK said they had pulled some of their tests from the market after a new review system came into force, which has not yet granted approval for their previously accepted products. Kate Holton reports for Reuters that Avacta and France-based Novacyt say they submitted documentation for review prior to a 1 September deadline but were still awaiting responses. Novacyt said two of its products have appeared on a temporary UK list that can continue to be sold, but it is waiting for an update on an additional nine products. Avacta said it has suspended further sales of its AffiDX SARS-CoV-2 Lateral Flow Rapid Antigen Test in the UK. A quick note from our political correspondent Aubrey Allegretti in Westminster, that the rules about visiting the Houses of Parliament in London are changing, with increased Covid security being put in place. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) has issued some data in the UK, suggesting that the number of Covid deaths is raising. The bulletin states: The number of deaths from all causes in the UK in the week ending 22 October 2021 (Week 42) was 12,935, 15.4% above the average for the corresponding week in 2015 to 2019. Deaths were above the five-year average in all UK countries. Of all deaths registered in the week ending 22 October, 974 involved coronavirus (Covid-19), 82 more than the previous week (a 9.2% increase). Deaths involving Covid-19 accounted for around 1 in 13 deaths (7.5%). Zhong Nanshan, a respiratory disease expert who helped formulate China’s Covid strategy in early 2020, has told state media the country will not give up on its zero-tolerance policy towards local Covid-19 cases any time soon. President of the Chinese Medical Association from 2005 to 2009 and currently the editor-in-chief of the Journal of Thoracic Disease, he said: The policy will remain for a long time. How long it will last depends on the virus-control situation worldwide. Reuters remind us that due to local outbreaks, since 23 October travel agencies in China have not been allowed to organise tourism between certain provinces, with such restrictions affecting trips to nearly one-third of the mainland’s 31 province-level regions including Beijing. Many cities with infections have also closed indoor entertainment and cultural venues. A flurry of marathons, theatrical performances and concerts have been delayed or cancelled. Zhong told state media CGTN that the current 2% death rate of the disease globally, despite vaccination, is not tolerable in China. “Zero tolerance costs a lot indeed, but letting the virus spread costs more,” Zhong said. Here’s the video clip of how New Zeland prime minister Jacinda Ardern ended her press conference after being heckled by people who appeared to be protesting about Covid vaccinations. The situation in Bulgaria continues to be a cause of concern for authorities. Yesterday, Bulgarian state media reported that all but two districts in the country are being classified as in the “dark red” zone, with infection rates above 500 infections per 100,000 people. Montana has the highest rate at 1,425 cases per 100,000 people, with capital Sofia in second place. Prof Mira Kozhuharova, an advisor to the caretaker minister of health, warned over risks to the healthcare system on national television, saying: Six-to-eight-thousand hospital beds, occupied by people not in intensive care, is still acceptable. During the previous wave there was a short period of time when approximately 10,000 beds were occupied. The healthcare system will probably not be able to cope with more than this limit, simply because there is not enough staff. Gulf state Bahrain has approved the Pfizer Covid vaccine for emergency use for children aged between 5 and 11 years, the government media office said. The decision came after a study involving 3,100 children aged between 5 and 11 who were administered with the vaccine found it to be 90.7% effective in that age group, said the statement, citing the National Health Regulatory Authority. None of the children involved in the study showed severe side effects, it said. Reuters report that Bahrain will be supplied with doses from the manufacturer for the 5-11 age group from the start of 2022. New Zealand prime minister Jacinda Ardern wasn’t phased by an earthquake the other week while she was making a media appearance, but today had to abruptly halt a media conference after being continuously interrupted and heckled by at least two people, who appeared to be anti-vaxxers. Praveen Menon reports for Reuters that one could be heard singing during the event, while another asked Ardern to identify a person who died in August after receiving the Pfizer vaccine, and accused her of lying to the public. The New Zealand Herald wrote: Ardern was answering questions from reporters outside, saying that she had seen multiple people getting vaccinated. She was being heckled throughout the press conference by a female member of the public, as well as having her answers interrupted by a man claiming to be a journalist. “Sir I will shut down the press conference if this continues,” Ardern told the man at one point during the exchange. The man continued interrupting, asking Ardern “why is the vaccine not working in Israel? And you are still pushing it”. For context, Israel has recently passed through a third wave of Covid infections, and is currently recording a seven day average of around 600 new daily cases, compared to a peak of around 11,000 daily infections in September. No vaccine currently on the market claims to be 100% effective at preventing transmission – clinical studies have shown that vaccines reduce the likelihood of transmission, and reduce the severity of infection, reducing the need for hospitalisations. The confrontation comes as authorities planned to seal off the northern tip of New Zealand with police cordons, as they enforce a lockdown in the region over fears of an undetected community transmission of Covid-19 there. Part of the Northland region, about 270 km (168 miles) from the biggest city of Auckland, is to begin a level 3 lockdown from midnight, said Chris Hipkins, the minister coordinating the response to coronavirus. The move follows two cases in the region that lacked a link to any known cases. “It’s unclear how they could have possibly picked up the virus,” Hipkins told a news conference. “There could be undetected community transmission in Northland right now.” Vaccination rates there are among the lowest in the country, with just 64% of Northland’s eligible population fully vaccinated. A quick snap from Reuters here that Iranian foreign minister Hossein Amirabdollahian has tested positive for Covid-19, the foreign ministry’s spokesman said. “His general condition is good and he continues working from quarantine,” Saeed Khatibzadeh told state media, adding that the minister’s agenda of visits had changed. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London with you for the next four hours. The UK media round is being done for the government by environment secretary George Eustice today, which suggests all the questioning will be about Cop26 again. I’ll bring you any Covid lines that do emerge. Here’s the latest UK data: Japan has relaxed restrictions on mass gatherings and is poised to reduce quarantine for business travellers following a dramatic decline in cases of Covid-19. Vaccinated people arriving for business will have to self-quarantine for three days, rather than the current 10, according to public broadcaster NHK, which added that the change could come as early as Monday. The country’s cap on international arrivals will increase from 3,500 a day to 5,000, it said. Limits on attendance at big events such as sports and concerts were relaxed on Monday as part of attempts to bring social and economic activity back up to pre-pandemic levels. Venues can now allow up to 5,000 people or 50% of capacity - whichever is larger - while bigger stadiums are no longer subject to a cap of 10,000 people. On Wednesday, about 30,000 people are expected to watch a J-League football match between Yokohama F Marinos and Gamba Osaka at Nissan Stadium, which has a capacity of 72,000. The government lifted emergency measures that included restrictions on restaurant and bar opening hours and a ban on alcohol in early October, although establishments were encouraged to close early until the end of the month. The easing of restrictions has been made possible by plummeting Covid-19 cases in Japan, where more than 70% of the 125m population has been double vaccinated. On Monday, it reported 84 new infections - the lowest number since June last year - compared with more than 25,000 in late August. Tokyo, meanwhile, recorded nine cases. While caseloads are typically lower on Mondays due to fewer tests being conducted over the weekend, the capital had 13 fewer cases than the same day the previous week. Hi and thanks for joining us today as we bring you all the latest Covid developments from all corners of the world. I’m Samantha Lock reporting to you from Sydney, Australia, and I’ll be with you for the next short while. Governments across the world are in constant flux as they adjust their advice in line with changing Covid concerns. In China, a notice posted on the website of the Ministry of Commerce late Monday urged “families to store a certain amount of daily necessities as needed to meet daily life and emergencies” while instructing authorities to take steps to ensure adequate food supplies, AFP reports. The country is adopting increasingly tight measures and a Covid-zero strategy to contain its latest outbreak. The directive made no mention of a food shortage or of whether the instructions were motivated by fears that Covid measures could disrupt supply chains or leave locked-down citizens in need of food. Meanwhile in neighbouring Japan, restrictions on mass gatherings have been relaxed and the nation is poised to reduce quarantine for business travellers following a dramatic decline in cases of Covid-19. Vaccinated people arriving for business will have to self-quarantine for three days, rather than the current 10, according to public broadcaster NHK, which added that the change could come as early as Monday. The country’s cap on international arrivals will increase from 3,500 a day to 5,000, it added. Summary Eastern Europe is grappling with its worst outbreak since the pandemic started. Moscow is currently under its strictest lockdown measures in more than a year as the daily tally of cases and deaths nationwide hit new highs. But many Russians have decided that now is an ideal time to fly off for a foreign holiday, with a sharp increase in bookings to destinations where Russia’s Sputnik V vaccine is recognised or where Covid entry requirements are cheap and easy. The United States is rolling out Pfizer/BioNTech Covid-19 vaccines for children aged 5 to 11 this week, but most of the 15 million shots being shipped initially are unlikely to be available before next week. In New York 9,000 public workers have been put on unpaid leave for refusing Covid vaccine. Cambodia’s prime minister, Hun Sen, declared the country open and ready for a new way of life after hitting vaccination targets that made it one of the most vaccinated countries in south Asia. In the United States, as deadlines for jabs approach, military leaders are wrestling with the decision of how to treat soldiers who choose not to be vaccinated. A total of 49,987,325 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine have been delivered in the UK by 31 October, a rise of 27,402 on the previous day, government figures show. The UK recorded 40,077 new positive Covid tests on Monday, up from 38,009 the previous day. Of the 377 local areas in the UK, 64 have seen a week-on-week rise in rates while the majority – 313 – have seen a fall. Greece has recorded 5,449 new coronavirus infections in the latest 24 hour period, the highest single-day figure since the pandemic began. Officials are poised to implement a new round of restrictive measures for those who remain unvaccinated. The Netherlands will impose new coronavirus restrictions this week in a bid to curb a recent surge in infections, Health Minister Hugo de Jonge said. Thailand, Australia and Israel eased international border restrictions significantly on Monday for the first time in 18 months. As Australia begins to reopen its international borders for fully vaccinated citizens, politicians are debating about the ongoing restrictions on internal travel. The US government has begun assembling and shipping millions of Covid-19 vaccines in preparation for getting the go-ahead to jab children aged five to 11. China’s leisure and tourism businesses are struggling under the country’s zero tolerance for Covid-19 as cities with infections, or have concerns about the virus, close entertainment venues, restrict tourism or delay cultural events. China locks down Shanghai Disneyland and tests 34,000 visitors after a single Covid case. Indonesia has given the world’s first emergency use authorisation for the Covid vaccine produced by Novavax. The company’s protein-based vaccine could prove hugely important for lower-income countries and the WHO-backed vaccine access scheme Covax.Unai Emery is close to returning to the Premier League as Newcastle’s new manager after the club’s Saudi Arabian-led owners identified the Villarreal coach as their preferred choice to succeed Steve Bruce. Although negotiations concerning Emery’s proposed salary are ongoing, there is cautious optimism at St James’ Park that the former Sevilla, Arsenal and Paris Saint-Germain coach will be in place for the trip to Brighton on Saturday. Emery, who turns 50 on Wednesday, is due to take charge of Villlarreal at home against Young Boys in the Champions League on Tuesday night. With Newcastle happy to pay his employers about £6m in compensation, he and his advisers have been talking to Amanda Staveley and her fellow directors via Zoom since the weekend. Staveley, who runs the club on a day-to-day basis, interviewed a number of candidates but, along with her Saudi overlords and fellow director Jamie Reuben, has been left most impressed by Emery and his track record. Should he sign, his arrival on an anticipated three-year contract with a salary in the region of the £7m a year he commanded at Arsenal will be regarded as a coup for Staveley. The Spaniard not only lifted the Europa League with Villarreal last season after beating Manchester United on penalties in the final but won the competition three years in a row with Sevilla from 2014 to 2016. He subsequently won the French league with PSG before struggling as Arsène Wenger’s successor during a short spell at Arsenal when the team finished fifth in the Premier League and lost the Europa League final against Chelsea in 2019. At Newcastle, the man who led a Villarreal side, now sitting a modest 13th in La Liga, to their first major trophy would face a very different challenge. Newcastle are still to win a match and sit 19th after 10 Premier League games. Following Villarreal’s 2-0 win against Young Boys, Emery said: “The only thing that is true is that I have been told of their [Newcastle’s] interest and I pretty much don’t have more news than that. There is no offer, which in any case would have to come via the club. So there’s no more beyond that [which would make] me say I’m going.” He added: “I do not open or close the door. I am waiting and I would talk to Fernando [Roig, the Villarreal president] and the club, for whom I have respect. My dedication is where I am.” When asked on Tuesday about a Newcastle approach for Emery, Roig said: “I have absolutely no idea. What I do know is that he has a contract with us and contracts are there to be fulfilled. I expect Unai’s professionalism and I have no doubt about that.” Roig, pressed on his calm response, said: “The important thing is that fans can’t be bought. They don’t go to Newcastle or Man United. Loads and loads of players and coaches have been and gone … you’re always prepared for what might come. We fans are always here. What matters is that the feeling for Villarreal remains.” With another 10 league fixtures due before the January transfer window Bruce’s successor faces a tricky, fairly high-risk challenge. Should the Emery deal founder, the indications are the club would turn to Eddie Howe after the former Bournemouth manager impressed in interviews. Although the Saudis have plenty of money to spend – including scope to invest almost £200m on players in January – the short-term priority is to avoid relegation. After the 3-0 home defeat by Chelsea last Saturday the Newcastle caretaker Graeme Jones, who is set to remain on the staff, conceded the team were in a relegation fight. Emery will appreciate that joining Newcastle will involve not only turning his back on European football but working with a limited squad alarmingly over-reliant on Callum Wilson and Allan Saint-Maximin for goals and inspiration. It is the sort of role as capable of breaking a manager’s reputation as making it but Emery, seemingly still stung by his sacking from Arsenal in November 2019, is said to believe he has unfinished business in England’s top tier. He will, though, be keen to know the identity of the director of football Staveley is also seeking and plans for building the training ground that is urgently required. Newcastle’s owners must trust that Emery’s profile and contacts will help them recruit the type of player capable of leading the team out of the bottom half of the table and, eventually, towards brighter European horizons.When the DVD came back shattered, it felt like a sign. The creators of Hong Kong protest documentary, Inside the Red Brick Wall, had sent it to regulators for a screening approval, as they’d done numerous times before without issue. But this time the returning envelope was filled with silver shards. “We didn’t understand why, but it was intentional,” one of the anonymous creators says. “They said it was broken by the DVD machine but it was intentional – it came back in pieces. It felt intentional, like they were sending a message.” The screening was approved, but with a higher rating restricting audiences to people aged 18 and over. But the moment marked a significant shift. A few months later, in March, the theatre hosting the first commercial screening of the protest film cancelled on the day. Then the government-backed funding body, the Arts Development Council of Hong Kong, reportedly withdrew a major grant from the independent film collective that had released it. The incidents underline the growing intolerance from authorities to anything related to the pro-democracy movement, which wracked the city for much of 2019. In June 2020, Beijing imposed its national security law which vaguely criminalised acts as foreign collusion, sedition, secession or terrorism. Since then police have used it to arrest hundreds of journalists, politicians, campaigners and activists, and make risky the selling of particular books, artworks, and films. ‘Clear political censorship’ On Wednesday last week, Hong Kong’s parliament criminalised politically sensitive film-making, with a law allowing broad censorship under the guise of national security. The new law bans any films the government deems could “endorse, support, glorify, encourage and incite activities that might endanger national security”, and allows officials to stop productions and screenings. Any unauthorised screening of a banned film can incur three years in jail for those responsible, or a $1m fine. “The goal is very clear: it’s to improve the film censorship system, to prevent any act endangering the national security,” commerce secretary Edward Yau told the Legislative Council. Kenny Ng, associate professor at the Academy of Film at Hong Kong Baptist University told Reuters the bill was “heavy-handed”. “Adding national security clauses to the bill is clear political censorship,” he said. Obvious targets of the law are the rush of protest documentaries released in the past 12 months. The documentaries show some of the protest movement’s most violent moments and follow individuals including some who were later arrested. Many were made by anonymous teams of likeminded people who met while filming on the frontlines of protests, and were inspired to tell a deeper story than international media. “I think that was the moment I personally felt like this is the time we should start doing what a documentary film-maker should do,” says Iris Kwong, one of seven directors behind When A City Rises, which screened at the Brisbane International Film Festival over the weekend. “[Before then] I wasn’t going to make any films about the movement because it was something I felt like the whole world was already coming in to, so maybe I didn’t need to do it. It was a moment where I just wanted to be together with the rest of the city in this social movement.” Several film-makers tell the Guardian the new law doesn’t affect them much more than the national security law already did. Some have already gone to ground, working anonymously, while others have fled Hong Kong. ‘Risks to everybody involved’ The biggest impact of the new censorship law, several say, will be on Hong Kong’s status as an international film hub and the city’s rich catalogue of lauded, thoughtful and often political films. Last week’s law allows Hong Kong’s security chief, John Lee Ka-chiu, to ban the screening of existing films if he determines they threaten national security. The one most often cited as a likely target is the 2015 film 10 Years, a dystopian and rather prophetic imagining of Hong Kong’s future, but there are many others. “We have so many films critical of governments, especially from before 1997 when we were still a colony of Britain,” says the Inside the Red Brick Wall film-maker. “It was OK to criticise the Chinese government at that time and many of our famous and iconic films are from before or around that time. So it would be a huge thing if they decided to ban those films too, because they’re very culturally significant.” Many local productions were already partnering commercially with mainland Chinese companies, and there had been a trend towards complying with mainland sensitivities, some of the film-makers note. But what was once an issue of resources is now a matter of law. “With Hong Kong being a hub for film-making, and most of which are really expensive to make, if your movie gets pulled that’s really bad,” says Kwong. “So I think what will happen is the impact of this law will mean more self-censorship for non-political films.” The Inside the Red Brick Wall film-maker says even in hindsight she and her team still would have made their film. When A City Rises won’t screen in Hong Kong because “there are risks to everybody involved”, says Kwong, but it will be shown in Australia and several European countries over coming months. Kwong hopes the film will help global audiences understand what happened in Hong Kong. “I think with any social movements around the world, there often isn’t a tonne that people can do, but what is worse is when people don’t know that it’s happening.”A British backpacker who worked as a waiter in Sydney has won a long-running legal dispute against Australia’s “backpacker tax” in its highest court. On Wednesday the high court ruled in favour of Catherine Addy, finding the tax which slugged working holiday-makers thousands of dollars more than Australians discriminated against her on the basis of her nationality and infringed a treaty Australia signed with the UK. The decision likely means the Australian Taxation Office will have to pay back taxes collected from up to 75,000 backpackers who worked in Australia, which has similar treaties with Chile, Finland, Japan, Norway, Turkey, Germany and Israel. In December 2016 Australia legislated the backpacker tax charging working holiday-makers 15% on the first $37,000 they earn a year, a maximum liability of $5,550. Australians are entitled to a tax-free threshold for the first $18,200 they earn and are only liable to pay up to $3,572 if they earn $37,000. Addy spent nearly two years in Australia between August 2015 and May 2017, earning $26,576 as a food and beverage waiter in Sydney in the 2017 tax year. In October 2019 Addy won a challenge in the federal court arguing the tax discriminated against her on the basis of nationality and breached the Australia-UK treaty on avoidance of double taxation. In August 2020 the full federal court overturned the decision. Addy appealed to the high court, arguing that if the backpacker tax had applied for the full year she earned $26,576, she would have been slugged $3,986 compared with an Australian who would pay just $1,591. On Wednesday five justices of the high court unanimously allowed Addy’s appeal, finding that “more burdensome taxation” had been imposed on her due to her nationality. “When the position of Ms Addy is compared with that of an Australian national, as it must be, that is the only conclusion which may be drawn,” they said. “She did the same kind of work and earned the same amount of income from the same source; yet an Australian national was required … to pay less tax.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The ATO said the decision was “only relevant” to holiday-makers who were “both an Australian resident for tax purposes” and from one of the eight countries with similar tax treaties. “Most working holiday makers will be non-residents as they are in Australia to have a holiday and working to support that holiday,” it said in a statement. “This decision will not change the tax rates for the majority of working holiday makers.” The ATO advised employers to continue using existing withholding rates until they are updated and working holiday-makers to wait for guidance “prior to lodging or amending a return or lodging an objection”. Joanna Murphy, the chief executive of Taxback.com, an international tax accounting and advisory firm that helped Addy bring the case, welcomed the high court decision. “The court has reaffirmed important protections for foreign citizens choosing to work while holidaying in Australia,” Murphy said in a statement. “It was always clear to us when this tax was introduced in 2016, against the wishes of the agricultural sector, that it breached a number of international tax agreements. “It also damaged Australia’s reputation as a working holiday destination.” The treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, said “the government is aware of the high court decision and the ATO is currently considering the implications of this decision and will provide guidance to taxpayers as soon as possible”. In a statement, Labor shadow ministers labelled the backpacker tax “ill-conceived and rushed”, arguing it had contributed to “huge workforce shortage challenges which the Morrison-Joyce government is still yet to fix”.Voters in Minneapolis have rejected the idea of replacing their police department with a new department of public safety, more than a year after the murder of George Floyd by a white police officer launched a national movement to defund or abolish police. Floyd’s murder in the summer of 2020 sparked outrage and international protests on police brutality and racial injustice. In Minneapolis and elsewhere, calls for major changes to law enforcement, including defunding police departments, soon followed. If the “yes” vote had won, the Minneapolis police department would have been replaced with a department run by a nominated commissioner who would be approved by the city council. The projected department would have used a “comprehensive public health approach” outlined by the mayor and city council via ordinances. Mandatory minimum police staffing would also be erased from the city charter. Supporters argued it was a chance to reimagine what public safety could be and how money was spent. Among other changes, supporters said, funding would have gone toward programs that did not send armed officers to call on people in crisis. The idea won wide support among many progressive groups who pointed out that it would have changed the nature of policing in the city – not gotten rid of law enforcement. “It’s a vote for us to all reimagine public safety and to move away from the type of systems that have not produced safety for all communities,” said Rashad Robinson, a spokesperson for Color of Change Pac, which organized support for the referendum. Opponents said the proposal contained no concrete plan for how to move forward and warned it would leave some communities already affected by violence more vulnerable as crime was on the rise. “Tonight Minneapolis voters have made clear that we want a planful approach to transforming policing and public safety in our city that needs to include meaningful consultation with the communities that are most impacted by both violent crime and by over-policing,” said Leili Fatehi, manager of the All of Mpls campaign, which advocated for a “no” vote on the measure. The policing amendment earned the support of several prominent progressive Democrats, including the US congresswoman Ilhan Omar, who represents the Minneapolis area, and the state attorney general, Keith Ellison. But other prominent figures, including the Minnesota governor, Tim Walz, and the US senators Amy Klobuchar and Tina Smith, opposed it and feared the backlash could lead to Democratic losses across the country in 2022. Rishi Khanna, 31, a tech worker, voted “yes” on replacing the police department, saying he didn’t believe police officers were qualified to deal with many situations, such as mental health crises. He said he thought having professionals equipped to deal with a range of public safety issues in the same department as law enforcement would benefit both residents and police officers. “I understand that law enforcement will have to have a seat at the table, but I think both in our community and in communities around the country, too often law enforcement is the only seat at the table,” he said. “I don’t think that’s the right solution.” Askari Lyons, 61, voted against the ballot initiative. A resident of the city’s largely Black north side, he said he believed Minneapolis police officers “may have learned a lesson after George Floyd’s death and what happened to the cop that killed him”. Lyons called it “unwise” to replace the department and said he believed change within the department was imminent. “People are so frustrated, so angry, so disappointed” with the violence occurring citywide as much as they are with the city’s law enforcement, he said. Minister JaNaé Bates, a spokeswoman for the pro-amendment campaign, told reporters Monday that even if the proposal failed, the activists behind it had changed the conversation about public safety. “No matter what happens, the city of Minneapolis is going to have to move forward and really wrestle with what we cannot un-know: that the Minneapolis police department has been able to operate with impunity and has done quite a bit of harm and the city has to take some serious steps to rectify that,” Bates said. The Associated Press contributed to this reportFormer police officer Eric Adams will be the next mayor of New York City, after the Democrat defeated Curtis Sliwa in Tuesday’s election. Adams was on course to easily beat Sliwa, the founder of the Guardian Angels, with a lead of 66% to 29% after more than half of projected votes were counted. Adams will now take charge of the largest city in the US in January, when he will be faced with overseeing recovery from the coronavirus pandemic, which has killed more than 34,500 New Yorkers. Adams, 61, becomes only the second Black person to be elected New York mayor, after David Dinkins, who led the city from 1990 to 1993. Adams, who defeated several progressive candidates in the Democratic primary, has pledged to cut government inefficiency and made public safety a central part of his campaign. In a speech, Adams urged unity and told his story as a working-class child who grew up to become mayor. “Tonight, New Yorkers have chosen one of their own,” Adams, said in a victory speech. “I am you.” Adams urged unity. “Today, we take off the intramural jersey and we put on one jersey, Team New York,” he told supporters at a celebration at the New York Marriott. “Tonight is not just a victory over adversity, it is a vindication of faith. It is the proof that the forgotten can be the future.” The centrist politician has been a disappointing choice for many progressives who hoped to see radical reforms in the criminal justice system. Adams has promised to strike a balance between fighting crime and ending racial injustice in law enforcement. After winning a contentious primary, Adams was always the favorite to defeat Sliwa, a Republican, in a city where Democrats outnumber Republicans seven to one. He will replace Bill de Blasio, a fellow Democrat who is limited to two terms as mayor, in January. Adams was born in Brownsville, Brooklyn, in 1960, and spoke during the campaign about his impoverished upbringing. He decided to join the New York City police department in an effort to change the force from within, Adams said, after being beaten by officers when he was 15 years old. He joined the police in 1984 and became a captain before leaving in 2006 to run – successfully – for state senate. During his time in the state legislature he was criticized by the New York inspector general for his role in attempting to bring a casino to a racetrack in Queens, New York City. Adams had accepted campaign contributions from a politically connected group bidding for the gambling franchise. In 2013 Adams was elected to Brooklyn borough president, a power-light position that chiefly involves championing the borough, but one which also boosted Adams’s profile as he weighed a run for mayor. Adams trailed Andrew Yang, a 2020 presidential candidate, in the early months of the Democratic primary, but came through New York’s ranked choice voting to edge out Kathryn Garcia, a former New York City sanitation commissioner, in July. His campaign raised eyebrows over the summer when Adams was forced to answer questions about whether he actually lives in the city he was bidding to lead, given he owns a home in New Jersey and was rarely spotted at the address in Brooklyn where he claims to reside. Adams has insisted he lives in New York City. Sliwa, a talk radio host best known for founding the Guardian Angels, a volunteer crime prevention group, in the 1970s, proved a charismatic if ultimately flawed candidate. He had been a regular presence on New York City’s streets, frequently standing on top of a car-pulled float and spreading his message through a microphone and speaker. Sliwa wore his red beret throughout the campaign, including during the mayoral debates, but struggled to gain much attention in a race where Adams had long been the presumptive winner.Seven New Zealand gang leaders, representing four of the country’s most well-known street gangs, have joined forces in a video urging their communities to get vaccinated, in a concept that was conjured up by a government minister. The video was commissioned by the minister for Maori development, Willie Jackson, after a discussion with gang leaders, who then provided footage that was edited by Jackson’s son, Hikurangi, the Herald reported. In the four-minute video, Denis O’Reilly, who joined the Black Power gang aged 19, says he had “taken a few shots” in his time, including the two shots against Covid-19, and he is asking his community “to do the same”. “This is not all about gangs, this is all about our whānau (family),” says Harry Tam of the Mongrel Mob. “One thing we need to be clear about is that this is not about the government telling us, it is about the experts telling the government, that is getting us to vaccinate to protect ourselves.” Fellow member Dennis Makalio says it was a “no-brainer” for him. New Zealand’s outbreak now stands at a total of 3,634 cases and has established itself along stark ethnic lines: about 70% of infections in the current outbreak are Māori and Pacific New Zealanders, who make up about 27% of the total population combined. About 72% of eligible Māori have had one dose of the Pfizer vaccine, compared with 85% of Pasifika and 88% of all people aged 12 and over. The virus has been detected in at least three gangs, prompting health officials to some grant some leaders essential worker status, in order to engage hard to reach communities. Tam is among those given that status, saying “we are all vulnerable” but children and elders are most at risk. Stephen Daley of the Head Hunters, says he was vaccinated because he cares about his children and wishes to protect his whakapapa (genealogy). While he does not want to push the vaccine on people, he does want everyone to make “an informed decision”. Paula Ormsby of Mongrel Mob Waikato Kingdom urged people to seek out Indigenous doctors who are experts on Covid-19, if they are feeling hesitant. Ta’alili To’omalatai of the King Cobras speaks in Samoan first, before delivering his message in English, urging everyone to get their shot “for the safety of our community”. Black Power member Michael Te Pou says he is also a father, a grandfather an uncle and a brother. “We did this for our tamariki (children) and our mokopuna (grandchildren),” he said. Criminologist Dr Jarrod Gilbert, told the Herald it was “brave” of Jackson to publicly associate himself with such a broad range of people in gangs. “This is an example of what needs to happen if we’re going to reach hard-to-reach communities – by using people who are respected in those communities.”Victorian Liberal MP Tim Smith says he will not resign from politics but is taking some time to “reflect on his career” after crashing his car into a family home, narrowly avoiding a child’s bedroom. Smith claims he only had a few glasses of wine at a friend’s house before deciding to drive home on Saturday night but he returned a blood-alcohol reading of more than twice the legal limit after crashing into a Hawthorn house in Melbourne’s east. Speaking to reporters in Melbourne on Wednesday, Smith said it was the “worst decision of his life” and he had spoken to his doctor. “I’m not (mentally) unwell. I’m an idiot,” he said. “I’m incredible regretful of what’s occurred.” The MP for Kew returned a breath test reading of 0.131, prompting the immediate suspension of his licence for 12 months. Once touted as a future premier, Smith resigned as shadow attorney general after the crash. Victoria’s opposition leader, Matthew Guy, has asked the 38-year-old to resign before the next election. Smith is also expected to be fined by police. Smith dodged questions that he has been asked to directly not to re-contest the next election, saying Guy only asked him to “reflect on my career”. “Matthew has made it very clear, as he has done on several occasions, that I should reflect on my career,” he said. “I’m not going to go into private conversations with a very good friend of mine.” Smith said he was not aware of how intoxicated he was because he had not eaten much that day. “As a consequence, I blew much more than I ever thought I had consumed. I’m not offering any excuses,” he said. He claimed he had only drunk “a few glasses” of wine at the dinner with friends. “It’s selfish, it’s stupid, I’ve been fined, I’ve lost my licence for a year. I profoundly messed up in a life-altering way. I can’t take that back and I’m not trying to. “It was an appalling lapse of judgment.” Smith said he has spoken to his GP about his alcohol consumption and has vowed not to drink again while he remains in public life. “I’m never touching a drop again,” he said. When asked if he had a drinking problem, Smith said he had drunk too much over the course of the pandemic. “I think like a lot of blokes my age – and please don’t construe this as an excuse – who live on their own over the last 18 months have drunk too much,” he said. On Tuesday, Guy said he had told Smith he would not be re-appointed to the frontbench and urged him not to contest the 2022 state election. “I made it very clear to Tim that he wouldn’t find his way on to the frontbench of any parliamentary Liberal party that I lead,” Guy told reporters. “And I made it clear that I didn’t want him to nominate at the next election and that I didn’t believe he should nominate for the seat of Kew. “Tim has, and will, reflect on my advice to him. He will then make a statement in his own time. I hope sooner rather than later.” Smith has been one of Guy’s closest political allies and was instrumental in his return to the leadership of the Liberal party after a successful spill against Michael O’Brien in September. With Australian Associated PressRains and storms are expected to lash central and eastern Australia in the coming days, bringing another sodden end to the week as tropical moisture flows down from the north. South Australia, the Northern Territory, Tasmania, western Victoria, western New South Wales and western Queensland will see falls of up to 100mm in hard-hit areas as Australia edges closer to declaring an official La Niña. Senior forecaster at the Bureau of Meteorology Jonathan Howe said it would be “one of the wettest weeks” coming into summer for every mainland state and territory as a trough extended from the Great Australian Bight to the tropics. “Across central and eastern Australia it will be muggy, rainy and stormy,” he said. “Every state and territory will be hit by thunderstorms and rain over the next week, with showers coming past before the storms arrive.” Howe said Western Australia, western Queensland and New South Wales, northern Victoria and much of the Northern Territory would be hit the hardest on Thursday and Friday, before storms gradually shifted to the east coming into the weekend. The heaviest rain – between 50mm and 100mm –is expected across remote Western Australia, the Kimberley and the Top End, while parts of north-east Victoria and south-east New South Wales were predicted to see rain of up to 50mm. “It depends on where the thunderstorms fall, but there are heavy rain warnings in place in northern Victoria and western New South Wales and there’s already the risk of flash flooding in remote areas,” Howe said. “Some places are soaked already, so there is a risk of some marine flooding.” Howe said an active tropical moisture front was causing the storms, with steamy waters in the north of Australia sitting at temperatures between one and three degrees hotter than normal. “It’s generally in the high 20s but water is getting to 33 degrees, like a warm bath,” he said. “That’s causing evaporation, and the tropical moisture is dragged across continent, leading to humid days and instability.” While La Niña hadn’t been officially declared, Howe said forecasters were “on the cusp” of doing so in the coming days or weeks, and predicted the continuation of above-average rainfall lasting into summer. “You need an above-average temperature over a consecutive period, and we’re almost meeting all criteria. It’s the warm waters that would lead us to declare it,” he said. “Usually you see weather like this at the start of the active rain and cyclone period, but what is unusual is the timing. You see this in summer, at peak warmth, but it’s quite early in the season which was unexpected.” Howe said one silver lining may be the lowered risk of severe bushfires like those seen during Black Summer in 2019. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It was getting really hot [in 2019] but because we’re seeing so much rain across western and central Australia, it’s not giving the heat a good chance to build and we’re unlikely to see big heatwaves over the next few weeks,” he said. “It’s looking to be an average season coming into summer, but that doesn’t mean we won’t get any bushfires as all you need is a few hot days. “There’s an above normal chance of bushfires in south-east Queensland and northern New South Wales because of how dry it’s been, but across eastern Victoria and New South Wales it’s below normal, which comes back to the wet weather.”Final thoughts The World Series MVP is … Jorge Soler! As predicted! The Cuban native expresses his happiness through his translator and that’s a nice feel-good moment to end this blog. With MLB heading into an uncertain future – the possibility of an owner-driven lockout looms – so hopefully everybody enjoyed this World Series. Congratulations to the 2021 Atlanta Braves on securing their first championship since 1995! We’ll have continued World Series coverage here at the Guardian but that will wrap things up for our live coverage. Thanks to all who followed along to today’s blog, particularly those who contributed. Ciao! MLB commissioner Rob Manfred is on the stage and, sadly, he does not get loudly booed at the start of the trophy presentation. Oh never mind, there they are. Good, there are some traditions that we can never get rid of. Manfred hands the trophy to the Atlanta owner to a rather healthy crowd of Braves fans. Meanwhile, Dusty Baker has some less enthusiastic commentary from the Houston Astros’ side: The final out, as called by the Braves broadcasters: Georgia native Dansby Swanson shouts out the very vocal Braves fans that managed to infiltrate Minute Maid. Yes, they are doing the Tomahawk Chop right now. Thank you, it has been surprisingly fun even for the many of us who found it impossible to settle on any sort of rooting interest. As per usual, we’ll stick around here for a spell for the trophy presentation. Honestly, I’m thoroughly curious about who the Atlanta Braves MVP will end up being here. It was such a group effort for them that it feels difficult to single out an individual player. The Atlanta Braves have defeated the Houston Astros in six games for the first World Series victory since 1995! Braves 7-0 Astros, FINAL Gurriel represents the Astros’ final hope. Smith’s first pitch is a strike. 0-1. Gurriel fouls the next pitch off. 0-2. Astros down to their final strike. Gurriel swings at the next pitch and grounds it out to Swanson who throws to first and the Braves have won the World Series! Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 9th Alvarez is up next. One on, one out. Alvarez fouls off the first pitch of the at-bat. 0-1. The next pitch is… well it’s a borderline pitch on the corner, called for a ball here. 1-1. Smith’s next pitch just hits the sweet spot Smith was looking for on the previous pitch. 1-2. Alvarez takes a ball low. 2-2. Smith’s next pitch, that’s outside. 3-2. Alvarez hits one sky-high to the outfield and the Astros have a single out remaining here to score seven runs. The odds feel against them. Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 9th Correa is up next, with Brantley on first and nobody out. He takes a strike. The next pitch, it’s a quite low strike call. 0-2. Smith’s next pitch, that’s much lower. 1-2. On the next swing, Correa flies out. The Braves are now two outs away from winning the World Series. Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 9th Brantley takes a ball from Will Smith. 1-0. And then a strike. 1-1. Are those “let’s go Braves” chants at Minute Maid Park? I guess some visitors made the trip to Houston. Brantley fouls off the next pitch. 1-2. He takes a ball. 2-2. The drama here is basically how long the Astros hitters can possibly prolong this thing. Brantley takes a slider outside and then hits a single to start off the inning. Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 9th Will Smith (and no, not that one, and I’m sure he’s sick of your references thank you very much) is up to close things out for the Braves. And now we’re getting “what things were like in 1995” updates. I feel so old. Braves 7-0 Astros, Top 9th Eddie Rosario is here with two out and nobody on for Atlanta. He takes strike one. 0-1. He then swings at the next pitch, an easy grounder that will take us to the bottom of the 9th. The Braves are three outs away from winning the 2021 World Series. Braves 7-0 Astros, Top 9th Swanson is up here at he falls behind 0-2. Okay, they’re absolutely looking to shorten this game and I, for one, am appreciative of this fact. The next pitch is a curve outside and then Swanson lines out for out two. Braves 7-0 Astros, Top 9th Matzek was just absolutely incredibly there. The Astros hitters had no chance. It almost feels unfair that the Braves get one more chance to hit here, but those are the rules. Yimi Garcia is pitching here, facing d’Arnaud who pops one foul straight back and ultimately out of play. 0-1. Garcia’s next pitch is outside 1-1. The next pitch, d’Arnaud pops it up fair for the first out in the top of the ninth. Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 8th Altuve is up here with two out, nobody on. Matzek strikes him out too and the MLB season is quite likely down to its final inning. Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 8th Marwin Gonzalez is now the pinch-hitter and he gets ahead of the count 2-0, which feels to be just not a great count for these Houston hitters today. In this case, however, Gonzalez resists swinging at a ball outside. 3-0. He takes a get-me-over automatic strike on the next pitch. 3-1. Gonzalez swings here but just ends up fouling off a high strike. 3-2. On the next pitch, Matzek locates a pitch on the corner for strike three. The Astros have four outs left. Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 8th Matzek is back out there to face a pinch-hitting Aledmys Diaz. At this point, Dusty Baker is going to press all of the remaining buttons to press when it comes to his entirely stifled offense. This button doesn’t work as Diaz strikes out looking. The Astros now have five outs left. Braves 7-0 Astros, Top 8th Albies is up. I always wonder if when a team gets this big of a lead and is this close to a championship, hitters get a little over-eager… like they’re trying to get through the outs as quickly as possible in order to finish as fast as possible. In any case, the Braves add evidence to this theory as Albies promptly flies out. Time for Houston to try to get something—anything—going at all. Braves 7-0 Astros, Top 8th Joc Pederson, he of the Mysterious Pearl Necklace, is up next and he gets ahead of the count 2-0 before grounding out to first. Braves 7-0 Astros, Top 8th Ryan Pressly has entered the game to face Adam Duvall who flies out to the outfield, where there’s almost a collision. Right fielder Brantley is credited for the out. Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 7th Poor Alex Bregman goes down on three pitches and Houston has just six outs left to play with. Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 7th Tucker’s up next and he nearly hits a single that takes a foul-ground bounce. It’s a mere strike, putting him down 0-2. Matzek hits triple digits on his next pitch, but it’s too wide. 1-2. Tucker hits another ball that feels like it should land but Pederson manages to slide and make a tumbling catch for out two. Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 7th Gurriel, who has power, is up here. Instead, he just flies out harmlessly. That’s the first out of the inning. Braves 7-0 Astros, Bottom 7th Tyler Matzek is up here for Atlanta. Alvarez is off to hit. At this point, Houston just has to take it one plate appearance at a time and tell themselves that baseball has no clock. It’s all about outs at this point. Well, this is a start, Alvarez finally gets his second hit of the season to lead off the inning. Seventh inning stretch How about a jazzy instrumental version of “Take Me Out To The Ballgame?” No? Well, you’re getting one anyway. Braves 7-0 Astros, Top 7th The bases are still cleared, but only because Freeman has already rounded them. Riley is up next and he falls behind 1-2 but keeps staying alive by fouling off pitch after pitch before working a full count on ball eight. On ball nine, Riley fouls another pitch out of play. Still 3-2. Fantastic at-bat here, even with this game pretty much out of reach. He, however, gets caught looking on pitch 10. To the seventh-inning stretch! Braves 7-0 Astros, Top 7th Freeman hits a home run and there’s the extra point! Braves 6-0 Astros, Top 7th Soler is up and the FOX broadcasters are wondering if he will be the MVP should Atlanta win today. Honestly, I’ve been racking my brains about who would win this trophy and he’s as good as a candidate as anybody. Stanek gets ahead of him 0-2, not that this means he should let up in the slightest. His next pitch is a ball. 1-2. Soler fouls the next one off. Still, 1-2. Stanek throws a ball and then, the next pitch, he hits a ball to third that really should be extra bases but Bregman makes a fantastic play to keep him off the bases. Two down. Braves 6-0 Astros, Top 7th Max Fried is getting congratulations, I think that was his last inning of work. The Braves are going to get their premiere relievers going for the final three innings here. (Or at least they hope that they will be.) It’s Ryne Stanek in for Maton rather than a starter. I guess that answer’s that question here. He faces Eddie Rosario as the Braves hunt for that extra point. Rosario won’t be part of that question—at least not this time—as he strikes out. Braves 6-0 Astros, Bottom 6th Correa works a full count against Fried. The Minute Maid Park is as loud as they’ve been since Soler’s game-changing homer. Correa strikes out… but the ball gets away. D’Arnaud gets it in time and throws it to first to complete the out. The Astros season is down to its last nine innings. Braves 6-0 Astros, Bottom 6th Brantley is up next and he falls behind 0-2 right out of the gate. Fried would love a strikeout here or, at the very least, not have to beat him to first base again. Well, he does. Brantley hits it towards Swanson who makes a spectacular play but can’t quite get it to first on time. Brantley’s on base here with two out. Braves 6-0 Astros, Bottom 6th Altuve is up here. Nobody on, one out. The good news is that he cannot ground out into a double play. On 1-2, he takes a pitch that looks like it grazes the top of the strike zone but turns out to be a ball. The next offering is a little off the corner, not by much. Still, it’s a full count for Altuve and if you’re the Braves you might take a home run over a walk here. The next pitch? Altuve fouls it off. Still a full count. On the next pitch, Altuve pops up to Swanson for the second out of the inning. This is looking all but settled, quite honestly. Braves 6-0 Astros, Bottom 6th David Lengel can rest easy, Max Fried is back out there. He’s facing Maldonado, whom he strikes out. Braves 6-0 Astros, Top 6th Well, instead Swanson grounds out on a 2-0 count. Perhaps a little overexcited there. To the bottom of the sixth, where the time is now or never for Houston to at least get back into this game. Braves 6-0 Astros, Top 6th D’Arnaud swings wildly at Maton’s first offering. 0-1, something which sets the tone for the rest of the at-bat. He strikes out for the second out of the inning. Swanson’s coming up now to see if he can add an exclamation point here to the score. Braves 6-0 Astros, Top 6th Albies hits the second single of the inning and the line keeps moving for Atlanta. Braves 6-0 Astros, Top 6th Joc Pederson hits a flyball for the first out of the inning. Braves 6-0 Astros, Top 6th Maton indeed is back out there for another inning, facing Adam Duvall, who works a full-count before hitting a single between the fielders for another Braves baserunner. I mean, this feels like it would make it quite difficult to liveblog a possible Game 7. This is a good question. I’d say anything goes at this point. A more pessimistic liveblogger would say this might be a Titanic deckchairs situation. Braves 6-0 Astros, Bottom 5th Oh wow, Fried is going to be going more than five innings here as he gets Jorge Siri to fly out to end things here in the fifth. Braves 6-0 Astros, Bottom 5th Nobody on for Bregman, whose struggles will be part of the story for Houston if nothing changes here. Fried gets ahead of him 1-2 before wasting a pitch. 2-2. Maybe not a great idea since he misses with the next one. 3-2. Could Bregman’s luck change this plate appearance? Nope? He looks at a strike. Bregman doesn’t like the call, but it’s not his decision. Two down. Braves 6-0 Astros, Bottom 5th Well, no time like the present for Houston. If they can’t get anything off of Fried here, they’re basically toast. Kyle Tucker is up here and he falls behind 0-2. The next pitch is away, 1-2, and he swings and misses on the next pitch. One down. Braves 6-0 Astros, Top 5th Phil “Auto” Maton is up now for Houston—we’re going to see pretty much everybody from Houston it feels like—and he’s facing Austin Riley, who falls behind 0-2. He takes a high pitch that’s not meant to be anywhere near the strike zone and isn’t. 1-2. The next pitch is outside. 2-2. On the next pitch, he flies out to center to finally end a disastrous top of the fifth for the Astros. Email from Sir Richard Woods: So what do you think of the possibility that the Braves see this out and then announce the retirement of the “Braves” name, and that gruesome chop, à la the Cleveland Guardians? If ever there seemed a good time to do such a thing, maybe a WS win would be it? 0%. Absolutely 0%.I wish I had a more optimistic answer, but MLB Commissioner Rob Manfred has made his voice heard about this. Braves 6-0 Astros, Top 5th Now this outcome? This outcome could be better from Houston as Freeman drives in Soler to pad the Braves lead. That will do it for Blake Taylor. Braves 5-0 Astros, Top 5th New Houston pitcher Blake Taylor gets Rosario to ground out and then walks Soler—could be worse outcomes there—which brings up Freddie Freeman with two down. Houston goes back to the bullpen, in the meanwhile we get emails. From Rev. Ronald Semro: Good evening, sir. Although I can get the game on local TV, we have a three-and-a-half-year-old grandson for a sleepover tonight, so “Blippi” gets preference over baseball. Grandparenting 101. I switched over to see the replays of Brantley’s “hit.” Why was he not called out when the pitcher finally touched the base? The runner missed it. I’m uncertain, but is the rule that they have to go tag him after he is past the base? That would make no sense. A guy could intentionally miss the base and take off down the right field line to drag things out! Oh, well, it benefited Houston, so I shall not complain. Besides, I like Brantley. He’s the real deal. I will check in on your reports from time to time, as the grandson allows. The Rev. Ron Semro, em.(that’s Latin for emeritus = retired). The short answer is that he should have been called out and had the Braves reviewed it, he would have been. They didn’t, which looked like a big deal at the time, but so far it’s looking like it’s not going to haunt them. Braves 5-0 Astros, Top 5th Swanson is up with a runner on second and one out. He takes two balls from Javier before swinging and missing at a breaking ball. 2-1. The same series of event repeats on the next pitch. 2-2. He fouls the next off. Still 2-2. On the next pitch… Oh dear, HE BLASTS ONE OUT. 5-0 Braves! The Astros are in deep, deep trouble. Braves 3-0 Astros, Top 5th A passed ball leads to the quick Albies easily making it to second, with still nobody on base. Meanwhile, at the plate, d’Arnaud is looking at a 2-2 count. Looking to at least get the runner to third, he’s seeking contact here. It’s his undoing, after fouling one pitch off, he swings at a four-seam fastball and gets nothing. One out. Now, this is a fantastic (and relevant) fact: Braves 3-0 Astros, Top 5th Javier is out there to start the top of the fifth to face Albies, who works a leadoff walk. Braves 3-0 Astros, Bottom 4th Never mind, there go the baserunners. Yordan Alvarez hits a ball that bounces on the mound and is easily turned into a double play. Two out, nobody on. Gurriel grounds out on the very next pitch and that was somehow even faster than a 1-2-3 inning for Fried. He might actually last long enough on the mound to qualify for a win. Starting pitching, what a concept! Braves 3-0 Astros, Bottom 4th Fried is still out there, he faces Correa, who hits a flair that drops into no man’s land between the outfielders. Any baserunners will do for Houston right now, so they will take it. The Soler home run is getting some comparisons to Albert Pujols famously taking Brad Lidge deep and having rewatched them, I can see the resemblance: Braves 3-0 Astros, Top 4th After a first-pitch ball, Javier throws a slow slider that completely baffles Pederson (and me as well, it looked like a violation of physics). Pederson takes the next two pitches, a strike and then a ball, to even the count at 2-2 before swinging and missing. To the bottom of the fourth! Braves 3-0 Astros, Top 4th Adam Duvall hits a glorious foul home run that ends up just being strike tow. Javier has him in a 0-2 hole and, after a pitch outside, he flies out to center. Braves 3-0 Astros, Top 4th Christian Javier is now pitching for Houston, facing Austin “Life Of” Riley, who strikes out in about a minute. The tempo has been pretty good this game, he wrote, inevitably jinxing the liveblog for a second time. Not bad company: Braves 3-0 Astros, Bottom 3rd Brantley grounds one right back to Brantley, who fields it cleanly and turns it into a double play. No rally there for Houston. Three innings in the books and the Braves bats are eager to get back out there to attempt to add to their lead. Braves 3-0 Astros, Bottom 3rd Altuve flies out, that’s less ideal for them. Braves 3-0 Astros, Bottom 3rd Fried is out there facing Martin Maldonado, who gets a leadoff single. That’s a good start for Houston. Braves 3-0 Astros, Top 3rd Brooks Raley gets Freddie Freeman to ground out to douse out the flames. Can the Astros strike back in the bottom of the third is the question now. One too many offspeed offerings from Garcia and Soler made him pay. Braves 3-0 Astros, Top 3rd Yeah, I jinxed it. The Astros go to their bullpen but a lot of damage has been done. If they are going to win this one, it’s going to have to be via the comeback once again. Braves 3-0 Astros, Top 3rd Okay, Garcia is not looking as crisp the second time around the order. He throws a ball to Jorge Soler. 1-0. Soler swings and misses at a cutter. 1-1. The next pitch apparently just misses the corner, although not by a whole lot. 2-1. Soler checks his swing, just barely, on the next pitch. It’s 3-1 but Garcia is honestly this close to a strikeout. With the next pitch, Garcia throws a weird looper that’s called a strike. 3-2. The bullpen is up for Houston. Or not, Soler fouls the next pitch off. And the next. The drama rises and AC/DC’s “Hell’s Bells” briefly fills Minute Maid Park. Still 3-2. Soler swings and… IT’S GONE! BRAVES TAKE A THREE-RUN LEAD! Braves 0-0 Astros, Top 3rd Rosario is back up with two out and one on. Garcia falls behind him 3-0, and, one strike later, he takes ball four. It’s now two out and two on. Braves 0-0 Astros, Top 3rd Dansby Swanson, whose name will always make me hungry for microwaved turkey slices, is up next and he takes a massive swing at a cutter for strike one. On 0-1, Swanson hits a super-long flyball that the park manages to contain. Albies had a great jump but instead, he has to find his way back to first. Two out. Braves 0-0 Astros, Top 3rd Albies is at first and the surprisingly dangerous d’Arnaud is up at the plate. He falls behind 1-2 rather quickly and then flies out. Albies has to return to first. Braves 0-0 Astros, Top 3rd Ozzie Albies is up for the Braves at the top of the third and he manages to swing at an 0-2 pitch for a single that’s the first Atlanta baserunner of the game. Oh no, I’ve already jinxed this game, haven’t I? Braves 0-0 Astros, Bottom 2nd Bregman pops up into foul ground, Joc Pederson just barely has the room to get it. Jorge Siri flies out to end the inning. So maybe we’re going to get that nailbiter that I predicted earlier. Braves 0-0 Astros, Bottom 2nd Fried is back up there, his ankle hasn’t acted up while he’s been resting in-between innings. He gets Kyle Tucker to ground out to short for the first out of the inning. Braves 0-0 Astros, Top 2nd Joc Pederson is up next and he just pops out. Garcia looks like he can give Dusty Baker a few innings. Braves 0-0 Astros, Top 2nd Adam Duvall grounds out to Bregman. Braves 0-0 Astros, Top 2nd Garcia is back out there to face Austin Riley after an eventful yet somehow scoreless first inning. He gets Riley to strike out. Just racking up the k’s here. Braves 0-0 Astros, Bottom 1st Yuli Gurriel is up next and he falls behind 0-2. Fried’s second pitch is out of the strike zone but it gets called anyways. On the next pitch, Gurriel lays off on what ends up being a strike. That’s three quick outs for Fried, whose ankle looks fine at the moment. Braves 0-0 Astros, Bottom 1st Two runners on for Yordan Alvarez who is hitting .063 on the series. It’s only five plus games, but still not great. He chops into a fielder’s choice that moves up the runners but is also the second out of the inning. Win some, lose some. Braves 0-0 Astros, Bottom 1st I don’t see how Brantley is safe on that play, but the Braves don’t challenge even though he was called safe before actually landing his foot on the bag. Well, they’re just happy that Fried is still standing somehow and actually gets Carlos Correa to strikeout. Braves 0-0 Astros, Bottom 1st Michael Brantley almost grounds out, but he runs over Freeman’s ankle on the way to first base. Both runners are safe but Atlanta is more worried about Fried’s ankle. That’s a hard error to get. Braves 0-0 Astros, Bottom 1st So, let’s see what Max Fried has on short rest. Jose Altuve is starting for the Astros. On a 1-1 pitch, Altuve legs out a single that the infielders do their best to try to catch him on first. Braves 0-0 Astros, Top 1st Another 0-2 count for Garcia who makes it a 0-3 count quickly by getting Freddie Freeman to swing and miss. What a ridiculously good start for Garcia and Houston will take it. Braves 0-0 Astros, Top 1st Garcia gets Jorge Soler 0-2 count, but then he throws three straight balls. Full count on Soler, who swings and misses on a pitch way underneath the strike zone. Braves 0-0 Astros, Top 1st Garcia’s first pitch is against Eddie Rosario and it’s a called strike. 0-1. Rosario’s next swing results in a foul ball. 0-2. Rosario hits what looks like it’s going to be a single but Kyle Tucker makes a wild catch in the outfield for the first out of the game. Oh hey one more prediction here before we start: Considering the pitching situation, manager Dusty Baker honestly wouldn’t mind having him for three batters at some point today. UPDATE: The country’s singer’s name was Carly Pearce. We’re getting some predictions in: Hmmm, a one-sided slugfest. Well, just speaking as someone who is committed to this game until the very end, I certainly hope it’s a tad more dramatic. National anthem Also according to the AP, Minute Maid Park’s roof will be open. The temperature seems, well, temperate: “It was 78 degrees when early batting practice started Tuesday and skies were mostly clear.” Oh and we have the National Anthem and per tradition, I’ve tuned in just in time to miss the introduction. It’s a female country singer who does a solid job. 8/10. Game 7 starters? Um, I feel like this is putting the cart before the horse here, Dusty Baker but you do you. Interesting factoid, considering how many big innings there have been this World Series and how poorly Bregman has been producing. Predictions I predicted this one would end in six games and I’m keeping with that prediction. Yes, I also predicted that the Astros would win, but let’s not quibble with such minor details as “which team will win the World Series.” Let’s say Houston’s bats go cold again and the Braves win a 3-1 nailbiter. Agree? Disagree? Send us your predictions here. In case you need a reminder, we’ll be using your emails (send them to hunter.felt.freelance@theguardian.com) or tweets (to @HunterFelt). So have the ratings for this World Cup gotten any better as it’s gone longer and, theoretically, more competitive Well, a little, but not too much. Should you really care about this if you don’t happen to work for MLB or FOX? Probably not, but I figure it’s interesting if you happened to be curious about how attractive this series has been for casual fans. Houston Astros starting lineup 1. Jose Altuve, 2B 2. Michael Brantley, RF 3. Carlos Correa, SS 4. Yordan Alvarez, LF 5. Yuli Gurriel, 1B 6. Kyle Tucker, CF 7. Alex Bregman, 3B 8. Jorge Siri, CF 9. Martin Maldonado, C Atlanta Braves starting lineup 1. Eddie Rosario, LF 2. Jorge Soler, DH 3. Freddie Freeman, 1B 4. Austin Riley, 3B 5. Adam Duvall, CF 6. Joc Pederson, RF 7. Ozzie Albies, 2B 8. Travis d’Arnaud, C 9. Dansby Swanson, SS One hitter that we won’t be seeing, according to the AP: “Atlanta Braves infielder/outfielder Ehire Adrianza was placed on the postseason paternity list ahead of World Series Game 6 on Tuesday night and replaced on the active roster by infielder Johan Camargo.” Adrianza is eligible to return for Game 7, should such a thing exist. R.I.P. Jerry Remy Like many here in New England, I’m still mourning the loss of former Boston Red Sox second baseman and longtime local broadcaster Jerry Remy. Remy, who had been fighting cancer off-and-on for years, died on Sunday at the age of 68. We actually covered his last public appearance, which was to throw out the ceremonial first pitch at Fenway Park before the Red Sox’s Wild Card game against the New York Yankees. Although clearly ailing, the Massachusetts native must have enjoyed watching his team beat the Yankees one final time. Although a fine player during his peak, it was through the microphone that he truly secured his legacy in Boston. Beyond just being a great in-game analyst, Remy shined in those slow moments where he was given free rein to vamp. If there’s one clip that will live on for as long as it’s legal to share MLB videos, it will be a little piece of footage entitled “Here Comes The Pizza.” Enjoy. Preamble I honestly didn’t think I would have to come to work today. The Atlanta Braves came back to defeat the Houston Astros in Game 4—after Houston had many, many chances to blow the game open in their favor—it looked like they wouldn’t survive past the next game. Yet, because the 2021 World Series has no rhyme or reason to it, the Astros staved off elimination in Game 5 and brought the series back in Houston. The Astros are still in trouble mind you, Atlanta has two chances to win one game and thus their first championship since 1995. Now, of course, it should be a tad trickier with the Braves now having to win one of those games on the road. They don’t want to rely on needing to win a Game 7 because, as a wise baseballer from ye olden days once put it, in a Game 7, “anything can happen.” The Braves want to wrap it up here and for that purpose, they are bringing Max Fried on the mound while the Astros are starting Luis Garcia. Of course, this is assuming that the starting pitchers even affect the final outcome, which we’ve learned is very much not the norm this World Series. Given that they are a loss away from elimination, look for the Astros, in particular, to be extremely aggressive in employing their pitching staff: it’s all hands on deck today. There might not be a tomorrow. As always, we look forward to your contributions throughout today’s game. You can either email us your World Series/baseball related thoughts (to hunter.felt.freelance@theguardian.com) or tweet them at us (to @HunterFelt) and we’ll use them in this liveblog over the course of the next few hours. First pitch is scheduled around 8:09 pm EST but we’ll be back beforehand to set the scene. It’s Game 6 of the World Series between the Atlanta Braves and the Houston Astros at Minute Maid Park! Hunter will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s a look back at Sunday night’s Game 5.Water utilities and regulators in the US have identified 56 new contaminants in drinking water over the past two years, a list that includes dangerous substances linked to a range of health problems such as cancer, reproductive disruption, liver disease and much more. The revelation is part of an analysis of the nation’s water utilities’ contamination records by the Environmental Working Group, a clean water advocate that has now updated its database for the first time since 2019. It found that the jump is partly driven by newly identified PFAS, a toxic class of “forever chemicals” that are widely used across dozens of industries and are thought to be contaminating drinking water for more than 100 million people. Pesticides, water disinfectant byproducts and radioactive materials are among other substances identified by regulators. Though the new contaminant list is disturbing, it would be much longer if regulators and utilities were properly monitoring the nation’s water supply, said the EWG senior scientist Tasha Stoiber. “It speaks to the fact that we don’t have nearly strong enough regulations in place to protect drinking water, and the regulation process is much too slow,” she said. “We’re testing for things that are already in our drinking water after the fact … and we’re not keeping pace with these chemicals.” The list includes some substances that have been in production and used for years, but are only now being monitored by regulators as their links to health problems become clear. Other contaminants include those that industry is only beginning to use in larger quantities. Many of the substances were identified as part of the Environmental Protection Agency’s unregulated contaminant monitoring rule (UMCR), which is one of the first steps in the regulation process. It tracks chemicals’ presence in some water systems and its aim is to provide the EPA with a picture of how widespread a chemical’s contamination is before new limits are established. Among other substances detected is HAA-9, a byproduct of the drinking water disinfection process. Regulators previously set limits for HAA-5, a contaminant in the same family that was found to cause health problems. Industry claimed HAA-9 was safe, but recent studies linked it to low birthrate, so the EPA is beginning to track it. However, setting limits can be a lengthy process, and the EPA has failed to set a new limit under the UMCR in the 20 years since the rule was implemented. The agency found what Stoiber characterized as “eye-opening” levels of PFAS compounds in 2013 yet is aiming to set water limits for just two kinds by next year. Other contaminants in the new list were detected by states that are moving to put stricter regulations in place for chemicals, like PFAS. In the meantime, there’s little that people can do beyond educating themselves about which contaminants are in their water system, buying filters and advocating for stronger regulations. EWG’s database allows users to search for contaminants in water systems by zip code, and it provides a guide on which chemicals water filters can remove. “Everyone can be educated,” Stoiber said. “Contact the local utility, ask them questions about what they’re doing … and push for stronger regulations that protect people’s health.”Creating an international price for carbon emissions could reduce global greenhouse gases by 12% at a cost of less than 1% of global GDP, according to a new report from the World Economic Forum (WEF) and PwC. The report found that if global governments agreed together to set a price for pollution to help cut carbon emissions the cost would be less than the economic losses triggered by the fallout of a runaway climate crisis. The “carbon revenues” raked in to government coffers from the world’s most-polluting companies could also be used to help hard-pressed households or ploughed back into green industries which help reduce emissions while creating jobs and economic growth, the report found. Bob Moritz, the global chair of auditing giant PwC, said setting a global carbon price could make a “significant contribution to tackling global warming by accelerating emissions reductions”. The report analysed a scheme proposed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) earlier this year to help accelerate the world’s carbon emissions cuts by 2030 in a bid to stay within 1.5C to 2C of global heating compared with pre-industrialised levels, as set out under the Paris agreement in 2015. “We found this could be done without severe economic damage to livelihoods and business, although the effects would be somewhat uneven across the world. The costs to society and business of failing to act are far greater,” Mortiz added. Under the IMF scheme companies with high greenhouse gas emissions, in high-income countries, would be subject to a carbon price of $75 for every tonne of carbon dioxide emitted. This would fall to $50 a tonne for polluters in middle-income countries, and $25 a tonne for low-income countries. Currently, the price of carbon is set at anywhere from $0 to more than $130 per tonne of CO2 equivalent across different global regions. In some cases this has created an uneven playing field by making it cheaper for international companies to move high-carbon activities, such as manufacturing, to countries without carbon schemes to avoid paying a price for pollution. But WEF and PwC found widespread participation in carbon price set across the global economy, even at reduced price floors for low and middle-income countries, would lead to very little “carbon leakage” from companies moving their manufacturing to countries where carbon prices are lower. Børge Brende, the president of WEF, said although the findings of the report are “extremely positive”, a huge amount of cooperation between governments and private sector companies would be key for carbon pricing to move ahead and accelerate efforts for a more sustainable and inclusive recovery. The political and technical challenges behind creating a global carbon price have stalled plans, leaving a patchwork of different international schemes to reduce carbon emissions which include mandatory emissions trading and carbon taxes, and voluntary carbon offset schemes. In the UK, a carbon price floor was introduced in 2013 at a rate of only £16 per tonne, and rose to £18.08 (€20.40), which has managed to drive almost all of the UK’s coal plants out of the electricity market in recent years. Coal power made up about 2% of electricity last year compared with around half of all power generation a decade ago.Ball Park Music – Sunscreen For fans of: Superdrag, Pavement, T Rex Brisbane’s most beloved band sealed the deal with a record-breaking 13 shows at local venue The Triffid last year, making the most of living in the sunshine state where live music fought through the entire pandemic. Sunscreen is their first new music since those shows, and it’s a restless tune, Frankensteined from a number of disparate pieces songwriter Sam Cromack had lying around, searching for a home. For this reason, structurally it’s a maze, weaving from part to part without any sense of direction: one minute the band breaks into Beach Boys harmonies, the next they’re riding a wave of chugging bass and quick-fire vocal melodies. This could have been two or three great tunes, but instead, it’s one exceptional summer single. Slip, slop, slap it on your stereo (sorry). For more: check out the band’s self-titled 2020 album, which is up for two Aria awards. Spacey Jane – Lunchtime For fans of: the Hummingbirds, the Cure, the Lemonheads Belying its joyous propulsion and a run of peeling guitars that recall an 80s single by the Cure, Lunchtime was reportedly written while frontman Caleb Harper was experiencing a heavy dose of post-inebriation anxiety, and his hopeless mindset is plastered all over the lyrics of this audio panic attack – an existential crisis in and out before your lunch order even comes to the table. Harper’s voice breaks in just the right way during the earworm chorus, while the lovely backing vocals from bassist Peppa Lane recall the Hummingbirds in top flight. For more: check out their June single, Lots of Nothing. Midnight Oil – Rising Seas For fans of: planet Earth Peter Garrett and co have been warning us about climate change since second-degree sunburns were a must-have summer accessory. Yet here we are, dragging the climate chain on an international stage at Cop26, and Midnight Oil are, suitably and understandably, still filled with rage. They are taking aim at inept leaders and corruption that leaps across industries and party lines, and this time Garrett can’t dance-shake off the anger. “Every child put down your toys and come inside to sleep,” he growls at the start of the song. “We have to look you in the eye and say we sold you cheap.” The band delivers its grim message with the same raw power of its best anthems. This is an important song, and hopefully it won’t fall on deaf ears. For more: check out last year’s collaboration album The Makarrata Project. Alex Lahey – Spike the Punch For fans of: Paramore, the Starting Line, Best Coast It’s fitting that Alex Lahey’s music has appeared on Tony Hawk’s Pro Skater – she is one of the few artists these days doing pop-punk that neatly sidesteps the self-pity for a hefty dose of glorious, hedonistic self-sabotage, like spiking the punch or launching yourself down a concrete ramp without kneepads. With guitar harmonies that sit between Queen and the Darkness, a slightly warped beat that recalls the Postal Service, and a propulsion and punch that belongs on a Cheap Trick album (or at least a Blink-182 set list), Lahey’s audible influences are all over the shop, in the best possible way. For more: Listen to On My Way, the theme song for animation The Mitchells vs The Machines. Punko – Cash Under Your Bed For fans of: Kate Bush, the Donnie Darko soundtrack, the Church Punko is Liv Jansz, a severely talented Melbourne artist now based in Newcastle, where she crafts haunting and wonderful pop music that leans towards the 1980s without settling into pastiche. Co-produced by Bonnie Knight, the duo meld a Nevermind-sounding chorused-out guitar with frosty synths and dark lyrics about twisted love and the abusive bonds that tie and confuse. The song creeps slowly and ominously, with minimalist instrumentation, hypnotic guitar lines and vocal refrains. For more: Punko’s debut album Plants Singing is out March 2022. Check out her first single Undivided. Thelma Plum – Homecoming Queen Strings For fans of: Ella Fitzgerald, Little Birdy, Lana Del Rey Homecoming Queen was the standout track from Thelma Plum’s exceptional Better in Blak album, but it struggled to find a home, appearing as a stripped-back waltz, then as an Alice Ivy remix. This definitive version, draped in strings, underscores its beauty and heartache. Feeling unseen as a young Indigenous Australian must be a crushing and damaging experience, and Plum chronicles this experience and her own hard-fought rise to self-respect in a wonderfully moving way. It is, unfortunately, a widely felt experience; as personally as she paints her first two verses, it’s the bridge that points this out: “’Cause in 1967 I wasn’t human, and in 1994 I was born,” she sings. “I’m still here. We are still here.” For more: check out her entire album, Better in Blak, as well as her haunting cover of Powderfinger’s These Days. e4444e – Wear No Flag For fans of: White Fence, Alex G, Modest Mouse Newcastle multi-instrumentalist Romy Church is one of the best young artists in the country, creating weird, warped pop songs one minute, and Aphex Twin-sounding doomscapes the next. Here he leans into the acoustic-based pop side of his immensely Google-friendly e4444e project, sounding like a lost outtake from the first Ben Kweller album or Beck on K Records. With unsettling tempo changes that suck like quicksand, single-syllable melodies that lead into a slightly funky breakdown, and a voice that sounds uncannily like Bandcamp hero Alex G, this is a top-shelf single, and a great indicator for Church’s second album, which we’ll get to hear in a few long weeks. For more: new album Autumnal Eve is out 19 November. Columbus – Temporary Summer For fans of: Yellowcard, Luca Brasi, Relient K This sun-dappled slice of joyous pop punk may just make Melbourne three-piece Columbus our latest international export. Close your eyes and you can imagine this gem soundtracking any number of MTV shows about love and island, or any teen movie that chronicles that last important summer before college. The impermanence of summer is well represented in anything from Grease to Yellowcard’s Ocean Avenue – to which this song owes a substantial sonic debt – and for good reason: it is such a bittersweet and universal sentiment. As long as young people are falling in love under a burning orb, bands like Columbus will neatly wrap that feeling and blast it back at them with a half-time chorus and a singalong hook. For more: listen to previous singles Can’t Hide From What Hurts, Out of Time and Pain Is a Mirror. Alice Ivy ft Sycco – Weakness For fans of: disco Kylie Minogue, Pnau, Sneaky Sound System If this bright, sun-filled dance tune was released back in the heyday of Channel [V], Alice Ivy would have found herself with a No 1 hit. As it stands, she still has a fairly good shot at the title: it would be a programming travesty if commercial radio didn’t pick this up and blast it through car stereos. With a chorus that will stick in your head for days, and breezy, tight production, this warm banger is destined to be one of the big songs of the summer. Alice Ivy’s discography is only two records deep, but already she has showcased many various talents: bouncing off Camp Cope vocalist Georgia Maq on previous single Someone Stranger, remixing Thelma Plum and genre-bouncing without betraying her core sound. This is her best work to date. For more: check out 2020 album Don’t Sleep. Montaigne – Now (in Space) For fans of: Rihanna, Drake, Jhené Aiko Any song that boasts a video clip with aliens and universe-sized plates of pasta deserves to go viral on its own obvious merits, but when it is affixed to a tune as lovelorn and bouncy as Montaigne’s latest gem, then the sky’s the limit. Equally as anthemic as her Eurovision song with a more futuristic, glitchy production bed, this is the first track from a forthcoming record Montaigne promises is “going to be the peak of my career”. She further describes it as “beautiful and wholesome”, which is the perfect descriptor for this single. For more: check out her 2019 album, Complex.An injunction to stop Victoria’s largest public health service from firing nurses who are refusing the Covid-19 vaccination or refusing to disclose their vaccination status has been thrown out by the federal court ahead of a trial challenging the vaccine mandate. Nick Ferrett QC is representing about 90 nurses at Monash Health, and told the court on Wednesday that under Victoria’s Occupational Health and Safety Act, the nurses should be consulted before any disciplinary action is taken against them. “There’s no suggestion that any of the … relevant employees … is dogmatic about vaccines, and unwilling in all circumstances to get vaccinated,” Ferrett said. “So consultation has value in those circumstances.” A directive from Victoria’s chief health officer under the Public Health Act makes it clear that health workers must be fully vaccinated, having received at least their first Covid-19 vaccine dose by 29 October, in order to work in a healthcare setting. They must provide evidence of vaccination to their employer. But Justice John Snaden said there was “no evidence” that Monash Health was trying to prevent nurses from exercising their workplace rights by commencing disciplinary action to fire them. “On the contrary, the evidence that there is very much suggests that the course that has been plotted has been plotted because Monash Health has formed the view that under the public health directions by which it is bound, they’re not permitted to do anything else [other than terminate employment],” he said. Ferrett argued whether Monash Health had commenced the disciplinary action because workers were asserting their rights and pushing to be consulted should be explored at trial. But Snaden said the nurses “… can’t point to anything in the way of evidence that substantiates their contention”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The relevant employees maintain that they ought to have been consulted about the vaccination direction and that the disciplinary action to which they are imminently to be subjected will be visited upon them because they possessed, and or, sought to exercise that right to be consulted,” he said. “It appears very unlikely, perhaps even impossible on the material that has been filed to date, that the applicants will be able to succeed in their claim that they have been or will soon be the victims of adverse action because or for reasons that include that they have possessed or exercised workplace rights, or because Monash Health wishes to prevent them from exercising any such right. “That of course presupposes that they in fact do possess such a right or rights. That will be a live question at trial.” Chris O’Grady QC, representing Monash Health, said the employer had simply been following the chief health officer’s directions. “In light of the CHO directions it goes without saying that anyone working in the health sector is going to have difficulty working in that sector absent their willingness to either be vaccinated or disclose their vaccination status,” he said. Monash Health also denied it was obliged to consult with employees before terminating them, and that it would, in any case, not change its requirement to abide by the CHO directions. Snaden said when the matter goes to trial, if the court finds the vaccine mandate was unlawful, then the nurses would likely have their employment reinstated and receive back pay. Therefore, the court had no reason to block disciplinary action including Monash Health firing the nurses in the meantime, he said, adding that the case had been “at best, weak”. Monash Health had given undertakings not to take action against the relevant nurses until the matter was determined. In light of Snaden’s decision on Wednesday, Monash Health was now free to terminate the staff. The substantive proceeding will now be allocated to a judge, to be heard at a later date.The New South Wales premier, Dominic Perrottet, has ordered a review of grants funding in the state but denied the move was an admission that two grants at the centre of an anti-corruption investigation were improperly awarded. On Wednesday, Perrottet announced he had ordered the department of premier and cabinet to conduct a review of grant procedures to “ensure the fairness and probity of current grant systems”. But the state opposition says it is concerned the review may not go far enough. Labor said it would adopt recommendations made by the Independent Commission Against Corruption (Icac) to improve transparency over grant funding, as well as introducing rules requiring ministers to explain when they diverged from department advice. Perrottet’s announcement followed evidence by his predecessor, Gladys Berejiklian, to the state’s anti-corruption watchdog that the government “threw money at seats to keep them” and grants were made to help win votes. This week, Icac concluded 11 days of public hearings into Berejiklian’s conduct, a probe which centred around two multi-million dollar grants in the seat held by her then-secret boyfriend, the Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire. The investigation heard evidence that Maguire had consistently lobbied for the grants over several years, and that they were ultimately signed off by Berejiklian despite concerns from within the public sector. The former premier used her appearance before Icac to defend the grants, saying they had been awarded in part to shore up support for the Coalition government following the loss of the Orange by-election to the Shooters, Fishers and Farmers party. Since her resignation, Perrottet has been critical of the practice of pork barrelling in government, saying he disagreed with the “concept”. On Wednesday, he said he had asked both the department and the productivity commissioner, Peter Achterstraat, to conduct a review of grant funding. “Taxpayers expect the distribution of funds will be fair, I share that expectation,” Perrottet said. “Every dollar from NSW taxpayers is important. I am committed to making sure grant programs are fair, robust and follow best practice when those dollars are put to work in the community.” But during a press conference, Perrottet denied the review was an admission proper process had not been followed in relation to the two Wagga Wagga grants, saying it was “important there is public confidence in relation to the expenditure of taxpayer funds”. Perrottet also said the report, due in April, may not lead to any concrete changes in grant funding processes. “These guidelines haven’t been looked at since 2010, I think it is incredibly important we look at it. Perhaps nothing will change, it’s really a matter for the government to look at a better way of doing things,” he said. The opposition seized on those comments, criticising Perrottet for refusing to commit to an overhaul of grant funding. On Wednesday, NSW Labor said in government it would require ministers to explain “in writing and provide reasons” if they went against a department recommendation on grant funding. The party would also introduce recommendations made by Icac last year as part of its submission to an inquiry into the integrity of grant funding. The inquiry, prompted by the government’s $252m Stronger Communities Fund, found money was overwhelmingly spent in Coalition-held seats and led to an admission from Berejiklian that it did amount to pork barrelling but was “not an illegal practice”. In its submission to the inquiry, Icac recommended changes to the government’s 2010 “good practice guide” to include obligations for ministers to “act ethically and in accordance with general probity principals such as transparency, accountability and fairness”. “The growing culture of pork-barrelling by this Liberal National government must be broken,” Labor leader Chris Minns said. Perrottet’s announcement came at the same time it was revealed more than 90% of schools selected as part of a $20m pilot to fund solar power systems were in Coalition-held seats. The Daily Telegraph reported 92% of the 25 schools selected as part of the pilot program came from Coalition seats, including two in the ultra-marginal seat of Penrith in western Sydney which is held by deputy Liberal party leader Stuart Ayres. Three of the schools were from Dubbo, which is held by the Nationals with a margin of just over 2%. Only two of the 25 schools were from non-government seats, including one held by the rival Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The NSW opposition leader Chris Minns accused the government of prioritising “their own interests ahead of what’s best for the people of this state”. “Many schools who are eligible and deserving of the schools renewables grant will be rightly asking why they have not been successful. Dominic Perrottet owes them an explanation,” he said. But the government has defended the grants. The education minister, Sarah Mitchell, said the schools chosen for the pilot program were selected by the department of education based on areas where the “electricity grid is constrained” – and that the program had been targeted at regional areas. Her office released correspondence which it said showed the schools chosen for the pilot had been recommended by the department. An email chain from June shows the minister’s office had requested the department provide it with the list of schools, and that almost all of the schools selected came from its initial recommendation. Two of the recommended schools were not selected because one was in recess and the other did not require the project. “They are located in areas where the electricity grid is constrained and, in order to deliver commitments made through the cooler classrooms program, require an electrical upgrade which would have involved a costly upgrade to electrical infrastructure,” a spokesperson for the minister said.When Clara Law’s film Floating Life opened in Australian cinemas in 1996, the Hong Kong-raised, Melbourne-based writer-director did not expect it to pack such a strong cultural punch. Along with being one of few local films to deal with the Asian migrant experience, Floating Life made history as Australia’s first-ever submission in the best foreign language film category at the Academy Awards, and ignited a new generation of Asian Australian film-makers. “I love hearing people talk about my film and saying, ‘I’m still thinking of the film’,” Law says. “That’s what we [with her husband and constant collaborator, co-writer, Eddie Fong] want to do: make films that can stand the passage of time and can touch people’s hearts hundreds of years later.” This year, Floating Life received a long-awaited digital restoration by the National Film and Sound Archive and will be presented on the big screen at the 2021 Sydney film festival alongside Law’s latest feature film, Drifting Petals, a free-wandering elegy to the loss of her brother and the fading memories of her two home cities of Macau and Hong Kong. Law describes Floating Life’s tonal inflections as “leaning towards the farcical”. The story follows the Chan family’s relocation from the bustling, steamy streets of Hong Kong to the sunburnt, open-concrete suburbia of Sydney. Tinged with tragicomedy, the film is also laced with heightened emotions, as the family face the jarring cultural shocks associated with immigration – from the pressures of assimilation and intergenerational tensions down to the sharp physical contrast of the blinding Australian skies. In an amusingly staged scene, the Chans wear sunglasses inside their sparse, white home after being warned of the hole in the ozone layer. “That’s what I felt too when I first came to Australia,” Law says. “It was all very strange to me but also very seductive – I wanted to recreate the feeling of this space, light and colour. With this distinctiveness, you feel the family spread all over, and not together. So, how and where can they find their home?” Speaking from her home in Melbourne where she has been based since the 1990s (she was born in Macau and raised in Hong Kong), Law’s film-making career and more generally, life journey, has been shaped by a search for home. In the early 1990s, she won awards across European and Asian film festivals for her independent Hong Kong arthouse features, notably Autumn Moon and Temptation of a Monk, the latter of which played in competition at the 1993 Venice film festival. She then made three Australian films, including Floating Life and the 2000 Rose Byrne-led road movie The Goddess of 1967. Law has spent the past decade or so exploring new terrain within the Chinese film industry, making Like a Dream in Taiwan and The Unbearable Lightness of Inspector Fan in Shanghai. “My whole life has been travelling the world,” she says. “It became natural to continue to make films [in Australia] when I thought there was more of a chance to make art films, compared to compromising in Hong Kong when we had to deal with more private funding. But with the change of government [in Australia], our funding was shrinking and then nonexistent.” Being uncompromisingly “original and fresh” is at the heart of Law’s film-making ethos – in style and content. During our conversation, she constantly refers to her favourite film-makers, Yasujirō Ozu, Michelangelo Antonioni and Andrei Tarkovsky. “It’s how I was brought up,” she says. “Their touch on your soul is so strong and so true, and I just want to hold on to that [feeling] for as many days as possible.” Law’s latest film, Drifting Petals, is a continuation of her belief that “film is an art first and foremost”. An experimental self-funded “alternate cinema” piece made over five years, Drifting Petals is inspired by WG Sebald’s novels in its blending of travelogue, historical fact, fiction and memoir – and loosely follows a film-maker as she reconnects with a piano student in Hong Kong. A drifting camera follows them each separately as they confront long-lost memories, meeting those living and dead, and facing an uncertain future. The free-spirited vision behind the project meant Law and Fong had no choice but to take a “DIY-nano production” approach. It saw the pair fulfilling most creative and practical elements themselves – sometimes resorting to YouTube tutorials to fill in the blanks. Despite its challenges, Law compares film-making to an addiction – “a fire in the belly”. “I can’t do things I don’t like. It is to my disadvantage that I am like that,” she laughs. “It is a hard thing to make films, but it consumes you. If I didn’t think it was worth doing, then why am I doing it?” It’s perhaps why Law thinks her and Fong’s films are “a bit ahead of [their] time”: Floating Life initially opened as a small national release to modest reception. “It’s OK,” she says, almost forgivingly. “Floating Life has helped spur [Asian-Australians] into their film-making careers, like [director] Corrie Chen, and I am glad to hear that has happened. It is like a relay, there is no ego there.” For her next project, The Little QiPao Shop, Law has also turned her lens on her adopted home. She describes it as a film for the “new generation” – an intergenerational story centring on a 28-year-old Australian-born Chinese woman growing up between two cultures. “I think there are still some [Asian Australian] stories in the pipeline for me,” Law says. “But maybe I’ll find something in Taiwan, in the UK, maybe here. There are always stories, and there are always interesting people.” Drifting Petals and Floating Life are showing at the Sydney film festival 2021, which runs 3–21 NovemberFacebook has announced it is deleting about 1bn “faceprints” it used as part of a facial recognition system for photo tagging, citing concerns with the technology. Meta, the company formally known as Facebook, announced on Tuesday it would end its use of facial recognition technology in the coming weeks. A third of Facebook’s users, or about 1 billion people, had opted into the service, Meta’s vice-president of artificial intelligence Jerome Pesenti said. So is the company really concerned about people’s privacy, or is it just a public relations move? How was Facebook using facial recognition technology? When people opted in to allowing the use of facial recognition, Facebook scanned a “faceprint” of that user and used it to find photos and videos of them on the platform, and suggested tagging them. It was also used to identify if someone else was impersonating that user on Facebook, and helped with accessibility for people with visual impairments by telling them who was in a photo. Why is Facebook stopping it? Pesenti said while facial recognition technology is a powerful tool to verify identity, it needs strong privacy and transparency controls to let people limit how their faces are used. He noted there were “many concerns” about the place of facial recognition technology in society, with regulators still playing catch up. “Amid this ongoing uncertainty, we believe that limiting the use of facial recognition to a narrow set of use cases is appropriate,” he said. Pesenti said facial recognition was most valuable when operating on a person’s device only – such as for unlocking iPhones – rather than communicating with an external server, as Facebook’s technology had operated. It comes at a time when Facebook has faced widespread criticism over its attitude towards user privacy and safety, after the release of tens of thousands of internal documents from Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen. What will happen to tagged photos? A spokesperson for Facebook said there would be no change to existing tagged photos or videos that were tagged using the technology, just that there will not be a suggested tag in the future. What will it mean for assisting people with visual impairments? People will still be able to add text and tags to their photos and videos, but Facebook won’t automatically suggest them. What will happen to my faceprint? Facebook says it will be deleted. If you opted out of the service before this, or never opted in, or deleted your account, Facebook has said the faceprint would not be retained. Had there been any data breach or sale of faceprint information? Facebook has previously said that the only person who could access the faceprint was the account user, and a spokesperson confirmed there had been no other access to the faceprint information. Will it be replaced with something else? The spokesperson said Meta believes there are “a number of potentially positive use cases for facial recognition in the future” and it’s something the company will explore, but privacy, control and transparency will be front of mind. “For each potential future application, we’ll continue to be public about its intended use, how people can have control over these systems and their personal data, and how we’re ensuring the technology lives up to our responsible innovation framework,” he said. Meta is shifting its focus to creating the metaverse, and trying a whole bunch of new things at the same time as it battles against an increasingly negative public image in the past few months.Joe Biden suffered a bitter political blow early on Wednesday when Democrats went down in a shock defeat in the election for governor of Virginia. The Democratic candidate, Terry McAuliffe, had campaigned with Biden and Barack Obama but it was not enough to prevent the Republican Glenn Youngkin pulling off an upset. The AP called the race for Youngkin in the early hours of Wednesday morning. The Republican took an early lead after polls closed that he maintained throughout the evening, while McAuliffe lagged in key counties that Biden swept in 2020. Clenching his fists then clapping his hands, Youngkin addressed jubilant supporters in Chantilly just after 1am. “All righty, Virginia, we won this thing!” he exclaimed. “How much fun!” The 54-year-old political neophyte described it as “a defining moment” for millions of Virginians “sharing dreams and hopes”. Youngkin promised: “Together, we will change the trajectory of this commonwealth and, friends, we are going to start that transformation on day one. There is no time to waste.” In a nod to what became his defining campaign issue, the Republican said: “We are going to restore excellence in our schools … We are going to introduce choice in our public school system … Friends, we’re going to embrace our parents, not ignore them. We’re gonna press forward with a curriculum that includes listening to parents’ input.” As on the campaign trail, Youngkin did not utter the name “Trump”. The battle in Virginia has been seen as a litmus test of Biden’s presidency one year after he won the White House, and it coincided with his agenda stalling in Congress and his approval rating sinking to 42%. “The fight continues,” said McAuliffe in a speech on Tuesday night, thanking his campaign staff for a hard-fought race, but stopping short of a concession. “We’ve got to make sure we protect women’s right to choose here in the commonwealth of Virginia. We’ve got to make sure everyone gets quality, affordable healthcare here in the commonwealth of Virginia. Everybody’s entitled to a world-class education here in the commonwealth of Virginia and we are going to continue that fight tonight, and every day going forward.” McAuliffe’s all-out effort to portray Youngkin as an acolyte of Donald Trump proved less effective than the Republican’s laser-like focus on whipping up parents’ fear and anger about culture war issues in Virginia’s schools. Youngkin made false claims that critical race theory – an analytic framework through which academics examine the ways that racial disparities are reproduced by the law – is rampant in the state’s education system (in fact it is not taught). His campaign zeroed in on a perceived gaffe by McAuliffe at one of their debates: “I don’t think parents should be telling schools what they should teach.” Importantly, Youngkin was also successful walking a political tightrope in which he accepted Trump’s endorsement but never mentioned him in stump speeches or invited him to campaign with him in person. He cultivated sufficient ambiguity to appeal to moderate Republicans without alienating the Trump base. History was on Youngkin’s side in that the party that loses the White House tends to be energised and usually wins the Virginia’s governor’s race a year later. But McAuliffe himself had bucked that rule when he became governor in 2014 (he was limited to one term). However, no Republican had won statewide office since 2009, and Biden beat Trump in Virginia by 10 percentage points, meaning that a Democratic loss here would reverberate across the nation. Meanwhile, in New Jersey, a similar story was unfolding as the Democratic governor, Phil Murphy, fought to win re-election against his Republican challenger, Jack Ciattarelli. That race was too close to call, with Ciattarelli narrowly ahead. If Murphy holds his office, he would be the first Democrat re-elected as the state’s governor in 44 years, while a defeat would bode ill for national Democrats. At McAuliffe’s election night event at a hotel in Tysons, Virginia, giant TVs that had been showing cable news coverage were switched off long before any result was finalized. Stunned supporters trailed out into the chilly night. Manisha Singh, 48, an analyst, said: “It’s extremely disappointing. I can’t imagine all the lies that were spread to influence voters. I was knocking on doors and people were saying take the porn out of public schools, which is a lie. They were just repeating what they had seen on Fox News.” Singh added: “This might be a huge wake-up call to Democrats. We always play nice when the other party spreads lies. We need to be more aggressive.” Argument quickly broke out among national Democrats over what had gone wrong. The Progressive Change Campaign Committee said in a statement: “Terry McAuliffe sadly can blame his loss on a few corporate-aligned obstructionist Democrats who blocked bold action in Congress, plus his own reliance on backward-looking Trump messaging. It added: “Democrats won’t win simply by branding one opponent after another as a Trump clone, and then hoping to squeak out a razor-thin win. When Democrats fail to run on big ideas or fulfill bold campaign promises, we depress our base while allowing Republicans to use culture wars to hide their real agenda.” McAuliffe, a career politician and establishment Democrat, is likely to point to Biden’s falling popularity and Washington gridlock as factors in his defeat. Youngkin, a former executive at the private-equity firm the Carlyle Group, sold himself as a political outsider challenging the liberal elite. His strategy – a delicate balancing act of stoking culture wars in education and winking at Trump without fully embracing him – is seen as a potential blueprint for Republican candidates in next year’s congressional elections. Trump said in a statement: “All McAuliffe did was talk Trump, Trump, Trump and he lost! What does that tell you, Fake News? I guess people running for office as Democrats won’t be doing that too much longer. I didn’t even have to go rally for Youngkin, because McAuliffe did it for me.” Dan Conston, president of the Congressional Leadership Fund, a super political action committee dedicated to electing Republicans to the House of Representatives, said: “Tonight’s results put every Democrat in Congress on notice. “Virginia was once ground zero for suburban decline but has now become the epicenter of a Republican comeback in 2022. If Republicans can win even in a state so blue that Joe Biden won by 10 points, then far more Democrats are in peril next year than they want to admit.” The battles in Virginia and New Jersey came as voters in states across the US headed to the polls on Tuesday, an off-year election day, to cast their ballots for local governors, mayors and public measures. In New York, the former police officer Eric Adams easily won his race to become the next mayor of New York City. In Boston, Michelle Wu made history when she defeated Annissa Essaibi-George to become the first woman of color and Asian American elected as the city’s mayor. History was also made in Durham, North Carolina, where Elaine O’Neal became the city’s first Black female mayor after campaigning on neighborhood safety, housing and economic relief in the aftermath of the pandemic, while Abdullah Hammoud won the mayoral race in Dearborn, Michigan, making him the city’s first Arab American leader. In Minneapolis, voters rejected an initiative that would have replaced the police department with a new department of public safety, nearly a year and a half after the police killing of George Floyd inspired nationwide protests against police brutality. Maanvi Singh and the Associated Press contributed reportingAn Italian woman who investigated what she thought was a burglar on her balcony, has described a petrifying encounter with a rare brown bear. The Marsican bear had climbed on to her bedroom balcony in Pescosolido, a village in the Lazio province of Frosinone, just days after a bear was spotted bathing in the fountain of a neighbouring village. Annalisa Castagna and her husband, Claudio Parravano, came face-to-face with the bear on Sunday night. The Marsican is a critically endangered subspecies of the brown bear living in the Apennine mountains that straddle Italy’s Abruzzo, Lazio and Molise regions. The couple initially thought there was a burglar on their first-floor balcony after hearing noises shortly after midnight, and stepped outside to investigate, using the light of their mobile phones. “I practically screamed in the face of the bear,” Castagna wrote in a Facebook post shared with the online community group Sei di Pescosolido se. “The bear snarled back at me and tried to reach me with its paw. In the dim light of the mobile phone, I was able to count all its teeth and see its red tongue.” Castagna leapt back inside, while Parravano threw himself over the balcony to escape the animal, causing minor injuries. The bear fled, leaving its faeces on the balcony. “The bear was certainly frightened, possibly even more than we were,” said Castagna. “The fear was great and we thank God [nothing happened]. We ask our fellow Pescosolido citizens to be careful … and we hope those in charge will ensure that the bear returns to its natural habitat without being harmed.” The encounter came a few days after a Marsican brown bear took a dip in the fountain of the main square in San Donato Val di Comino, a nearby village of about 1,200 residents where bears have occasionally been sighted on the streets. A resident, Vania Tramontozzi, took photos and shared them with the Facebook group, Visit San Donato Val di Comino. “My husband is the manager of the bar right by the square,” Tramontozzi told Kodami, a website for news about animals. “Seeing the bear so quiet and relaxed in the fountain, at about 7.45pm, when there were some people around, was very emotional.” Both villages are close to the vast national park of Abruzzo, Lazio and Molise, home to the endangered Marsican bears, of which only an estimated 50 are left. The animals tend to venture into inhabited areas more between September and November, but are not known to be aggressive towards humans. A spokesperson for the national park, Daniela D’Amico, said: “Experts from the national park went to Pescosolido today to better understand what happened on Sunday night, but it is a little strange to hear that the bear managed to climb on to the balcony.” Marsican bears that gravitate towards towns in search of food during the autumn are either females with cubs or young bears, she said. “Bears are opportunistic and follow their stomachs … in this period they need to eat a lot in order to face the winter.” She added: “It’s not that they’re malnourished. There is abundant food in the mountains. But staying in the mountains is risky for the young, who will have to share their territory and food with adult bears, and for female bears, who are at risk of male bears killing their cubs, forcing the female back into heat.” In 2019, the Italian branch of the World Wildlife Fund warned that the Marsican brown bear faced extinction. The population has dwindled during the past 25 years, with 63% of bear deaths attributed to illegal hunting or being hit by vehicles.Joe Biden exuded confidence. “We’re going to win,” the US president told reporters before departing Cop26 in Glasgow. “I think we’re going to win in Virginia.” But as Biden returns to Washington, he faces questions about why his prediction was so wrong – and whether Democrats’ loss in the most important election of the year will send his presidency into a downward spiral. The Republican Glenn Youngkin’s surprise victory over the Democrat Terry McAuliffe in the race for governor of Virginia is a brutal rebuke for Biden, who had personally invested in the race, twice making the short trip from Washington to campaign for McAuliffe at rallies. It will particularly sting because Donald Trump, whom he defeated in Virginia by 10 percentage points in last year’s presidential election, will doubtless seek to claim credit for the result and savor his revenge. But the truth is that this election was more about the current president than the spectre of the last one. Biden’s ambitious agenda has stalled in Congress. By his own admission, the inertia has sucked oxygen away from priorities such as a police reform and voting rights, disillusioning the activists who fuel Democratic turnout. Inflation and gasoline prices are up. Global supply chains are buckling. And Biden’s sunny predictions for post-withdrawal Afghanistan were as off the mark as his predictions for Virginia. The president’s sagging approval rating of 42% combined with historical headwinds to drag McAuliffe down. Nothing energizes a political movement like opposition: the president’s party has lost every election for governor of Virginia over almost half a century – the exception was McAuliffe himself in 2013. But this time McAuliffe failed to inspire. The chairman of Hillary Clinton’s 2008 presidential primary campaign had a distinct whiff of Clinton 2016: a career politician imbued with a sense of entitlement who constantly found himself on the defensive against an upstart candidate drawing bigger crowds. Like Hillary Clinton’s reference to “deplorables”, McAuliffe made a perceived gaffe – “I don’t think parents should be telling schools what they should teach” – which was replayed endlessly in Youngkin attack ads. McAuliffe’s central argument – that Youngkin is an acolyte of Trump – was about the past. Youngkin’s central argument – that schools are under attack from culture warriors on race and gender – was about the future, even if it was riddled with falsehoods. To many voters, the future tends to be more persuasive. Enough of them did not seem to know or care that Youngkin’s arguments on schools were based on a lie. He stoked fears about critical race theory being taught in schools – it isn’t – with a caricature of Black children learning to think they are victims and white children learning to self-hate. It cut through and proved effective in a febrile, pandemic-era atmosphere where parents shout and even turn violent at school board meetings debating issues such as gender identity and mask mandates. Whereas McAuliffe wanted to nationalize the election, Youngkin managed to keep it local, albeit by tapping into Fox News talking points following last year’s Black Lives Matter protests. Expect this incendiary mix of children and racism to be chapter one of the Republican playbook in next year’s midterm elections for Congress. Expect chapter two to be How to Deal with a Problem Called Donald Trump. The 45th president will still be welcome in the safe districts of the Make America Great Again nation, sure to draw fanatical crowds and turn out the vote. But in swing states, Youngkin has shown Republicans the way to have their cake and eat it too. In the Republican primary, he praised Trump and fanned his false claims of voter fraud by raising concerns about “election integrity”. In the general election, he was willing to tacitly pat Trump on the back without ever embracing him – he eschewed mentions of the former president in campaign speeches and must have been tremendously relieved that Trump never turned up in person. Youngkin squared the circle that many Republicans have struggled with, creating a template for how to win over moderates and independents without alienating the Trump base, or vice versa. Call it the Goldilocks principle of strategic ambiguity: neither too hot nor too cold, but just the right temperature. Democrats knew exactly what he was doing. McAuliffe relentlessly tried to conflate Youngkin with Trump. At a rally last week, Biden warned: “Extremism can come in many forms. It can come in the rage of a mob driven to assault the Capitol. It can come in a smile and a fleece vest. Either way, the big lie is still a big lie.” But it was all in vain. Youngkin, like Trump, might have emphasized his status as a businessman and political outsider but otherwise came over as a suburban dad, more polished and less profane: the acceptable face of Trumpism. Yet his tactics were just as dark, dishonest and divisive. Democrats will now need to find a counter-strategy fast. Some commentators have suggested that members of the House and Senate could desert Biden and rush to the exits, retiring rather than facing a bloodbath in the midterms, so weakening the president’s hand at a crucial moment for his agenda. Virginia is a warning cry that the party needs strong leadership to get it done before things fall apart. Wednesday marks the first anniversary of Biden’s defeat of Trump in a presidential election like no other. But the pandemic of Trumpism rages in new and unexpected ways – and the Youngkin variant may prove among the most dangerous.It was Election Day across the country... The Virginia governor’s race, Democrat Terry McAuliffe was defeated Republican Glenn Youngkin. The race is being widely viewed as a referendum on Joe Biden’s first year in office. Youngkin leaned into a growing backlash against mask mandates, school closures and right-wing fervor against teaching critical race theory. In New Jersey, the governor’s race between Democratic incumbent Phil Murphy and Republican Jack Ciattarelli, a former state assemblyman, remains too close to call.The election could be a litmus of how voters are responding to coronavirus health policies like mask mandates, business closures and other restrictions. In Boston, progressive Michelle Wu defeated moderate Annissa Essaibi-George in the mayoral race. She has become the first woman of color and Asian American elected to the office. Her campaign emphasized climate action, the importance of addressing racial inequities in a city where the majority of residents are people of color. Aftab Pureval was elected Cincinnati’s first Asian American mayor.“We made history in Cincinnati,” Pureval said to supporters in a victory speech. His family “ came to this country to provide a better life for their sons. Because of that incredible decision, our family went from being refugees to mayor of Cincinnati,” he said. Abdullah Hammoud has won the mayoral race in Dearborn, Michigan, making him the city’s first Arab American leader.Dearborn has one of the largest Arab American populations in the nation. In Durham, North Carolina, Elaine O’Neal will become city’s first Black woman mayor. She campaigned on neighborhood safety, housing and economic relief in the aftermath of the pandemic. She is a former superior court judge and the former dean of North Carolina Central University’s School of Law. Minneapolis voters choose not to replace the police department. Voters rejected a plan to transition the city’s police department to a new Department of Public Safety, nearly a year and a half after the police killing of George Floyd inspired nationwide protests against police brutality. In New York, Eric Adams won the New York mayor’s race, as expected. The former police officer, 61, would be only the second Black person to be elected New York mayor. He urged unity in his acceptance speech. “Today we take off the intramural jersey and we put on one jersey, Team New York,” he told supporters in a victory speech. Democrat Alvin Bragg won the race for Manhattan district attorney. He will be the first Black DA for Manhattan and inherit an office that is leading a closely-watched investigation into Donald Trump’s business dealings. Bragg has also vowed to address the disproportionate prosecuting of Black residents and scale back the prosecution of “crimes of poverty”. In other politics news... Joe Biden criticized the leaders of China and Russia for not participating in the Cop26 climate change conference, saying they had made a “big mistake”. Holding a press conference before leaving Glasgow, Biden said, “We showed up. And by showing up, we’ve had a profound impact on the way, I think, the rest of the world is looking at the United States and its leadership role.” The US rejoined the High Ambition Coalition at Cop26. The group is dedicated to following through on the pledge to limit global temperature increases to 1.5C (2.7F), which was included in the Paris Climate Agreement. Biden also expressed confidence that Joe Manchin will support the final version of Democrats’ reconciliation package. “He will vote for this if we have in this proposal what he has anticipated,” the president told reporters in Glasgow. “I believe that Joe will be there.” Manchin has indicated concerns about how the legislation will impact the federal deficit, and he said today that it would take “quite a while” to pass the bill. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said Democrats had reached a deal on a proposal to lower prescription drug prices, one of the last remaining hurdles in their negotiations over the reconciliation package. But Democrats still need to find common ground on the immigration provisions and the proposed Medicare expansion in the bill, to name just a couple of the outstanding issues in their talks – Maanvi Singh and Joan E Greve Abdullah Hammoud has won the mayoral race in Dearborn, Michigan, making him the city’s first Arab American leader. Dearborn has one of the largest Arab American populations in the nation. Joe Biden suffered a bitter political blow in Virginia. McAuliffe, had campaigned with Biden and Barack Obama but it was not enough to prevent Youngkin pulling off an upset. The race was effectively the first referendum on Biden’s presidency, one year after he won the White House, and it coincided with his agenda stalling in Congress and his approval rating sinking to 42%. McAuliffe’s all-out effort to portray Youngkin as an acolyte of Donald Trump proved less effective than the Republican’s laser-like focus on whipping up parents’ fear and anger about culture war issues in Virginia’s schools. Youngkin made false claims that critical race theory – an analytic framework through which academics examine the ways that racial disparities are reproduced by the law – is rampant in the state’s education system (in fact it is not taught). His campaign zeroed in on a perceived gaffe by McAuliffe at one of their debates: “I don’t think parents should be telling schools what they should teach.” Importantly, Youngkin was also successful walking a political tightrope in which he accepted Trump’s endorsement but never mentioned him in stump speeches or invited him to campaign with him in person. He cultivated sufficient ambiguity to appeal to moderate Republicans without alienating the Trump base. History was on Youngkin’s side in that the party that loses the White House tends to be energised and usually wins the Virginia’s governor’s race a year later. But McAuliffe himself had bucked that rule when he became governor in 2014 (he was limited to one term). However, no Republican had won statewide office since 2009, and Biden beat Trump in Virginia by 10 percentage points, meaning that Democrats’ loss here will reverberate across the nation. The Associated Press has called the race. The face-off between Democrat Terry McAuliffe and Republican Glenn Youngkin has been widely considered a referendum on Joe Biden. McAuliffe, who served as governor from 2014 to 2018, cast Youngkin as a Trumpist, and vowed to protect voting rights and abortion access in the state, while Youngkin capitalized on anger against mask mandates, school closures, and other pandemic-era public health policies. Aftab Pureval was elected Cincinnati’s first Asian American mayor. “We made history in Cincinnati,” Pureval said to supporters in a victory speech. His family “ came to this country to provide a better life for their sons. Because of that incredible decision, our family went from being refugees to mayor of Cincinnati,” he said. He won with about 66% of the vote. In Buffalo, incumbent Byron Brown declared victory over socialist candidate India Walton, who has refused to concede. If Walton, 39, wins, she would the first Black woman to lead Buffalo. Her stunning victory over Brown in the June Democratic primaries bolstered her profile. But Brown asked supporters to write him in today – and his strategy seems to have worked. The vote could take a while to tally. In Durham, North Carolina, Elaine O’Neal will become city’s first Black woman mayor. She campaigned on neighborhood safety, housing and economic relief in the aftermath of the pandemic. She is a former superior court judge and the former dean of North Carolina Central University’s School of Law. O’Neal’s challenger Javiera Caballero had suspended her campaign but remained on the ballot. Michelle Wu defeated Annissa Essaibi-George in the Boston mayoral race. She has become the first woman of color and Asian American elected to the office. Acting mayor Kim Janey is the first woman and person of color to lead the city, having been appointed by former mayor Marty Walsh who is now serving as Labor secretary. Wu’s campaign has emphasized climate action, and she has vowed to address the housing crisis and racial injustice. She signaled ambitions to enact universal pre-K, public transit and initiatives to address the racial wealth gap. Essaibi-George, who ran on a moderate platform, conceded in a phone call to Wu. “I know this is no small feat. You know it’s no small feat,” she said. “I want her to show the city how mothers get it done.” Wu’s win is historic in a city where the majority of residents are people of color. The Virginia governor’s race remains too close to call, but Democrat Terry McAuliffe – who is trailing Republican Glenn Youngkin – delivered a measured speech. “I want to thank my campaign staff – it was the greatest team ever assembled,” he said in a speech that sounded adjacent to a concession speech, even though he wasn’t conceding. “The fight continues,” he said. “We’ve got to make sure we protect women’s right to choose here in the Commonwealth of Virginia. We’ve got to make sure everyone gets quality, affordable health care here in the Commonwealth of Virginia. Everybody’s entitled to a world-class education here in the Commonwealth of Virginia and we are going to continue that fight tonight, and every day going forward.” “Tonight, New Yorkers have chosen one of their own,” Eric Adams, who just won the mayor’s seat, said in a victory speech. “I am you.” Adams urged unity. “Today we take off the intramural jersey and we put on one jersey, Team New York,” he told supporters at a celebration at the New York Marriott. “Tonight is not just a victory over adversity, it is a vindication of faith,” he noted. “It is the proof that the forgotten can be the future.” The former police officer and centrist has been a disappointing choice for many progressives who hoped to see radical reforms in the criminal justice system. Adams has promised to strike a balance between fighting crime and ending racial injustice in law enforcement. Voters rejected a plan to replace the city’s police department with a new Department of Public Safety, nearly a year and a half after the police killing of George Floyd inspired nationwide protests against police brutality. The rejected initiative would have gotten rid of a city a requirement to staff the police department with a minimum number of officers, clearing the way to completely reimagine law enforcement. A new Department of Public Safety would instead develop “a comprehensive public health approach”. Read more: Democrat Alvin Bragg won the race for Manhattan district attorney, the AP projected. He will be the first Black DA for Manhattan and inherit an office that is leading a closely-watched investigation into Donald Trump’s business dealings. Bragg has also vowed to address the disproportionate prosecuting of Black residents and scale back the prosecution of “crimes of poverty”. In New Jersey, the governor’s race between Democratic incumbent Phil Murphy and Republican Jack Ciattarelli, a former state assemblyman, remains too close to call. The election could be a litmus of how voters are responding to coronavirus health policies like mask mandates, business closures and other restrictions. Murphy, who has issued stringent health orders to slow the spread of Covid-19 has earned high marks from constituents for his leadership during the pandemic. But Ciattarelli, like many Republican politicians across the US, has seized on growing backlash and frustrations over such policies. The AP has projected the race in Adams’ favor. Adams, the Brooklyn borough president and a former state senator, was long expected to win. Read more: The ballroom of a Hilton hotel in Tysons, northern Virginia, is the setting for Democrat Terry McAuliffe’s election watch party as results come in for the governor’s race. Giant TV screens are broadcasting the MSNBC network and currently show Republican Glenn Youngkin leading on 55.5% with McAuliffe trailing on 43.8%, with 46% of votes in. But music is playing, people are chatting and the mood remains upbeat – for now. “Terry McAuliffe will win,” said David Broder, 42, president of a local union for home care and public service workers. “He has been strong on economic issues. Continuing to push paid family and medical leave has been crucial at the same time Congress has not. This issue has not gone away. I hear it every time I knock on doors.” Asked for his views on McAuliffe’s Republican opponent, Broder replied: “Glenn Youngkin is the love child of Donald Trump and Mitt Romney. He should not be anywhere near state government.” Former police officer Eric Adams is favored to defeat Republican Curtis Sliwa in Tuesday’s election. Adams, 61, would be only the second Black person to be elected New York mayor, after David Dinkins, who led the city from 1990 to 1993. Adams, who defeated several progressive candidates in the Democratic primary, has pledged to cut government inefficiency and made public safety a central part of his campaign. Sliwa is a talk radio host who founded the Guardian Angels, a volunteer crime prevention group, in the 1970s. He has been a regular presence on New York City’s streets, frequently standing on top of a car-pulled float and spreading his message through a microphone and speaker. Sliwa wore his red beret throughout the campaign, including during the mayoral debates, but has struggled to gain much attention in a race where Adams had long been favored. With about 60% of the vote in, Republican Glenn Youngkin appears to be pulling ahead in the Virginia governor’s race, which remains too close to call. Democrat and former governor Terry McAuliffe will have really to catch up to win this – he appears to be lagging in key counties that Joe Biden swept in 2020. Republicans also appear poised to win the lieutenant governor and attorney general seats. My colleague David Smith explains the tension here: The race is effectively the first referendum on Biden’s presidency, one year after he won the White House, and it coincided with his agenda stalling in Congress and his approval rating sinking to 42%. McAuliffe launched all-out effort to portray Youngkin as an acolyte of Donald Trump proved less effective, while Youngkin retained a laser-like focus on whipping up parents’ fear and anger about culture war issues in Virginia’s schools. Here’s more background: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) formally endorsed the Pfizer vaccine for children aged 5 through 11. After an expert panel voted unanimously to support the vaccine, CDC director Rochelle Walensky gave final approval. “Together, with science leading the charge, we have taken another important step forward in our nation’s fight against the virus that causes Covid-19,” she said. Pfizer has been readying shipments of pediatric doses to vaccination centers, pharmacies, and health clinics, and vaccines could begin this week. The approval is sure to bring relief to millions of parents across the US, with the country bracing for a surge amidst the holiday season. Doses for children are about one-third the adult dose. Although children are less likely to get sick and die from the virus than adults, there is still a risk. More than 8,000 US children have been hospitalized with Covid-19. California last month was the first state to require vaccines for children attending school in person. Democrat Shontel Brown has won the election for the House seat vacated by Marcia Fudge of Ohio, the AP projects. Fudge left her seat to become Joe Biden’s secretary of housing and urban development. Brown’s victory will not affect the balance of power in the House, where Democrats currently have a three-member lead, because Republican Mike Carey is expected to fill the seat vacated by the GOP Ohio representative Steve Stivers, who resigned this year. In Buffalo, Democratic mayor Byron Brown is running an unusual write-in campaign against Democratic socialist India Walton. We’re watching what could be a historic result. If Walton, 39, wins, she would the first Black woman to lead Buffalo. Her stunning victory in the June Democratic primaries bolstered the socialist candidate’s national profile – and she’s the only candidate printed on the ballot, as Republicans are not running a candidate in the deeply blue city. But on election day, incumbent mayor Brown, 63, has been doubling down – asking supporters to write him in today. Party leaders have also declined to offer Walton their whole-hearted support; neither New York governor Kathy Hochul nor Jay S Jacobs, the chair of the New York State Democratic Committee, have made endorsements. When asked why he isn’t supporting her, Jacobs said in a Spectrum News interview: “Let’s take a scenario, very different, where David Duke — you remember him, the grand wizard of the KKK — he moves to New York, he becomes a Democrat, he runs for mayor in the city of Rochester ... I have to endorse David Duke? I don’t think so. Now, of course, India Walton is not in the same category.” Critics including Brown and his supporters have characterized Walton, a registered nurse and political newcomer, as an inexperienced, radical choice, echoing Republican critiques of progressive Democrats. Republican voters, a minority in the city, could play a key role in the election if they rally behind Brown. Meanwhile, progressive representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez has been stumping for Walton, and the candidate gained the support of senators Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts. We’ll be watching and updating you here as the results roll in. Lauren Gambino in Washington, Martin Pengelly in New York and agencies: Virginians on Tuesday are voting to elect a new governor, in a closely contested race between the Democrat Terry McAuliffe and Republican Glenn Youngkin widely seen as a referendum on Joe Biden’s presidency. They did so as a leading Virginia polling expert warned that Youngkin may be riding a wave of “white backlash” all the way to the governor’s mansion, having successfully focused on controversy over the place of race in education. In the final hours of the campaign, the candidates offered starkly different closing arguments, making their cases to voters whose odd-year gubernatorial elections have long reflected the national political mood a year into any new administration. Saddled by Biden’s sagging poll numbers and intra-party wrangling that has gridlocked the president’s domestic spending agenda, McAuliffe has attempted to tether his opponent to Donald Trump, a polarizing figure in voter-rich northern suburbs. Youngkin has mostly avoided the subject of Trump while embracing many of his tactics, a blueprint many Republican strategists believe could be a model for the midterm elections next year. There’s yet another hitch in negotiations over the Democrats’ massive reconciliation bill Democratic negotiators are reportedly considering repealing the $10,000 cap on the federal deduction for state and local taxes, known as SALT, as part of the reconciliation deal – setting off a fierce debate over a provision that could result in tax cuts for the wealthiest Americans. The issue of repealing the cap has been a key point of contention, with some lawmakers from high tax states such as New Jersey and New York saying they won’t vote for a reconciliation bill that doesn’t address the cap. “Today’s news is encouraging for a SALT cap repeal to be included in the final reconciliation package,” said Democratic representatives Josh Gottheimer and Mikie Sherrill of New Jersey and Tom Suozzi of New York, in a statement. “We will continue to work with House and Senate leadership to ensure the cap on the SALT deduction is repealed. No SALT, no deal. No SALT, no dice.” A bipartisan Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget analysis found that repealing the SALT cap offset tax hikes in the Build Back Better plan. Vermont senator Bernie Sanders said he would strongly oppose lifting the cap, noting, “at a time of massive income and wealth inequality, the last thing we should be doing is giving more tax breaks to the very rich”. An advisory panel at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) unanimously voted to recommend that all children ages five to 11 get Pfizer’s pediatric coronavirus vaccine. The Food and Drug Administration has already approved the vaccine for children, and now, with the CDC panel’s vote, those shots are one step closer to reaching the public, once CDC director Rochelle Walensky signs off. Pfizer is already readying shipments to pharmacies and clinics across the US. The Georgia Republican responsible for running elections considered an infamous call in which Donald Trump told him to “find” enough votes to overturn Joe Biden’s victory in the state a “threat” to his safety and that of his family. Biden’s victory in Georgia was a narrow but vital part of his national win. No Democratic presidential candidate had taken the state since Bill Clinton in 1992. Trump called Brad Raffensperger, the Georgia secretary of state, nearly two months after election day, on Saturday 2 January. Telling him “it’s pretty clear we won”, the then president said: “I just want to find 11,780 votes, which is one more than we have [to get]” to surpass Biden’s total. Raffensperger, a conservative who supported Trump, resisted the president’s demands. That prompted Trump to suggest the refusal to expose mass voter fraud in Georgia – on which Trump insisted but which did not exist, as in all other states – could be a “criminal offense”. “That’s a big risk to you,” Trump said. “That’s a big risk.” In Integrity Counts, a book published on Tuesday, Raffensperger writes: “I felt then – and still believe today – that this was a threat. Others obviously thought so, too, because some of Trump’s more radical followers have responded as if it was their duty to carry out this threat.” Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden criticized the leaders of China and Russia for not participating in the Cop26 climate change conference, saying they had made a “big mistake”. Holding a press conference before leaving Glasgow, Biden said, “We showed up. And by showing up, we’ve had a profound impact on the way, I think, the rest of the world is looking at the United States and its leadership role.” The US rejoined the High Ambition Coalition at Cop26. The group is dedicated to following through on the pledge to limit global temperature increases to 1.5C (2.7F), which was included in the Paris Climate Agreement. Biden also expressed confidence that Joe Manchin will support the final version of Democrats’ reconciliation package. “He will vote for this if we have in this proposal what he has anticipated,” the president told reporters in Glasgow. “I believe that Joe will be there.” Manchin has indicated concerns about how the legislation will impact the federal deficit, and he said today that it would take “quite a while” to pass the bill. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said Democrats had reached a deal on a proposal to lower prescription drug prices, one of the last remaining hurdles in their negotiations over the reconciliation package. But Democrats still need to find common ground on the immigration provisions and the proposed Medicare expansion in the bill, to name just a couple of the outstanding issues in their talks. Virginia voters are going to the polls today to choose their next governor. Recent surveys show Democrat Terry McAuliffe and Republican Glenn Youngkin running neck and neck, and the results of the race will provide some clues as to how much ground Biden has lost with voters since taking office. (The president carried Virginia by 10 points last year.) Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. House speaker Nancy Pelosi has endorsed the deal on lowering prescription drug prices, which was announced by Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer this afternoon. “For a generation, House Democrats have been fighting to deliver real drug price negotiations that will lower costs,” Pelosi said in a new statement. “With today’s agreement on strong lower drug price provisions for the Build Back Better Act, Democrats have a path forward to make good on this transformational agenda for our seniors.” Pelosi noted the deal, which will be included as part of Democrats’ reconciliation package, will reduce out-of-pocket co-pays for seniors and establish a $2,000 out-of-pocket limit for Medicare Part D expenses. “We are now finishing the drafting of the legislative text to reflect this important agreement,” Pelosi said. “I am pleased with the compromise reached by House Members and Senator Sinema.” In the final hours of the Virginia gubernatorial campaign, Republican Glenn Youngkin and Democrat Terry McAuliffe offered starkly different closing arguments, making their cases to voters whose odd-year gubernatorial elections have long reflected the national political mood a year into any new administration. Saddled by Joe Biden’s sagging poll numbers and intra-party wrangling that has gridlocked the president’s domestic spending agenda, McAuliffe has attempted to tether his opponent to Donald Trump, a polarizing figure in voter-rich northern suburbs. Youngkin has mostly avoided the subject of Trump while embracing many of his tactics, a blueprint many Republican strategists believe could be a model for midterm elections next year. Polls showed an unexpectedly close race in a state that has trended Democratic since the election of Barack Obama in 2008. A loss in a state Biden won by nearly 10 points in 2020 would be deeply alarming for a party already bracing for a difficult challenge next year. Joe Biden expressed confidence that Democrats will win the gubernatorial races in Virginia and New Jersey, even as some Virginia polls show Republican Glenn Youngkin pulling ahead of Terry McAuliffe. “I think we’re going to win in Virginia,” Biden told reporters in Glasgow. “It’s about who shows up, who turns out.” Biden acknowledged it would be a “tight race” in Virginia, and he predicted that a result would be known by the time he lands in Washington at roughly 1 am local time. Defying many political analysts, Biden said the Virginia election would not be determined by his approval rating or congressional Democrats’ inability to pass his economic agenda (so far at least). “I’ve not seen any evidence that whether or not I am doing well or poorly, whether or not I’ve got my agenda passed or not — is going to have any real impact on winning or losing,” Biden said. “Even if we had passed my agenda, I wouldn’t claim we won because Biden’s agenda had passed.” The president’s press conference has now concluded, and he will soon start the journey back to Washington. Joe Biden said he believed the leaders of China and Russia made a “big mistake” by not attending the Cop26 climate change conference in Glasgow. “We showed up. And by showing up, we’ve had a profound impact on the way, I think, the rest of the world is looking at the United States and its leadership role,” Biden said. “The rest of the world is going to look to China and say, ‘What value added are they providing?’ And they’ve lost the ability to influence people around the world and all the people here at Cop.” Asked whether he was concerned about potential armed conflict between the US and China, Biden said he was not. “This is competition, it does not have to be conflict. There is no reason there needs be conflict,” Biden said. The president added that he has told Chinese President Xi Jinping the US expects Beijing to “play by the rules of the road”. Taking questions from reporters in Glasgow, Joe Biden was asked whether he believed Joe Manchin will support the final version of Democrats’ reconciliation package. “He will vote for this if we have in this proposal what he has anticipated,” the president said. “I believe that Joe will be there.” Manchin has refused to explicitly endorse Biden’s framework for the $1.75tn bill, saying he is concerned about how the legislation could affect the federal deficit. But the White House has expressed confidence that the final version of the bill will quell Manchin’s fiscal concerns and win his support. Joe Biden is now delivering prepared remarks at the start of his press conference, after the US president participated in the Cop26 climate change conference in Glasgow. “I think we got a lot done,” Biden said of global leaders’ efforts over the past couple of days. Echoing his comments yesterday, the president called for a “decisive decade of action” to combat the climate crisis and limit global temperatures increases. Joe Biden will soon hold a press conference in Glasgow, after the US president participated in the Cop26 climate change conference there. After taking questions from reporters, Biden will return to Washington to continue the negotiations over Democrats’ reconciliation package. Biden’s press conference comes after the US formally rejoined the High Ambition Coalition, which is dedicated to fulfilling the obligations of the Paris Climate Agreement, namely to limit global temperature increases to 1.5C. The Guardian’s Fiona Harvey reports: The decision by the world’s biggest economy and second biggest emitter, after China, to return to the High Ambition Coalition group of countries marks a significant boost to attempts to focus the Cop26 summit on limiting temperature rises to 1.5C, the tougher of the two goals of the Paris agreement. The coalition, which numbered scores of countries at the 2015 Paris talks, will on Tuesday call on governments to step up their efforts on greenhouse gas emissions and phasing out coal, consistent with a 1.5C limit, and urge rich nations to double the amount of climate finance they make available for poor countries to adapt to the impacts of the climate crisis. They also want to bring an end to subsidies for fossil fuels. Krysten Sinema, one of the two key Democratic holdouts in the Senate amid the reconciliation bill talks, confirmed she supports the deal to lower prescription drug prices. “The Senator welcomes a new agreement on a historic, transformative Medicare drug negotiation plan that will reduce out-of-pocket costs for seniors,” Sinema’s office said in a statement. But again, there are still several other outstanding issues that need to be negotiated before Democrats can bring the reconciliation package up for a vote. Stay tuned. Lowering prescription drug prices was one of the last remaining issues in Democrats’ negotiations over the reconciliation package, so Chuck Schumer’s announcement marks a significant step forward. However, there are still several other important proposals that Democrats need to finalize before moving forward with the bill. Congressional Democrats have not yet reached agreements on immigration provisions and the proposed Medicare expansion in the reconciliation package, for example. House speaker Nancy Pelosi is still hoping to hold votes on both the reconciliation package and the bipartisan infrastructure bill by the end of the week. Stay tuned. Congressional Democrats have reached a deal on lowering prescription drug prices through the reconciliation package, Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said. “I’m pleased to announce that an agreement has been reached to lower prescription drug prices for seniors and families in the Build Back Better legislation,” the Democratic leader said. “Fixing prescription drug pricing has consistently been a top issue for Americans year after year, including the vast majority of both Democrats and Republicans, who want to see a change because they simply cannot afford their medications.” Schumer acknowledged the agreed-upon proposal did not go as far as some Democrats had hoped, but he argued the deal still represented “a massive step forward”. The Senate leader also noted that Kyrsten Sinema, one of two key Democratic holdouts in the upper chamber, has indicated she supports the proposal. The drug pricing proposal was not included in Joe Biden’s framework for the $1.75tn reconciliation package, but Senate budget committee chair Bernie Sanders had pledged to keep fighting over the issue, which was one of his top priorities for the bill. Joe Biden met with Prince Charles today on the sidelines of the Cop26 climate change conference in Glasgow, the White House said. “President Biden and Prince Charles discussed the importance of global cooperation in tackling climate change,” a senior administration official told the press pool. “They underlined the need for ambitious commitments and concrete actions among partners worldwide and discussed Prince Charles’ initiatives to engage the private sector on sustainability. “President Biden reaffirmed the strength of the enduring ties between the United Kingdom and the United States, and he thanked the United Kingdom for hosting COP26. He commended the Royal Family for its dedication to climate issues, particularly Prince Charles’ environmental activism over the last half century.” Speaking at the conference yesterday, the Prince of Wales called on countries to respond to the climate crisis with a “war-like footing”. “The eyes and hopes of the world are upon you to act with all dispatch, and decisively — because time has quite literally run out,” he said. There seems to have been some confusion at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow earlier, when some local reporters said Joe Biden was “evacuated” before an event about methane. There does seem to have been a lot of hot air involved – from reporters trailing the president, as the White House pool report, from Katie Rogers of the New York Times (and once, us) makes clear: While walking to the methane pledge event, a rather stunned pool encountered President Biden walking through the conference with his delegation. Things quickly turned chaotic. As he wove his way through a crowd of hundreds of people – many of them journalists – he ignored more shouted questions about Joe Manchin. Biden spoke as expected. Here’s more, from our diplomatic editor, Patrick Wintour: Interesting news from Alabama, where a conservative Christian university has withdrawn an invitation to speak to the Pulitzer-winning historian Jon Meacham, because he has given speeches to Planned Parenthood groups. Samford University, in Birmingham, is a Southern Baptist institution. As such, students there said Meacham’s “beliefs and core values” did not align with their own and pushed for his speech to be cancelled. As reported by the Associated Press, Samford’s president, Beck A Taylor, “posted on the university’s website that Meacham’s speech was ‘intended to highlight his work in analysing the current state of civility and discourse in our country’, not abortion. “But the Samford Student Government Association and others recommended postponing Meacham’s talk, Taylor said, so his appearance was canceled and the school will try to schedule another time for him to speak.” Meacham has both written a biography of George HW Bush and advised Joe Biden. He won the Pulitzer in 2009, for a biography of Andrew Jackson. (As it happens, the president upon whom Steve Bannon famously told Donald Trump to model himself, and whom Trump equally famously said was very cross about the civil war, something of a feat even for Old Hickory seeing as he died in 1845, 16 years before the war broke out.) Anyway, the AP also reports that Taylor said he found Meacham’s insights “to be both challenging and inspiring” and added: “Our mission as a Christ-centered institution of higher learning is to stand boldly at the intersection of society and the church and to convene important conversations about how to live faithfully in the world. That mission calls us to invite speakers and artists to campus who challenge our perspectives and who share wisdom and insights.” Nonetheless, Meacham appears to have been … cancelled. Here’s an interview with him, by our Washington bureau chief David Smith: Mike Pence met with applause on Monday night in Iowa City, when he answered a question at an event held by a conservative youth group about why he didn’t do what Donald Trump wanted and help overturn the 2020 election. “James Madison,” Pence said, citing the fourth president, the founder widely considered the father of the US constitution. On 6 January, the then vice-president did not do what a conservative lawyer, John Eastman, now notoriously recommended, and use his role presiding over the certification of electoral college results to upend key states and keep Trump in the White House. Eastman has complained that Pence has been given too much credit for his behaviour on a day when he and his family were hustled to safety while the mob that attacked the Capitol hunted him, some chanting that he should be hanged. Eastman told the Guardian he was the victim of a “false narrative put out there to make it look as though Pence had been asked to do something egregiously unconstitutional, so he was made to look like a white knight coming in to stop this authoritarian Trump”. Others, including Bob Woodward and Robert Costa of the Washington Post, have reported that Pence took Eastman and Trump seriously and had to be convinced he could not do as they wished. Pence has struggled to reconcile the events of 6 January with the need to both appease Trump and advance his own political ambition. In Iowa, Pence said: “I understand the disappointment in the election. You might remember I was on the ballot. But you’ve got to be willing to do your duty. And the time may come that some of you are in that position, or one like it. And I just have a feeling based on the shining faces I’m seeing around here you’re going to be men and women who do your duty in that time as well.” Why was Pence in Iowa, talking about shining faces? Iowa will hold the first contest of the 2024 Republican presidential primary. Here’s some very fine further reading, from Ed Pilkington of this parrish: Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Manchin said it would take “quite a while” to pass the reconciliation package, even as the House looks to hold votes on that proposal and the bipartisan infrastructure bill by the end of the week. “We’re not in a rush right now,” Manchin told reporters on Capitol Hill today. “The rush was trying to get everything before the president went overseas.” Virginia voters are going to the polls today to choose their next governor. Recent surveys show Democrat Terry McAuliffe and Republican Glenn Youngkin running neck and neck, and the results of the race will provide some clues as to how much ground Joe Biden has lost with voters since taking office. (The president carried Virginia by 10 points last year.) The US has rejoined the High Ambition Coalition at Cop26. The group is dedicated to following through on the pledge to limit global temperature increases to 1.5C, which was included in the Paris Climate Agreement. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. In New Jersey, Democratic Governor Phil Murphy leads his Republican opponent, Jack Ciattarelli, by several points in recent polls. According to the RealClearPolitics polling average, Murphy has a 7.8-point advantage over Ciattarelli as New Jersey voters cast their ballots today. If Murphy can pull off a victory as expected, he will become the first Democratic governor to win reelection in New Jersey since 1977. Given that Joe Biden carried New Jersey by 16 points last year, Democrats will be looking closely at the margin of Murphy’s likely victory to see how much ground they have lost with voters as they struggle to enact the president’s economic agenda. All eyes are on Virginia today, as the state holds its closely watched gubernatorial race, but there are other important elections happening across the country today. In New Jersey, voters will also go to the polls to pick their next governor, although Democratic incumbent Phil Murphy is heavily favored in the race. And in Minneapolis, voters will decide whether the city should replace its police department with a new Department of Public Safety. The election comes nearly a year and a half after George Floyd, an African American man, was murdered by a white Minneapolis police officer. The AP reports: The Democratic mayor, Jacob Frey, is also in a tough fight for a second term, facing opponents who attacked him in the wake of Floyd’s death. Frey opposed the policing amendment. Two of his leading challengers in a field of 17, Sheila Nezhad and Kate Knuth, strongly supported the proposal. Voters will also decide whether to replace an unusual ‘weak mayor, strong council’ system with a more conventional distribution of executive and legislative powers. Even as Joe Manchin is indicating it will take a while for the Senate to pass the reconciliation package, budget committee chair Bernie Sanders is pushing for a vote as early as next week. “This process cannot go on week after week, month after month. It’s finally got to come to an end,” Sanders said, per CBS News. The progressive senator added that he will be pushing for a vote “as soon as possible”, hopefully by next week. But with the Senate evenly divided, Democrats need all 50 of their members on board before they can move forward with the reconciliation process. Senator Joe Manchin said it would take “quite a while” to pass the reconciliation package, even as the House looks to hold votes on that proposal and the bipartisan infrastructure bill by the end of the week. “You’re talking about overhauling the entire tax code. That is tremendous. And there needs to be input. We need to know what the effect’s going to be,” the West Virginia senator told CNN on Capitol Hill. Manchin added, “We’re not in a rush right now. The rush was trying to get everything before the president went overseas.” Democrats were not able to pass either bill before Joe Biden left for Europe last week, so Manchin argued that the party can now take its time as it tries to pass both bills. House speaker Nancy Pelosi is still looking to hold votes on both bills by the end of the week, even though there are several important outstanding issues with the reconciliation package. If the House can pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill, Biden will be able to immediately sign that proposal because it already passed the Senate. But the upper chamber would still need to approve the reconciliation package before it can go to Biden’s desk. The US has rejoined the High Ambition Coalition at the UN climate talks, the group of developed and developing countries that ensured the 1.5C goal was a key plank of the Paris agreement. The decision by the world’s biggest economy and second biggest emitter, after China, to return to the High Ambition Coalition group of countries marks a significant boost to attempts to focus the Cop26 summit on limiting temperature rises to 1.5C, the tougher of the two goals of the Paris agreement. The coalition, which numbered scores of countries at the 2015 Paris talks, will on Tuesday call on governments to step up their efforts on greenhouse gas emissions and phasing out coal, consistent with a 1.5C limit, and urge rich nations to double the amount of climate finance they make available for poor countries to adapt to the impacts of the climate crisis. They also want to bring an end to subsidies for fossil fuels. A senior US official said: “The High Ambition Coalition was instrumental in Paris in making sure that high ambition was written into the Paris agreement and will be instrumental in Glasgow in making sure it’s delivered.” House Democratic caucus chair Hakeem Jeffries was asked whether he believes Joe Manchin is working in good faith in the negotiations over the reconciliation package, after the senator’s critical comments yesterday. “The Senate is the Senate, and it’s the price that we pay for the democracy that we have in America,” Jeffries said at a press conference. “I take every single senator in good faith, in terms of comments that they’ve put into the public domain. I also believe that all 50 of them do want to get the Build Back Better Act over the finish line, and I remain convinced of that fact.” Leaving the House Democratic caucus meeting, speaker Nancy Pelosi said she believed the outstanding issues with the reconciliation package could be addressed today. “I’m not announcing a vote,” Pelosi told reporters. “But I did say it would be, could be resolved by the end of the day.” However, Democrats still need to reach a consensus on issues like prescription drug pricing, immigration and Medicare expansion, so it will be a heavy lift to wrap up the work on the reconciliation bill today. Pelosi and her team are still hoping that the House can hold votes on the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package later this week. Glenn Youngkin may be riding a wave of “white backlash” all the way to the Virginia governor’s mansion, a leading polling expert in the state said, as the Republican led the former governor Terry McAuliffe into election day. Asked why education was a key factor in Youngkin’s stronger-than-expected showing in a state recently dominated by Democrats, Larry Sabato of the Center for Politics at the University of Virginia said: “One of the candidates decided it was his ticket to the governor’s mansion and he may well be right.” Speaking to MSNBC, Sabato pointed to the core of Youngkin’s appeal on education: a promise to ban critical race theory in schools. Critical race theory, or CRT, is an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. It is not taught in Virginia schools, regardless of Youngkin’s promise to ban it. “The operative word is not critical,” Sabato said. “And it’s not theory. It’s race. What a shock, huh? Race. That is what matters. And that’s why it’s sticks. “There’s a lot of, we can call it white backlash, white resistance, whatever you want to call it. It has to do with race. And so we live in a post-factual era … It doesn’t matter that [CRT] isn’t taught in Virginia schools. It’s this generalised attitude that whites are being put upon and we’ve got to do something about it. We being white voters.” Virginia voters are going to the polls today to decide who will be their next governor: Democrat Terry McAuliffe or Republican Glenn Youngkin. McAuliffe, who previously served as governor from 2014 to 2018, had widely been considered the favorite in the race in the months leading up to Election Day. But recent surveys have shown McAuliffe and Youngkin running neck and neck, and the 538 polling average now has the Republican leading by 1 point. Joe Biden won Virginia by 10 points last year, but historically, the president’s party loses the state’s gubernatorial seat in its off-year election. Since the 1970’s, only one candidate has defied that trend: McAuliffe in 2013. The blog will be keeping a close eye on the race throughout the day, so stay tuned. House speaker Nancy Pelosi told her caucus that she is looking to finish talks on the reconciliation package today, according to Politico. The Democratic speaker is hoping for a House rules committee hearing on the legislation tomorrow, which could set up a Thursday or Friday vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package. But there are still several important outstanding details of the reconciliation package that need to be negotiated, including the provision over prescription drug pricing. Stay tuned. Congressional Progressive Caucus chair Pramila Jayapal said Democrats still need to finalize details on prescription drug pricing, childcare and immigration in the reconciliation package. And yet, the Washington congresswoman told Punchbowl News that she still hopes the House can vote on both the reconciliation package and the bipartisan infrastructure bill this week. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. House Democrats are moving forward with their plans to hold votes on both the infrastructure and reconciliation bills later this week, as they race to finish the text of the reconciliation package. “The House, Senate and White House continue to move forward with the Build Back Better Act,” speaker Nancy Pelosi said in a statement yesterday. “Democrats look forward to passing the Build Back Better Act and Bipartisan Infrastructure Framework For The People.” But Democratic Senator Joe Manchin once again raised concerns about the reconciliation package yesterday, intensifying fears that the bill may not pass the evenly divided Senate. “Simply put: I will not support a bill that is this consequential without thoroughly understanding the impact that it’ll have on our national debt, our economy and most importantly all of our American people,” Manchin said. But so far, the White House has dismissed Manchin’s criticism, insisting that the final version of the reconciliation bill will pass his spending tests. “Senator Manchin says he is prepared to support a Build Back Better plan that combats inflation, is fiscally responsible, and will create jobs. The plan the House is finalizing meets those tests,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. House Democrats will be looking to make more progress on the reconciliation package today. Stay tuned.I have come on an annual pilgrimage, this autumn afternoon, along a muddy track under a tunnel of trees, in search of two toadstools that fire the imagination. One is almost extraterrestrial in appearance, the other a Halloween horror story from the underworld. Until two years ago, in a lifetime of looking, I had never seen an earthstar. But then a naturalist told me about a colony of these most charismatic toadstools, rare in our region, growing on a bank beside this path. And here they are again today, collared earthstars, Geastrum triplex, half hidden among ivy, looking like invaders from another planet. Each began when barely visible underground hyphae coalesced into an egg-shaped object on the soil surface. Now the outer rind has split into segments that are folded back, like spacecraft landing-module ramps, revealing a sphere with a pore in the top, ready to puff clouds of spores whenever a raindrop splashes against its paper-thin walls. As the autumn days grow shorter, the fleshy rays will curl back further, eventually levering the whole toadstool from the ground. Then it will be free for the wind to carry away across the landscape, like tumbleweed, shedding more spores as it bounds. If evolution’s twin forces of chance and necessity hadn’t already crafted this unlikely fungus, then HG Wells might surely have invented it for a role in The War of the Worlds. Further down the path, another toadstool, this one worthy of a gruesome Edgar Allan Poe horror story: dead moll’s fingers, Xylaria longipes. Miniature hands of slender, spongy fingers attached to skeletal wrists, reaching up from the shallow grave of a decaying sycamore branch. This species has an explosive method for finding new hosts, shooting spores from microscopic flasks clustered in pits on its surface: fungal artillery, silent, unseen, performing its seasonal bombardment. The sun is setting, daylight has begun to fade. A chill has settled over the wood. Time for a final deep breath of glorious autumnal scent before heading home, lungs filled with the aroma of damp earth, decaying leaves and, no doubt, some spores of earthstar and dead moll’s fingers. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryAs world leaders inside the Cop26 conference centre in Glasgow boasted about pledges to slash greenhouse gas emissions and end deforestation, indigenous delegates gathered across the river Clyde to commemorate activists killed for trying to protect the planet from corporate greed and government inaction. At least 1,005 environmental and land rights defenders have been murdered since the Paris accords were signed six years ago, according to the international non-profit Global Witness. One in three of those killed were indigenous people. The dead include Berta Cáceres, winner of the prestigious Goldman prize for environmental defenders, who was shot dead at her home in Honduras in March 2016 for opposing the construction of an internationally financed dam on a river considered sacred by her Lenca people. As the names of the murdered defenders were projected on a large outdoor screen, indigenous activists from Mexico, Guatemala, Ecuador and the Philippines implored political leaders to listen to their struggles. “The Cop is a big business, a continuation of colonialism where people come not to listen to us, but to make money from our land and natural resources,” said Ita Mendoza, 46, an indigenous land defender from the Mixteca region of Oaxaca in southern Mexico, attending Cop for the first time. “What benefits does the Cop bring when more than a thousand people fighting to keep the planet alive have been killed [since Paris]?” Mendoza is part of the Futuros Indígenas (Indigenous Futures) collective from Mexico, who spent months crowdfunding to be able to attend Cop26 so their communities’ struggles and vision for protecting the planet might be heard. The collective did not get accreditation for the full two weeks, and as Cop first-timers are struggling to navigate the bureaucracy and structural barriers to their participation. Still, at least they made it. About two-thirds of civil society organizations who usually attend Cop could not come to Glasgow due to a combination of visa and accreditation problems, lack of access to Covid-19 vaccines and changing travel rules. Mostly absent are those from the global south – poorer, less industrialized countries who have contributed least to greenhouse gas emissions but are disproportionately harmed by increasingly intense extreme weather events linked to global heating such as drought, storms and floods. Their voices will be missed during the negotiations, but the problems run much deeper, according to multiple veteran Cop participants. In the 26 years since the first Cop was held in Berlin in 1995, international climate policies have mostly ignored or violated the cultural and territorial rights of indigenous peoples – despite them being recognized in 2001 as a formal constituency, one of nine broad thematic clusters (that also include business groups, environmental NGOs, women and youth groups and trade unions) permitted to observe and lobby negotiators. Then in 2015, the Paris accords legally recognized the crucial role of traditional knowledge and innovations by local communities and indigenous peoples in understanding and tackling the climate crisis. The move was meant to ensure they could participate and influence international climate policies in a more meaningful and equal way. But six years on, indigenous people interviewed by the Guardian say little has changed inside the UN-led negotiations, while outside environmental destruction continues unchecked in their communities and the impact of the climate crisis is getting worse. “Indigenous people are more visible but we’re not taken any more seriously; we’re romanticized and tokenized,” said Eriel Deranger, executive director of Indigenous Climate Action and member of the facilitated working group for North America, part of the new UN structures established after Paris. “They’re trying to collect and preserve indigenous knowledge while continuing to leave us out of the actual decision-making and positions of power. It’s the only lever we have to hold states and governments accountable, but it’s the same paternalistic system as ever. We’re set up to fail, so that’s where civil society must come in.” Tom Goldtooth, executive director of the North American Indigenous Environmental Network, who has attended every Cop since 1998, said indigenous knowledge holders were being “co-opted and manipulated by the Eurocentric UN system”. This week, it was announced that $1.7bn will be given to indigenous peoples and local communities in recognition of their key role in protecting the planet’s lands and forests. Net-zero targets, the central theme of Cop26, revolve around incentivizing carbon capture markets through mass reforestation, biofuels and new technologies – which many indigenous leaders see as false climate solutions that will lead to further land grabs and environmental and cultural destruction. For them, keeping fossil fuels and minerals in the ground is the only way to curtail global heating and its devastating impacts. Chief Ninawa Inu Huni Kui, president of the Huni Kui People’s Federation of the Brazilian Amazon, added: “Our vision is very different to those who make the decisions at Cop. We have ancestral connections to the environment and Mother Earth. These are spiritual spaces that we would never negotiate or offset for money, but the working groups don’t represent the views of our communities or explain what these carbon markets actually mean.” As the climate crisis intensifies with record floods, fires and heatwaves across the world, so does the violence against defenders. 2020 was the deadliest year on record for environmental and land defenders, with indigenous people accounting for half of the total 227 killed. Many, like Cáceres, had been resisting environmentally destructive extractive industries and energy projects including pipelines, dams, industrial wind and solar farms, and African palm plantations. Still, indigenous peoples have survived against the odds, and they are not giving up. “It’s a testament of our resilience that even after hundreds of years of colonization and betrayal that we indigenous communities are still willing to sacrifice our lives, health and energy for this last-ditch attempt to save the planet,” said Ruth Miller, climate justice director of the Alaska-based Native Movement, a Dena’ina Athabaskan and Ashkenazi Russian Jewish woman, who is a member of the Curyung tribe. “We’re here offering sustainable solutions to the rest of the world that require an ideological shift, not a green industry built on colonialism and repression. It’s up to them if they listen or not.” • This article was amended on 3 November 2021. An earlier version erroneously said that it was “50 years since Cop began”; it is actually 26 years since the first Cop was held.The disruption from the climate emergency being experienced by marine wildlife reached a new high in the first week of Cop26, when a female walrus was discovered sleeping on a submarine in a naval base in North Holland. Walruses normally live in the polar regions – several hundred miles north. This particular animal is one of at least two of the species that have been seen far from their Arctic habitat. Another wandering walrus, seen off the Scilly Islands, France, Spain and West Cork, Ireland, has since been sighted back in Icelandic waters. Freya, as the animal has been named, is the first of her species to visit the Netherlands in 23 years. She was spotted snoozing on a submarine in the naval port of Den Helder by Jeroen Hoekendijk, a Dutch scientist specialising in marine mammals. She appears to be in good health, although Hoekendijk – who observed the animal feeding on razor clams earlier – noted a raw wound in her front flippers. She is thought to have swum south, following the Danish and German coasts. (Suggestions that she or the ‘Irish’ walrus might have been cast adrift on a broken ice floe were widely ridiculed by marine scientists.) Hoekendijk was instructed that he wasn’t allowed to board the vessel to photograph the animal, only to be told; ‘But you can walk on it.’ He also noted that the vessel happens to be a ‘Walrus-class submarine’ – and is named Zr. Ms. Dolfijn. Social media users quipped that the Arctic mammal showed an “excellent example of animal-initiated civil resistance”, and that “considering military are huge contributors to carbon emissions, the walrus is probably protesting climate justice”. Others, however, thought it was very nice of the Dutch navy not to kick the walrus off their boat. But walruses are not just recent visitors to these southern waters. In 1456, William Caxton, the medieval chronicler and printer, recorded a walrus in the Thames (along with a swordfish and 20 whales). Caxton warned that the beast’s appearance was a sign of trouble to come. Although that might have been for the walruses themselves, since they were slaughtered for their thick hide, which was made into ropes, and for their tusks, which were carved into ivory objects such as the famous Lewis chess pieces. And five hundred years ago this year, in 1521, the Renaissance artist Albrecht Dürer, a great chronicler of the natural world, drew perhaps the first modern image of a walrus, said to have been stranded in ‘Netherlandish waters’. The sepia drawing goes on show in a major exhibition of Dürer’s work at the National Gallery in London later this month.Paul Dacre has departed his role as chair of the Daily Mail’s parent company, sources say, with the newspaper also no longer paying for his secretary and chauffeur. Although Dacre stood down as editor of the Daily Mail in 2018, he remained on the payroll after being given the largely honorific positions of chair and editor-in-chief of parent company Associated Newspapers. Two individuals with knowledge of the situation said this arrangement ended last week, with Dacre also losing access to his personal support staff. His departure from the company all but marks the end of Dacre’s 42-year-old association with the Daily Mail, which included a quarter of a century as editor. One source suggested it was the company’s decision to let Dacre go after he had served as chair for exactly three years. The Daily Mail declined to comment, while Dacre could not be reached. The departure clears the way for Dacre, 72, to make a new application to be chair of the media regulator Ofcom after he failed the interview process on the previous attempt despite the backing of Downing Street. Dacre, one of the leading media campaigners for Brexit, was rarely seen in the Daily Mail newsroom after moving upstairs to an office on the executive floor of the company’s Northcliffe House headquarters in west London. He used his position to pick battles with Geordie Greig, his Remain-supporting successor as Daily Mail editor. In one intervention Dacre wrote a public letter to the Financial Times accusing Greig of being “economic with the actualité” when it came to suggesting advertisers thought the newspaper had become too toxic. He also accused Greig of failing to pay enough respect to Dacre’s journalistic achievements. News of Dacre’s departure comes after Daily Mail owner Viscount Rothermere, the great-grandson of the newspaper’s founder, announced he is close to concluding a complicated series of financial transactions related to the business. This will allow Rothermere to take the parent company DMGT off the stock market and have total private control over the Daily Mail and its sister titles such as MailOnline, Metro, and the i. Dacre, who earned £2.7m in his final year as Daily Mail editor, is still the favourite to be appointed as chair of Ofcom, with the government re-running the appointment process for his benefit. The new job advert has been rewritten to favour a more confrontational candidate after Dacre was judged not to have met the original criteria during his first application. If he is successful on the second attempt, he will help steer policy on issues from regulation of social media platforms such as Facebook, complaints about television news and oversight of postal services.It is a sign of the confusion surrounding the Bank of England’s interest rate decision on Thursday that investors are unusually divided over which direction the central bank will go. Financial markets show that more than six in 10 investors are anticipating a hike in the cost of borrowing while a majority of City economists take the opposite view, telling a Reuters survey they expect rates will remain at historic lows, at least for the time being. In a big week for central banks, America’s Federal Reserve will today make its much more clearly signposted announcement on tapering the scale of its monthly stimulus package, though interest rates are expected to remain unchanged. Which way the BoE will swing, even at the 11th hour, is anyone’s guess. Ahead of one of the most finely balanced monetary policy (MPC) meetings in a decade, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange’s gauge of interest rate futures, known as BoE Watch, has stated there is a 100% likelihood of a rate rise in the UK this week. The views of City economists chime with MPC members Silvana Tenreyro and Catherine Mann, who have aired fears that an interest rate rise now could threaten a recovery that is already weakening. Governor Andrew Bailey, his chief economist Huw Pill and Michael Saunders, the former Citibank economist, have argued in speeches and comments that swift action could be needed to quell rising prices, swaying opinion in financial markets in favour of the BoE being the first major central bank to tighten policy. Bailey’s remark that the bank “will have to act and must do so if we see a risk, particularly to medium-term inflation” caught the eye of many investment funds seeking to hedge against rates going up. Deputy governor Sir Dave Ramsden is also believed to be in favour of Threadneedle Street pushing rates from historic lows after he voted with Saunders at the last MPC meeting to stop quantitative easing (QE) in its tracks ahead of a planned cut off date in December. QE is the second strand of the BoE’s stimulus programme and was ramped up by £250bn to £895bn after the pandemic hit. If four members of the committee have signed up to higher rates, it only takes one more to tip the scales. That puts another deputy governor, Ben Broadbent, in the frame, since the former Goldman Sachs economist has never voted against the governor in his seven years on the MPC. Deutsche bank economists Sanjay Raja and Panos Giannopoulos said after Bailey’s intervention that they were changing their view and that the BoE would “deliver its first post-pandemic rate hike of 0.15%”, adding: “We also expect the MPC to end its current QE programme – one month earlier than expected, trimming £20bn from QE.” Pride will be the deciding factor, according to analysts at Bank of America Securities. “Disappointing [markets] now, we think, would be Bailey’s least preferred option,” they said, though they conceded a rate rise was not a done deal. The confusion surrounding the outcome of Thursday’s meeting stems from the wide range of often contradictory data that has emerged in recent months. After Britain suffered its worst slump in the postwar era in March 2020, it has bounced back strongly this year. Job vacancy rates have spiralled higher and wages, which fell sharply last year, have recovered. Inflation, after dropping to almost zero earlier this year, has climbed since the spring above the BoE’s target level of 2% to 3.1%. At the MPC’s last meeting, it said rates would most likely need to rise by 0.5% next year to help bring down inflation to 2% over the next three years, though the minutes show it cautioned against early action. “All members agreed the outlook for the labour market, and hence underlying inflationary pressures, was particularly uncertain.” David Blanchflower, the Ivy League economics professor and former MPC member, said the committee should ask itself how much of the pandemic dust had cleared. “The furlough scheme has only just ended, consumer confidence is sliding backwards and businesses are nervous about the future. How can they say the economy is strong enough to cope with more expensive credit? If anything the indicators show the economy is weakening, which means that an interest rate rise would be a colossal mistake.” The other major central banks are a long way from raising rates. The Federal Reserve has held rates at near zero since the start of the pandemic and plans to continue adding to a $8.5tn QE programme, albeit at a slower pace. The European central bank has pledged to maintain its policy of negative interest rates and boost QE for the foreseeable future while the Bank of Japan said last week that it plans to redouble its efforts to stimulate a lacklustre recovery in the world’s third-largest economy. Ana Boata, head of economic research at credit insurer Euler Hermes, said Bailey’s comments “have pushed the BoE into a corner”. She believes a rate rise now could push the UK into recession, such is the pressure on household finances from higher prices, only moderate wage rises and significant tax rises due next spring. Martin Beck, the chief economic adviser to the EY Item Club, said while some MPC members might argue the government was pouring fuel on the inflationary fire, this view was misguided. “Tightening policy when other major central banks are still in loosening mode would seem incongruous, particularly when the UK economy was more affected by the pandemic than the US and the eurozone,” he said.What happens if you reverse engineer the raw materials of everyday objects such as an iPhone, a Starbucks cup or a bicycle? Lonneke Gordijn and Ralph Nauta of the Dutch art collective Studio Drift attempted to find out by stripping back the elements and depicting them proportionately in cubes and prisms. Titled Materialism, their show at the New York event space the Shed asks viewers to put aside culturally constructed ideas of various chemicals and view the objects with a renewed sense of wonder. Materialism is presented within another show, Fragile Future, that is equally enamored with the material world, finding a certain grace in enormous blocks of concrete. Fragile Future’s five minivan-sized concrete blocks (“Drifters”) appear to float through the air, rotating and performing feats of choreography that start out free-form before tracing specific shapes around the viewer. It’s set to music composed by Anohni, an artist long preoccupied by questions of human ecology. Nauta describes the pieces in Materialism as “deconstructions of everyday objects that we find interesting”. By nudging us to remember that iPhones contain elements like nickel that are environmentally destructive to mine – along with trace quantities of cobalt and tungsten, which have been linked to conflict mining – Studio Drift wants us to realize the connections between consumer goods and the societies that create them. In a less world-historical sense, phones themselves have changed a great deal. Comparing the components of an iPhone 4S with those in a now obsolete Nokia 3210, Nauta observes that the shift has been enormous in barely 20 years. The Nokia’s main component is the circuitry of an actual telephone, whereas with iPhones, the biggest chunk is specially developed glass. The iPhone 4S is made of specially developed glass along with steel, polycarbonate, graphite, copper, nickel, and a range of other materials. The Nokia 3210 includes polycarbonate/acrylonitrile butadiene styrene, nylon and aluminum. Its main component is the circuitry of an actual telephone. “At first, the function was more important,” Nauta says of early-aughts phones. “The screen was minimal. The connection was more important, but now it’s the visual connection. There are a lot of details: the cobalt, the mercury, the nickel, which comes from certain mines. We’re going deeper into that for our next project, putting in an augmented layer where you can actually dive into the object and find more about the materials.” A Nokia 3210. Apple claims to have phased out mercury in its products in 2009, but in Materialism’s breakdown of a Nokia – a company that once attempted to manufacture a tablet called Mercury – a spongy, kelly-green prism jumps out from the mostly transparent or grayscale. In this context, it looks eerie, almost radioactive. The show’s spookiest piece might be the Internet, a single, dark-gray block. It’s silicon, Nauta says. Using the time-honored principle of E = MC2, he calculated the weight of all the electrons running through the internet on a specific date in 2020. The total? About 60kg, up from 25 grams not so long before. Many of these prisms are representations of the materials, not the materials themselves. This owes less to toxicity than to the fussy properties of some materials at room temperature, or their cost. The internet of 2020 is represented by a large block indicating the weight of all the electrons running through it, with a much smaller block showing how it appeared in 2000. Nauta says the ratios on display are more important. Take the Big Mac Menu, for example. “We kept it recognizable,” he says. “We could have gone to a molecular level, but with this, we thought you can still point out the fries, the sugar, the salt, the saturated fats, the pickle, the straw. It’s interesting, because people do recognize it and get all of the blocks correct. So we have a logic in our minds that sees this hamburger and understands the size of the block that should be for the pickle, which I find fascinating.” The Big Mac Menu features water, bread, fries, Coke, fat, meat and other ingredients that ‘people do recognize’, Nauta says. Like the human body itself, the Starbucks Cup is mostly water. Nauta says that when he pays $5 for a cup of tea, he feels like someone screwed him over, but when he gets coffee with milk in it, he feels like it’s worth it. (“But it’s the same amount of water you’re buying!” he says.) The Starbucks Cup is mostly water, but also contains paper, coffee, wood and polystyrene. Once deconstructed, this poses all sorts of questions about how arbitrary human economics can be, from quirks of the human palate to the fact that the global coffee industry appears consumed with questions of fair-labor practices far more than tea is. The more processed an item is, the harder it becomes for our minds to process. An AK-47. Geopolitics shows up in several pieces, namely the M16 and the AK-47. The AK-47, one of the best-known Soviet exports, has become a totem of rightwing American ideas of liberty – it’s a sort of cold war narrative in miniature. This humble Kalashnikov, Nauta says, is a $500 tool whose bullets are steel. By contrast, the M16 is practically a luxury good. The AK-47 consists of birch wood, steel, paint and other materials, while the bullet contains steel, smokeless powder, lead and more – as compared with the high-grade polymer and nickel bullets of the M16, Nauta says. “The AK is made with wood, but in the States, it’s this high-grade polymer that’s specifically developed for the M16 that makes these weapons tens of thousands of dollars, and the bullets are made out of nickel,” he says. “These different war machines – why do they function in a certain way?” Then there’s the Bike, as much a symbol of the Netherlands as the tulip. Unlike the smartphone, it’s something most people can dismantle and fix in their garage. And yet even an analog technology can, when reduced to its essence, renew a sense of wonder. The bike, which, unlike the smartphone, is something people can dismantle themselves, is made of rubber, polyurethane foam, steel, aluminum and other materials. “When it rains here, or it’s -15C here, everyone’s still on their bike,” Nauta says. “Everybody knows how to repair their tire or put a chain back on their bike. In Amsterdam, you go through three a year, and it becomes this piece of mechanics that’s just a part of your life. Still, all these things that you collect, it’s impossible to process. We live in a very strange world.” Fragile Future is at the Shed until 19 DecemberNHS mobile test-and-trace units run by Mitie are cutting the guaranteed pay of workers by a third after winning a new contract from the government. The outsourcing firm, which employs about 1,000 people at mobile testing sites, has told workers that from 8 November they will be guaranteed pay for an eight-hour shift each day, rather than 12 hours, slashing secure pay to £80 a day from £120. Workers previously received the £120 no matter how many hours they worked, they will now receive extra pay only if they work more than eight hours. Workers said the pay change came amid a surge in demand for their services with some sites dealing with more than 600 people in a day. One worker said some supervisors were so busy they did not have time for the regulation half-hour break. Another said the mobile test-and-trace workers had suffered “a huge blow to morale” because of the pay changes that are hitting shortly before Christmas. “Personally, I feel betrayed and seen as disposable by Mitie. The changes mean that everyone will be losing hundreds of pounds in earnings each month, with those who live the closest to and furthest from our sites losing significantly more with the new mileage proposals. “The bumbling way Mitie have handed this and their poor communication to employees is just shocking,” the worker said. The latest cuts come after fellow mobile test-and-trace operator G4S cut the pay of some workers by up to 5% in the light of a new government contract that specifies they should receive the real living wage. Some G4S workers were told their hourly pay rate would drop from £10 to a maximum of £9.50 outside London, a cut of 5%. Those in London will drop from a maximum £11 an hour to £10.85, a 1.4% cut. Mitie said there were no standard shift timings for mobile-testing units and the hours could change depending on a range of factors including location and weather. It said workers would be paid for the time from when the mobile unit left its base location until it returned. They will also now receive payment towards travel expenses – of 45p per mile from the testing base – as well as expenses such as parking fees as set out by the government. It said that previously these costs were factored into the workers’ daily rate. A Mitie spokesperson, said: “We are introducing new procedures to ensure a consistent and fair approach to the payment terms for all colleagues working at mobile-testing units. “These changes better reflect the average shift length while still ensuring that colleagues are paid for any additional time they work, as well as for their business mileage and other associated driving expenses.” Mitie said it had been directed to pay travel expenses by the government. The UK Health Security Agency, which was set up this year to replace Public Health England in the handling of public health protection and dealing with infectious diseases, is understood to be reviewing its position on travel expenses and the terms of payments have yet to be agreed with all operators. G4S did not respond directly when asked if it was planning to pay travel expenses for its workers. A spokesperson said: “The terms and conditions of our team members will remain in accordance with government guidelines and our contractual requirements, as it has been at all times throughout the delivery of this important contract.”Wild Weather: Our World Under Threat 7.30pm, BBC One Wildfires, dust storms, floods. If it feels as if we’re living in a dystopian world where freak weather events are becoming commonplace – that’s because, well … we are. Panorama’s Justin Rowlatt investigates how this is affecting civilisation, including the people of Madagascar who are on the brink of the world’s first climate change-induced famine. They’re not exactly easy realisations to digest, but that surely just proves how important it is to stay tuned. Hollie Richardson Location, Location, Location 8pm, Channel 4 Kirstie and Phil revisit couples who, a few years ago, had to compromise. In 2019, Alistair and Candice dreamed of starting a family in the swankiest part of Swindon – now we see how they like their less glamorous location. In 2018, Thomas and Angelina prioritised a garden in Bolton. Are they even using it? Jack Seale Universe 9pm, BBC Two Is there anybody out there? Professor Brian Cox continues his mind-boggling exploration of the cosmos, this time looking at other lifeforms. Over the last few decades, ultra-sensitive telescopes and dogged detective work have transformed alien planet-hunting from science fiction into hard fact. Are we really alone? HR The Love Trap 10pm, Channel 4 The savage dating show continues, as David’s friend enters the mansion acting as an undercover single woman – she will decide which trio will be taken to the trap room this week. Will someone please just take them to the First Dates restaurant for a nice meal instead? HR Station 19 10pm, Sky Witness After the recent crossover that saw the firefighters of Station 19 join forces with the Grey’s Anatomy medical gang for a double helping of melodramatic crisis management, it’s back to normal for this fifth season. Normal in this instance meaning volatile relationships being negotiated amid professional chaos – in tonight’s case, thanks to reckless behaviour at a festival. Phil Harrison The L Word: Generation Q 10.15pm, Sky Atlantic Set over more than 10 years after The L Word, this sequel confidently carries on unpicking LGBTQ+ love, heartbreak, sex and setbacks in its second season. Tonight’s opener sees Bette forced to navigate some major changes, while Shane gets pulled into LA’s poker scene. HR Film choice The Harder They Fall, (The Bullitts, 2021), Netflix The fact that a western with an almost entirely black cast is surprising says a lot about the genre’s partiality down the decades. Director and co-writer Jeymes Samuel is here to change all that, taking real historical figures and letting them fly in a kinetic drama with more than a nod to the stylings of Quentin Tarantino and Spike Lee, but which still loves a good spaghetti western closeup. Jonathan Majors is in endearing form as outlaw Nat Love, whose revenge mission after his parents are killed leads him to Idris Elba’s bad guy Rufus Buck. The likes of Zazie Beetz, Regina King, Lakeith Stanfield and Delroy Lindo give classy support in a fun, bloody revisioning. Simon Wardell Live sport Champions League football: Liverpool v Atlético Madrid BT Sport 2, 7pm. The Group B match from Anfield.Salma Hayek is dreadfully jetlagged, which is one of the perils of having homes around the world and frequently hopping between them. “Let me tell you about my craziness,” she says by video chat from her home in west London. “I’m here for less than a week, then I go back [to the US] for five days for my husband’s work, then I come back here for my work, then I go back to LA because I’m getting a star on the Hollywood Boulevard! It’s crazy,” she says. After this interview she has a fitting for dresses for various movie premieres. “We’re just making it up as we go along!” she says in exasperation at her crazy life. Despite the craziness, she looks impeccable in a Gucci dress (“As comfortable as your sweats!”), framed by the enormous mirrored painting behind her. “It’s by [Takashi] Murakami,” she says casually of one of the most expensive living artists. She blows a kiss to her husband, François-Henri Pinault, as he leaves the house. Pinault is the CEO of the fashion conglomerate Kering, which is behind labels such as Gucci, Balenciaga, Yves Saint Laurent and many others. The Pinault family wealth is estimated at $49bn. It’s crazy. Hayek could have easily opted for the cosy, cosseted life of a mega-rich housewife. And, to be honest, there are times when she does sound a bit like one. Her favourite outfits at the moment are Balenciaga dresses: “I have four that I love,” she says. Of course, it helps that her husband owns the brand. Is she allowed to wear brands that aren’t owned by her husband? “I’m allowed to do whatever I want!” she says with mock indignation, although she adds “it’s just easier to buy the [Kering] brands. They know me there.” Yet, despite possessing a walk-in closet presumably as big as an average house, Hayek is not your average gazillionaire’s wife. By the time she met Pinault, she was 39 and a famous actor with an Oscar nomination, for 2002’s Frida. Plenty of actors before her had married wealthy men and then disappeared behind the fortress wall; Grace Kelly gave up her career to become the princess of Monaco, and Prince Rainier had a fraction of Pinault’s money. But Hayek, 55, was never going to do that. “I love what I do,” she says when I ask what motivates her to work. Plus, she says, she pays for her own expenses in her marriage: “Sometimes I struggle because I have a lot of expenses, but I like that sensation. It keeps me real,” she says solemnly. (Mind you, Hayek’s “real” is the bank balance of a Hollywood star.) This month alone, she stars in two films: the latest Marvel megamovie, Eternals, and House of Gucci, the biopic of the Gucci family. I’ve only been allowed to see Eternals, and it’s undeniably pleasing to see a female superhero older than 21 – and a deaf one, a gay one, an Asian one and a black one – among the seemingly endless Eternals heroes. That casting “feels like a miracle”, she laughs. “It has to start somewhere, and I’m glad it starts with me!” But good intentions can’t disguise that the script is a load of hooey (the Guardian gave the film two stars). I ask Hayek if she agreed to star in it because it was directed by Chloé Zhao, who won an Oscar last year for Nomadland, given she has long been a vocal supporter of female directors. “Yes, absolutely. I was in awe of her every second I was with her,” she says. “I thought, ‘Wow, I am working with a Chinese female director,’ and there’s a satisfaction in that that’s bigger than the film: it’s watching another woman be so brave, be so clever, be so inspiring.” Eternals is Hayek’s first superhero movie – “And I found it fascinating!” I ask why she thinks superhero movies are so popular now, but instead of making the usual economic arguments (eg they’re easier to sell to Chinese audiences than American dramas), she makes a very Hayek one: “I have a strange theory about it. It’s out there, so get ready: I think that because we only use from 3% to 10% of our brain, we know there’s a lot more to a human being that we have not discovered. So I think the superhero story makes us wonder if there’s more that we can do. That’s what they do to me anyway.” By her usual charismatic standards, Hayek is a little flat today because of the jetlag. But she warms up on subjects she cares about, so we talk a bit about Frida, her true labour of love, which she spent eight years getting made. But this, alas, leads to a subject she’s a little less fond of: Harvey Weinstein, who produced it. In 2017, Hayek wrote a blistering piece for the New York Times, detailing how he sexually harassed her for years, and how she kept saying no: “No to me taking a shower with him. No to letting him watch me take a shower. No to letting him give me a massage. No to letting a naked friend of his give me a massage. No to letting him give me oral sex. No to my getting naked with another woman. No no no no no … And with every refusal came Harvey’s Machiavellian rage.” Hayek, understandably, isn’t super-excited about rehashing this particular part of her history: “It’s so boring and old!” she groans. But when I tell her that Weinstein bullied me, got me banned from restaurants and parties and even wrote an article about me because he didn’t like things I’d written, she perks right up. “Now I want to interview you! Now, this is an interesting conversation because, if you really look at my piece, you’ll see that I really focused on the bullying [rather than the sexual harassment], and I do think women got it worse [from him].” Weinstein “is not the only man to reassure himself by knowing he can destroy women,” she says. I ask if she normalised his bullying as a way to cope with it. “To a degree. And I did feel all right [when he bullied me]. OK, I would shake [afterwards] and it did depress me, but there was a cartoon aspect about the whole thing. When he would call me up [during the making of Frida] and scream, ‘Why do you have a [monobrow] and moustache? I didn’t hire you to look ugly!’ I was like, ‘But didn’t you ever look at a picture of Frida Kahlo?’ If a man was playing Cyrano de Bergerac, he wouldn’t say, ‘What’s with the nose?’” I start to ask about her claim in the article that she thinks the reason Weinstein never assaulted her was that she was friends with Robert Rodriguez, Quentin Tarantino and George Clooney, but she interrupts me. “Also I was very strong,” she says pointedly. This sounds a little like she’s suggesting some of Weinstein’s victims could be seen as weak, which seems unlikely from a woman who has done so much activism on behalf of women. So I ask if she just means she said no. “I didn’t just say no. I’m a force to be recognised,” she stresses again. “He never saw me weak. It’s not that I’m not afraid, but you’re not going to see it. I can be almost intimidating in my calm strength, you know?” When did she learn to control her fear? “I don’t know. Maybe animals. I have a lot of animals and I know that it’s very important they don’t smell the fear. But I don’t know.” By the way, she says, Weinstein was “not the first or last one” who treated her like that. In Hollywood or in general? “In general! We’re girls! … So you learn to be brave. It’s not easy, but you have to.” Are there men who bullied or harassed her who are still working in Hollywood? “I’m sure – it was systematic. But one of my strengths is I don’t hold a grudge,” she says, and then adds, “I also believe people can change … I’m not interested in shaming anyone. I just want it to stop.” Hayek was born and raised in Mexico, and I ask what constituted a worse problem for her in Hollywood: the harassment or the racism. “Well, it comes hand in hand. When they disrespect your background, they feel you’re weaker and they prey on weakness,” she says. A few years ago, Hayek revealed in an interview with the Guardian that the director Ivan Reitman wouldn’t even let her audition for the lead of a film because the part “wasn’t written Latin”. Which movie was that? “Ummm, the leading man was, um, Indiana Jones?” Harrison Ford? “Yes! Harrison Ford! The woman was supposed to work in the fashion business and, ironically, [Reitman] thought it wouldn’t be believable for me. It was Six Days, Seven Nights and Anne Heche got the part. And then she came out! Just before the movie was released! And they thought I wouldn’t be believable [in a romance with Ford]!” she hoots. Did she lose many parts because of her ethnicity? “So many! I’m not going to name names, but there was one part written for me, for a Mexican, and it was played by not even a Latina,” she says. And yet she was criticised for playing a Puerto Rican character on 30 Rock, I say. “Ahhh, it’s complicated because they wrote that for me. Probably if I had not done that, [that character] would not have happened. As an actress, I want to play a Puerto Rican, I want to play a Colombian, I want to play a Martian! As an actress, that is what it’s supposed to be. On the other hand, it’s good to give people opportunities. But there has to be a balance, because if we restrain people too much, everyone is going to be afraid to do anything: ‘You need a name because you need to promote the thing: oh, it’s too complicated, let’s just get a white girl.’ So we need to be realistic and to strike a balance. I’m not black and white about this, or about anything.” Hayek grew up in a wealthy family in Mexico, the daughter of an oil executive and an opera singer. She became hugely famous in her own country at the age of 23 when she starred in a telenovela and slowly broke into Hollywood when Rodriguez cast her in Desperado opposite Antonio Banderas. Soon after, she founded her own production company, through which she would make Ugly Betty and Frida, the film that really confirmed her as a star. From early on, she was an activist for helping women, including testifying to the US Senate to reauthorise the Violence Against Women Act and donating to women’s shelters. She also bought a ranch, which she uses as an animal sanctuary. For a long time, she assumed she would just live as a single woman with her animals, but then she met Pinault, through their mutual friend, the late designer L’Wren Scott. They have a 14-year-old daughter. Trying not to channel Mrs Merton too much, I ask what first appealed to her about mega-billionaire Pinault. “He’s like no one I ever met before,” she says, clearly relishing the subject. “He’s a fascinating man and it’s been 16 years and I’m still fascinated by him. I’d met amazing men, but I don’t know if anybody saw me as clearly as him. And I know who he is. Something about his soul, I don’t know how to explain it, but it’s pure.” During lockdown, Hayek got dangerously ill with Covid, but refused to go to hospital, preferring to stay home. “It was terrifying. But it was also kind of lovely to be in the house with him, who is my rock,” she says. She was 41 when their daughter, Valentina, was born and I ask what the upsides are to being an older mother. “You appreciate it so much more because, by the time you get there, you’ve been through the fear of maybe it might never happen. Also you know what you want to do with your life, so you don’t have the pressure of: ‘What am I going to do with my life? And I’m a mother!’ When you marry young, it’s hard because maybe you don’t know who you are yet. I was a little bit wiser,” she says. And as she heads off for more fittings for her upcoming premieres, Murakami twinkling over her shoulder, who would disagree? Eternals is in cinemas from 5 November. House of Gucci is released on 26 November.Streaming services, such as Netflix and Spotify, online newspapers, ebooks and items reserved online but picked up in stores could be subject to a new online sales tax if ministers give it the green light. In a long-anticipated final report on a review of business rates the Treasury said it would shortly launch a consultation on a new tax for online goods and services which was expected to conclude next year. Should an online sales tax be pursued, the report said “design choices” would need to be made on what should be taxable, including digital products, sales agreed via email or instant message, and essentials such as most foods, medicines and children’s clothes, which currently do not attract VAT. But the consultation added that it was likely any extra cost of such a tax would be passed on to consumers at a high rate, suggesting it would be “regressive” – or borne more heavily by low-income households. Publication of the detailed review comes after the government announced at the budget last week it would “explore the arguments for and against” an online sales tax that could fund a reduction in business rates for high street retailers. The report said a new tax set at 1% to 2% would not raise enough money to replace business rates, but could “help to rebalance the tax burden between bricks and mortar shops and online retail”. Despite widespread calls from the retail and hospitality industries, who partly blame hefty business rates bills for mass closures on the British high street, the report said there was no case for a fundamental revamp of the property tax which brings in £25bn a year. The government review said: “The evidence provided has not established that the business rates system is responsible for the shift to online or for broader problems on the high street. Other factors that may be relevant include changing consumer preferences, improvement in the choice and convenience available to online shoppers, and differences in the amount of stock that physical stores carry as compared with online retailers.” Store owners say they are disadvantaged by paying higher taxes than online specialists such as Amazon, Boohoo and Asos who divert shoppers away from local thoroughfares. Labour last month pledged to scrap business rates and undertake the “biggest overhaul of business taxation in a generation” if it was voted in at the next election. In his budget speech last week the chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said he would help small retail and hospitality businesses with a temporary 50% cut. However, industry groups said the cut, which is capped at £110,000 per business and will last a year, would only benefit small retailers, bars and restaurants and pubs, because larger shops such as a single department store can pay more than £1m a year in rates. The cancellation of next year’s planned rise in business rates – which would have added just over £1bn to bills, according to analysts at the real estate adviser Altus, and of which a quarter would have been paid by retailers – was welcomed but not seen as a long-term fix.In some respects, preventing climate breakdown is highly complicated. But in another, it’s really simple: we need to leave fossil fuels in the ground. All the bluster and grandstanding, the extravagant promises and detailed mechanisms discussed in Glasgow this week amount to nothing if this simple and obvious thing doesn’t happen. A recent study in the scientific journal Nature suggests that to stand a 50% chance of avoiding more than 1.5C of global heating, we need to retire 89% of proven coal reserves, 58% of oil reserves and 59% of fossil methane (“natural gas”) reserves. If we want better odds than 50-50, we’ll need to leave almost all of them untouched. Yet most governments with major reserves are determined to make the wrong choice. As the latest production gap report by the UN and academic researchers shows, over the next two decades, unless there’s a rapid and drastic change in policy, coal is likely to decline a little, but oil and gas production will keep growing. By 2030, governments are planning to extract 110% more fossil fuels than their Paris agreement pledge (“limit the temperature increase to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels”) would permit. Even nations that claim to be leading the transition mean to keep drilling. In the US, Joe Biden promised to pause all new leases for oil and gas on public lands and in offshore waters. His government was sued by 14 Republican states. Though climate campaigners argue that Biden has many other tools for preventing such leases from being issued, he immediately folded, and his government has now begun the process of auctioning drilling rights in Alaskan waters and the Gulf of Mexico. It’s just the kind of weakness the Republicans were hoping to exploit. Germany has promised to phase out coal production by 2038 (far too late, by the way). Yet it is still developing new deposits. For example, the village of Lützerath in North Rhine-Westphalia, which sits above a thick seam of the filthiest kind of coal – lignite – is currently being destroyed. But if Germany abides by its own rule, the mine will need to be abandoned before it reaches full production. So either homes and forests are being trashed for no reason, or the German government doesn’t intend to honour its promise. In the UK, the government still insists on what it calls “maximising economic recovery” of oil and gas. Last year, it offered 113 new licences to explore offshore reserves. It aims at least to double the amount of fossil fuels that are ready to be exploited here. Every speech and pledge and gesture at Glasgow this week is thistledown, by comparison to the hard facts of new coalmines, oil and gas fields. It’s the mining and drilling that counts: the rest is distraction. But distraction is big business. The oil corporations have spent many millions of dollars on ads, memes and films to convince us they’ve gone green. But the latest report on this issue by the International Energy Agency reveals that in 2020 “clean energy investments by the oil and gas industry accounted for only around 1% of total capital expenditure”. Since the Paris agreement in 2015, the world’s 60 largest banks have poured $3.8tn into fossil fuel companies. People in rich nations seek to blame climate breakdown on India and China, which continue to develop new coal plants. But an estimated 40% of the “committed emissions” for the Asian coal plants sampled by researchers can be attributed to banks and investors in Europe and the US. Even if guilt were to be apportioned by nationality – a preposterous notion in a world where money moves freely and power is wielded across borders – we could not detach ourselves from these decisions. There’s scarcely a fossil fuel project on Earth that has not been facilitated by public money. In 2020, according to the International Monetary Fund, governments spent $450bn in direct subsidies for the fossil fuel industry. The IMF accounts the other costs the industry imposes on us – pollution, destruction and climate chaos – at $5.5tn. But I find such figures meaningless: dollars can’t capture the loss of human life and the trashing of ecosystems, let alone the prospect of systemic environmental collapse. One in five of all deaths, according to a recent estimate, are now caused by fossil fuel pollution. Public finance corporations are still pouring money into coal, oil and gas: in the past three years, G20 governments and multinational development banks outrageously spent two and a half times as much money on international finance for fossil fuels as they did on renewables. On one account, 93% of the world’s coal plants are protected from market forces by special government contracts and uncompetitive tariffs. The UK has reduced its petroleum revenue tax for companies drilling for oil to zero. As a result, our oilfields are likely soon to cost the exchequer more money than it gains. What’s the point? For just $161bn – a fraction of the money governments spend on supporting fossil fuels – they could buy out and shut down every coal plant on Earth. If they did so as part of a just transition, they would create more employment than they destroy. For example, research by Oil Change International suggests the UK could generate three jobs in clean energy for every one lost from oil and gas. Everything about the relationship between nation states and the fossil fuel industry is perverse, stupid and self-destructive. For the sake of this dirty industry’s profits and dividends – overwhelmingly concentrated among a tiny number of the world’s people – governments commit us to catastrophe. All over the world, people are mobilising to change this, and their voices need to be heard in Glasgow. The campaign to create a fossil fuel non-proliferation treaty has gathered the signatures of thousands of scientists and more than 100 Nobel laureates. Europe Beyond Coal is bringing together movements across the continent to stop new mines and close existing ones. The visionary governments of Denmark and Costa Rica have founded the Beyond Oil and Gas Alliance. We should pressure our governments to join it. And yes, it really is this simple. We have the technology required to replace fossil fuels. There’s plenty of money, which is currently being squandered on the destruction of life on Earth. The transition could take place in months, if governments willed it. The only thing that stands in the way is the power of legacy industries and the people who profit from them. This is what needs to be overthrown. The handwaving, the complexity, the grandiloquent distraction in Glasgow are designed above all for one purpose: not to accelerate this transition, but to thwart it. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnist Cop26 and a greener future, with George Monbiot. Join a Guardian Live online event on climate justice on Thursday 4 November at 8pm. Tickets at gu.com/guardianliveThe ideal dancer’s body is unrealistic in many ways: bendier than a Barbie, incredibly lean but super-strong, with very particular proportions (in ballet, small head, long legs, short torso, high insteps). And also, it’s hairless. As with swimmers, athletes, gymnasts and others who wear leotards for a living, constant depilation is part of the job. That goes for men as well as women. “I choose to shave because it gives me a sense of readiness,” says dancer and choreographer Eliot Smith. “I believe it gives me better outlines of the body against the stage lights.” On ballet message boards, it’s not uncommon to find parents of teenage boys asking what to do about hairy legs showing under white tights (wear two pairs of tights, or paint over hairs with pancake are two suggestions, if shaving isn’t an option). But is there an alternative? When pole dancer Leila Davis was pictured in an Adidas campaign in March showing off armpit fuzz, as well as toned abs, there were plenty of online haters, predictably, but lots of lovers, too. And there are a few – although not many – contemporary dancers who are happy to let their body hair be seen on stage. “I want it to be normalised,” says Jessie Roberts-Smith, a performer with Scottish Dance Theatre. And independent choreographer Ellie Sikorski sees it as part of a bigger picture. “It’s not the first fight I would pick about the homogeneity of bodies on stage,” she says. “But there’s something archaic in dance – where your body is policed in certain ways. You’re taught not to have agency over your body and body hair is a tiny detail of that.” In ballet, land of smooth, clean lines and impossible perfection, it’s hard to imagine unkempt hairs sprouting up on stage any time soon. “In classical ballet you’re never going to see a beautiful tutu princess with loads of armpit hair,” laughs Nancy Osbaldeston, a principal with Ballet Vlaanderen in Antwerp, who fits in leg shaving and Brazilian waxes around her performance schedule. She recently danced Palmos, a ballet of bare legs and high-cut leotards by Andonis Foniadakis. “There were definitely some crotchy moments,” she recalls. In fact, Osbaldeston thinks hair removal is so much part of the job that dancers might be able to claim it as an expense. “I think someone did tell me that if you have a good accountant to do your taxes, you can write it off,” she says. When Osbaldeston danced with English National Ballet, she remembers a woman coming in once and waxing everyone in turn as a job lot. Begoña Cao, winner of a National Dance award, had a similar experience. “We’d put a mat down and lock the door.” Laser removal is popular as well. “I like to be tidy,” adds Cao. “The thought never crossed my mind to not take it off. If you have a tutu on, the audience from further out can’t see anything. But you’ve got your colleagues and people in the wings and those ballet fanatics that have their binoculars!” Outside ballet, though, there are some hairs peeking through, in line with a wider cultural shift among Gen Z-ers happy to show off their armpits au naturel on Instagram, or even dye their body hair. And then there’s the beauty brand Billie, which advertises razors with pictures of models and their proudly furry bikini lines. “I do feel like we’re getting more into a world where both are normal,” says Roberts-Smith, who is 26 and leaves her hair as it is, which is fine by Scottish Dance Theatre. “I don’t even think about it any more. I’m lucky to be in a company that embraces different shapes and sizes and hairless and hairy. It needs to be happening. For me, it is one of the most profound inequalities between men and women, that we have been removing parts of ourselves for such a long time, and that’s just deemed normal by society. It’s bonkers when you think about it, absolutely bananas.” Obviously, men do shave their faces, but it’s the sense of disgust attached to women’s hair that’s so gendered. “There’s all this deep-seated stuff about cleanliness, which just isn’t true,” says Roberts-Smith. Sikorski, 33, stopped shaving her legs at 17. “Because, I suppose, I discovered that was possible,” she says, and because shaving irritated her skin. She’s more likely to get a reaction now on the tube than on stage – she’s had people take pictures of her when she’s been holding on to an overhead support. There’s a hierarchy of hirsuteness, though. Sikorski remembers that, in one of the first pieces she made, she wore a swimming costume. “I had hairy legs, hairy armpits, but I plucked my bikini line.” “I think the bikini line is still a no-no,” says Robert-Smith, with regard to the move towards letting it all hang out – although she has a leotard piece coming up and isn’t planning to buy any Veet. There are plenty more hair-related issues – most seriously, the dancers with afro hair who are told flat-out that it’s not appropriate for ballet. French dancer Marie-Astrid Mence talked about this in the film Pointe Black last year. The vagaries of personal grooming may seem trifling by contrast. But the discrimination against afro hair is changing, according to Northern Ballet’s dancer Aerys Merrill, who’s heard those stories, but hasn’t experienced negative comments about her own afro hair. In the US, she danced Clara in The Nutcracker with her natural hair proudly on show. “Some companies are more accepting; some companies want it to be extremely uniform, with the same slicked-back look,” she says. Like Merrill, 17-year-old Taïs Vinolo, who appeared in Amazon’s The Show Must Go On advert last Christmas, used to straighten her hair. “I didn’t feel comfortable with my own hair until two or three years ago,” she says. Now she’s wondering if we’ll see ballet dancers with braided hair on stage. “I hope it’s going to happen. I’m pretty sure we are close to it,” she says, but adds that as a young pre-professional dancer, “I am scared to approach that subject with my teachers.” Some choreographers actively incorporate (head) hair into their choreography, Pina Bausch being the queen of long flowing locks, whether swooping around the dancer like an extra limb in 2006’s Vollmond or being used to whip the cruel Bluebeard in her 1977 version of the folk tale. Osbaldeston says she missed out on being cast once because she had short hair and the choreographer wanted it long and swishy. Choreographers have a vision in mind – and that includes facial hair. Sikorski knows of a male dancer who has lost jobs because he won’t shave his beard off. Smith has become more relaxed about his own facial hair, he tells me, in line with a general shift across the industry that includes dancers having visible tattoos. As an artistic director he has an open mind, he says, but expects the dancers to look “presentable” and be open to what’s needed for a particular character. “I guess it’s a question of whether ballet is a personal expression or whether a choreographer has the final say over how you look,” says dancer James Forbat who, incidentally, shaves his chest and leg hair out of choice for performances, but has never explicitly been asked to. Sikorski raises a similar point. Do you see a body as an abstract tool to create visual art, or a person who can’t be separated from what they’re doing? “People think you can abstract a body, and I fundamentally think you can’t, and shouldn’t,” she says. “That’s where I differ with a lot of people in the dance world.” All these dancers agree on one thing, though: each to their own, everyone’s personal choice should be respected. But the decision to shave and wax, or wear your hair straightened or natural, inevitably reflects the values of their art forms as well as the wider culture at large. Osbaldeston doesn’t think any of her female colleagues will stop shaving their armpits soon. “I would feel bad for partnering, if a boy was holding you under your arms,” she says. “But they have hair there too,” she muses, “so I don’t know the difference really.”Jodie Comer has said the record-breaking drama Killing Eve should end on a “good note” after the next series rather than continuing until it is “kicked out the door”. The BBC spy thriller, starring Comer as the psychopathic assassin Villanelle and Sandra Oh as British intelligence officer Eve Polastri, is approaching its fourth and final series. Speaking to Harper’s Bazaar, the Liverpool-born actor, 28, admitted she tried to avoid thinking about the show’s conclusion. Comer, who received the editor’s choice award at the Harper’s Bazaar women of the year awards on Tuesday, said: “I’m trying not to think about it too much, honestly. It’s sad, you know? I’ve been with this character for a really, really long time. “I would rather we ended on a good note and kept our integrity, instead of going on and on, and being kicked out the door.” Comer said there were many layers to Villanelle : “She’s multifaceted and you can’t really pin her down. She’s instilled a sense of fearlessness in me. Through playing her, I’ve had to shed my own self-consciousness. “Villanelle’s style is loud and a little bit mismatched. She dresses for herself, which I adore. I’m happy when I’m comfortable, I want to explore fashion but ultimately, I want to feel like myself. Villanelle would probably hate me.” The actor said she hoped to appear in a science-fiction project and work with the French film director and screenwriter Julia Ducournau, who won the Palme d’Or at this year’s Cannes film festival. “I’d love to do some very grounded sci-fi and I really, really want to work with Julia Ducournau,” she said. “What I love about her is that she clearly has such a distinct voice and her films are so unexpected.” Killing Eve follows Oh’s Polastri as she attempts to track down and arrest Comer’s Villanelle, but as the pursuit unfolds the pair develop a mutual obsession with one another. In 2018, the first season set a record for BBC iPlayer when it notched up 10.8 million requests in seven days. This record was later beaten by the television adaptation of Sally Rooney’s Normal People. Based on the Villanelle novel series by Luke Jennings, each series has been led by a different female head writer, with the first penned by the Fleabag creator, Phoebe Waller-Bridge. Emerald Fennell was head writer for season two, Suzanne Heathcote worked on season three and the fourth and final series is led by Laura Neal, who previously worked on the Netflix comedy-drama series Sex Education.Today our planet is a lively place: the climate swings from greenhouse to icehouse and back again, while earthquakes, volcanoes, mountain ranges and ocean trenches are all signs of its restless surface. But if you go back far enough, you reach a period where Earth was a very dull place. Nicknamed the “Boring Billion”, the period between 1850m and 850m years ago appears to have had hardly any plate tectonic movement, very little change in climate and a stalling of biological evolution. But was this period more interesting than we think? Geologists have been studying the geochemistry and makeup of continental rocks from the Boring Billion. The geochemistry suggests that the continental crust was hot and thin (40km or less) – not suitable for plate tectonics or building mountain ranges. But curiously the structure and composition of continental rocks indicate that crust did shimmy around and that low mountain ranges existed. The findings are published in Geophysical Research Letters. Instead of the dodgem-car style of plate tectonics we have on Earth today, the Boring Billion seems to have been more like a waltz on a slippery dancefloor. This gentle form of plate tectonics has long since vanished, but understanding it may give us a clue as to how contemporary plate tectonics got started.You can read Elias Visontay’s full story of Cleo Smith’s rescue here: We’ll end our rolling coverage here. Thank you for your company today and please hug your kids tight. Let’s just recap the main points of that press conference: Cleo Smith was rescued by four police officers just before 1am today. There was no one piece of information that led to her rescue, it came out of police analysing thousands of pieces of data. Police did not have time to warn Cleo’s parents, Ellie Smith and Jake Gliddon, before raiding the house in Carnarvon this morning. The first they heard of it was when the family liaison officer called them once Cleo was out of the house and said, “there’s someone here who wants to speak to you”. Cleo was taken to hospital this morning for a medical examination but is physically well. Detective Sergeant Cameron Blaine, one of the officers on the four-person rescue team, said that after reuniting with her parents Cleo had become “a little Energiser bunny” with more energy than any of the exhausted detectives. She is a “very sweet, energetic girl”. A 36-year-old man was in custody at Carnarvon police station and helping police with their inquiries. The man was not a suspect before yesterday and had no connection to the family. He was not at the house when Cleo was rescued. Detective Superintendent Rod Wilde said police believed it was an “opportunistic” crime. Police expected to lay charges later today. Detective Superintendent Rod Wilde says he expects charges to be laid today. Police are asked a number of questions about comments made by neighbours to the media today, which they decline to answer because the investigation is ongoing. They also will not comment on the condition of the house, for the same reason, and say they are still investigating the case. Blaine is asked: “Is this the best moment of your career?” He replies: No doubt. Detective sergeant Cameron Blaine says Cleo was full of energy after being reunited with her parents. He says he is not sure if she is aware that she had been abducted and police were careful what they asked her, so as not to influence her record of events. We also need to be mindful of their mental health and welfare. The questions that, it was more or less that we were talking to her, that she was talking to us. What can I say, having seen her a couple times this morning, she is a little Energiser bunny. How she has that much energy – I wish I did, I am about ready to go to sleep. Very sweet, energetic girl. Very trusting and very open with us. We all wanted to take turns holding her. It was a really good experience. Detective Sergeant Cameron Blaine was one of the four police officers who raided the house in Carnarvon this morning and found Cleo. He says he was shocked and elated to find her. There could have been anyone of the team but it turned out that I was of four guys that was fortunate enough to go through that door and make that rescue. We had always hoped for that outcome but were not prepared for it. It was absolutely fantastic. Originally, to see her sitting there in the way that she was, it was incredible. Blaine was the officer who asked Cleo for her name. One of the guys jumped in front of me and picked her up and I just wanted to be absolutely sure that – it certainly looks like Cleo – I wanted to be sure it was her. I said, ‘what is your name?’ She didn’t answer, I asked again and she didn’t answer. I asked a third time and then she looked at me and said, ‘my name is Cleo’. And that was it. Then we turned around and walked out of the house. The victim liaison officer then called Cleo’s parents, telling them “there is someone here who wants to speak to you”. You can imagine, absolute surprise and they were ecstatic. Things developed so quickly. We didn’t really have time to prepare them. And we didn’t want to give them any false expectations about what might happen. We didn’t know ourselves. It is always a delicate process when it comes to that. But still to be able to give them that news and say they can make their way to the hospital and we will meet them there, that was fantastic. It was an honour to be able to witness that reunion. So many of the guys had been doing long days and long hours. We are only the pointy end here but we are backed by a massive taskforce. More than half back in Perth. It was certainly an honour to see that reunion and have a part in it. Cleo was taken to hospital this morning but has since been discharged into her parents’ custody. Wilde says there was no single piece of information that led to the discovery of the house, but says that the information about an unknown car at the campground was a crucial piece. He says the man who is in custody was not a suspect before yesterday. Asked how Cleo’s family are feeling, Wilde says: Ecstatic, obviously, they have the little girl back. Wilde says the alleged abduction “appears to be opportunistic”. Detective Superintendent Rod Wilde, the lead investigator, says police had more than 10,000 calls from the community to provide information about the case. People worked basically without sleep from the first occurrence when this happened 17, 18 days ago. They have been working here tirelessly, never gave up hope, and got the result that we are all so grateful for. Asked how he felt when Cleo identified herself, Wilde says: It was amazing. It really was. It was really emotional to see that. Obviously we had hopes for that. We had real concerns for her welfare and, as time passed by, they grew worse. So to see that, it was amazing, an amazing outcome. He adds: People were in tears, it is fair to say. It is an amazing outcome. We hoped, we kept working with that belief that we could get there, you could find Cleo. I don’t know what happened, but we were lucky. The WA police commissioner, Chris Dawson, confirms police have a 36-year-old Carnarvon man in custody who is helping with their inquiries, but does not provide any further update. I am not going to elaborate further in terms of that man, other than to say he is a local man from Carnarvon, and we will be having something further to say later. I once again want to reinforce my thanks to a great team, assisted by a great community, the town of Carnarvon, and it can stand strong. And, as a community, I appeal to the community to come together, as you have. Yes, we have one man and a custody, but that is not the town of Carnarvon, that is one person. I want the town of Carnarvon and everyone else to come together as a community, as we move forward, and we can rejoice that this little girl has been found, but we need to move forward as a community as well. Dawson thanks volunteers, army members and SES volunteers who helped with the investigation. He also thanks members of the public for their support, which included deliveries of chocolate and flowers to the police station today, and he thanks the media. You have kept the story running, kept in front of mind for everyone, which is important because we needed to get these messages out. I thank you for keeping the hope of finding Cleo alive a real and present story, which we now can all celebrate in terms of this. Dawson thanks Cleo’s parents, Ellie and Jake, for their stoicism. He also thanks the police team, which he says was about 140-people strong. Many of them are still at work here right now, and a whole bunch of them are back in Perth. We will be working through this for the next week or two at least, there is much more work to be done, but I am just so proud, the proudest police commissioner in the world at the moment, right now, I think. To everyone who has worked tirelessly, police, analysts, forensic officers, people behind the scenes, media teams. They have gelled together from day one here, from the moment Inspector Jon Munday and the uniformed officers declared a protected forensics scene within minutes of arrival, that commenced an enormous operation to the outcome that was achieved at about 1am this morning. Dawson is joined by the WA police minister, local police commanders, local taskforce commanders, and one of the detectives who was directly involved in Cleo’s rescue. He says: We now have returned Cleo to her loving parents. It is a wonderful day for this little girl and her loving family. It is a really special day for Western Australia. Indeed, I know the nation is rejoicing over the fact that we have been able to conduct this operation and we never gave up hope. I know that Cleo’s parents never gave up hope, and it is just a such a wonderful opportunity for me to say, thank you. The police minister, Paul Papalia, said: If you feel the need to thank God today, thank God for the West Australian police force. The WA police commissioner, Chris Dawson, has begun speaking in Perth. What a great day. WA police have just released this image of Cleo Smith after her rescue this morning. We’re standing by to hear the press conference. Police will be speaking about 1pm local time, so in the next 10 minutes. We’re expecting to hear from WA police on the rescue of Cleo Smith in the next half hour. Cleo was found in the locked room of a house in Carnarvon, a small town about 900km north of Perth, just before 1am local time. Police were led to the house after finding what the acting police commissioner, Col Blanch, called “a needle in the haystack” of thousands of pieces of information collated over the past 18 days. A police officer picked her up, asked “what is your name”, and she replied, “my name is Cleo”. She was taken to hospital for a medical check but appears well and has been reunited with her parents. The WA police commissioner, Chris Dawson, said it was one of the most impressive feats of policing in his decades on the force. He was flying to Carnarvon today to thank the 100-person strong team. A 36-year-old man has been helping police with their inquiries. Speaking in Dubai earlier, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the disappearance of Cleo Smith was “every parent’s worst nightmare”. The fact that that nightmare has come to an end, and our worst fears were not realised, is just a huge relief. And a moment for great joy. This particular case, obviously, has captured the hearts of Australians as we felt such terrible sorrow for the family. I want to thank, particularly, all of the police and all of those who were involved in making sure that Cleo is safe. And we are so thankful, thank you so much for what you have done. I know you do it every day. I know that you feel a great sense of satisfaction in the work you have done to bring her home. But we know each and every day, they are out there doing the same thing. And trying to keep our kids safe and keep our people safe. So thank you so much. And thank God that Cleo is home and that she is safe. Morrison was also asked about the AFP’s capabilities and the technology it used to help with the search. I won’t go into details of this case specifically but I will go on to say that everything we had available to the AFP was there to be used and shared in with the work that was being [done] in Western Australia. So I would congratulate the Western Australia [police]. They did a tremendous job there. Had this occurred in another state or territory, I know the exact same thing would have happened in terms of the capabilities that would be brought together. We are very pleased and very proud of those who did such a great job to bring Cleo home. Earlier I reported some comments that the home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, made about Cleo’s rescue. I wanted to clarify what she said about the involvement of the AFP reconnaissance planes. Andrews said that the AFP supported WA police with “a wide range of advance technologies”, but did not specify what those technologies were or how they work. She told Neil Breen on 4BC breakfast radio in Brisbane: It’s very high-tech capability, and they were able to assist with the search for little Cleo. So I’m as happy as can be that we were able to provide support through the AFP and it ended up in a great result. But, of course, the great capability that the AFP has – which often goes unrecognised quite frankly – because they are very elite in terms of their capabilities; you know, they are right up there with the best in the world. Breen: Did it make a difference, do you think? Did it make a difference in this case? Andrews: Yes it did. I’m very confident of that. So congratulations to everyone involved. It was an extraordinary effort with a great outcome. Andrews said she was “almost beside myself with excitement” when she read that Cleo had been found alive and well. Police will hold a press conference at 1pm today in Carnarvon about the rescue of Cleo Smith. That’s 4pm on the east coast of Australia. We’ll bring you the updates as they happen. We will pause our rolling coverage of this case for now. We are expecting WA police to hold a press conference at some stage today and will bring that to you live. We have been hearing a lot of jubilation from police officers and from Cleo Smith’s family this morning. But if this story has been triggering for you in any way, there is help available. The following crisis support services are available 24 hours a day: Lifeline 13 11 14; Suicide Call Back Service 1300 659 467; Kids Helpline 1800 55 1800; MensLine Australia 1300 78 99 78; Beyond Blue 1300 22 4636; 1800-RESPECT on 1800 737 732. Dawson said it was “very rare that this type of crime occurs, but equally rare that we get this kind of outcome”. I don’t need to fiddle round too much with these words. Obviously we were very concerned. Yes we we hoped for this outcome but, you know, I’d be less than truthful if I said I wasn’t very concerned about the result. We were very concerned, for understandable reasons. He said he had seen the photo of Cleo Smith smiling when back with her parents. It’s just such a joyful reunion. I can say that she’s smiling and she’s well. She’s been through an ordeal, obviously, but she’s now back with her parents where she should be. Dawson said police examined every piece of information but some pieces — like the discovery that a car was seen near the campsite — were particularly important. We followed every lead we could. We had some important information. I can say that the information about a car was really important. At the same time we were collecting a lot of data, we were collecting every bit of physical evidence, and we were just not letting anything drop. We were just following everything through. Late yesterday and in the early hours this morning we got a breakthrough and that breakthrough was the result of all of that work. Dawson told 6PR’s Liam Bartlett that he was briefed on the plan to raid the house before it took place. We’d been following some leads up and just after midnight I got a call to say, we’ve got a strong lead, and they briefed me on it and said we’re going to have to get into this house. I’ve seen the — look I can’t release it here, Liam, but I’ve seen the video of it.... they had to break into the house, she was in there, and to see that vision and to watch it... it unashamedly brought a tear to my eye. It’s just so remarkable and I’m just so proud of the way that they worked their way through this. The WA police commissioner, Chris Dawson, told Perth radio this morning outcomes like this was “one of the reasons I come to work every day”. Cleo’s abduction strikes at the very heart of every parent, every Australian. Cleo’s parents Ellie and Jake, they didn’t give up, and the Carnarvon community didn’t give up. We had a lot of volunteers, companies, people, strangers, come together to give it everything they had... it’s just so wonderful that we were able to bring Cleo home.” McGowan said it was a “remarkably brazen and shocking thing to do, to go to someone’s campsite, unzip their tent, and take the little girl”. It is beyond belief that someone would do that. Like many people, I love going out in a tent and camping, particularly with my children, the idea that someone would come and steal your child away is beyond awful. McGowan said he phoned the analysts who worked on the case. Arlene, who leads the team, she told me it was great to provide the country with positive news this morning, rather than waking up this morning to, you know, something negative, it was great to wake up to some positive news. McGowan said police sent 63 police officers to Carnarvon who have been working full time on the case for 18 days, alongside local police and community volunteers. This is great new sand uplifting for the entire country. Especially for those people who put their heart and soul into finding little Cleo. I know they are proud and pleased of what has been achieved. McGowan said he missed a message from the police commissioner at 1.38am, because he was asleep. But I woke up at about three and saw the message... He sent me a photo of little Cleo in a hospital bed sitting there smiling, so it was a wonderful piece of news. I don’t know what to expect in these things, you never know what to expect. You hope for the best but you prepare for the worst. It is an exciting day for all of us. WA premier Mark McGowan has started his press conference in Perth by acknowledging the work of WA police in searching for Cleo Smith, as well as the work of volunteers, including the SES, in searching for Cleo. He also thanked the 10 information analysts who worked on the case, and the community of Carnarvon. It’s an amazing piece of police work, an amazing piece of detective work. I think this will be looked at by police around the nation and indeed around the world as to what can be done if you have the right people and the right way of looking at it and you do it methodically, with determination, which is exactly what has occurred here. Can I finally also acknowledge Ellie and Jack, Cleo’s parents, they have been through a lot of the last 18 days, terrible trauma, some vicious attack, and some, no doubt, very trying and sad times. To them, and all of our thoughts go to them. We’re so pleased that little Cleo has been back to them. There is an exciting, uplifting, wonderful day. I’m sure we are very proud. While we’re celebrating the wonderful news of Cleo Smith being found alive and well, we should think of those families that are still desperately searching for their loved ones. There are 61 missing people listed on the Crime Stoppers WA website. As of this morning only one of those listed, Cleo Smith, has been found. Some have been missing for decades. The oldest listed case is from 1979. The WA premier, Mark McGowan, is due to front reporters in Perth shortly. He is making a health announcement but is also expected to speak about Cleo Smith. WA police minister, Paul Papalia, told 6PR he received a call from Col Blanch early this morning. I was quite stunned. Honestly, I think like everybody, you’d begun to fear the worst particularly the time that had passed. It was just incredible news, wonderful. I am very proud of the WA police service. He thanked all the police involved, particularly the lead investigator Rod Wilde. He said it was the result of “hard police grind, hard work and good policing”. We should all in Western Australia be incredibly proud of our Western Australian police force. Earlier, prime minister Scott Morrison and Labor leader Anthony Albanese expressed their relief Cleo had been found: Labor frontbencher Tanya Plibersek said Cleo’s family had been through “every parents’ worst nightmare”: Former prime minister Kevin Rudd also congratulated WA police: Legal circles around Australia are talking about Cleo Smith. This is from Kelly Fedor, the chief court reporter for Nine News in Sydney. Forensic experts have expressed their shock and admiration that Cleo was able to be found alive. Murdoch University forensic scientist Dr Paola Magni said finding child alive so quickly is a rare outcome: We have, in the history of criminology, many cases about abduction and kids have been found 15 years later as adults. In this case, the two weeks is such a good outcome. She said police would have used a mixture of traditional policing, digital evidence and profiling analysis. The 36-year-old man who police have in custody has not, at this stage, been charged. Col Blanch said there was no one particular lead or clue that led police to the house where Cleo was found. It’s a collation of a lot of different things but what I can say is humans, good people, put information together. And that’s what I really want to put it down to. There were lots of things, there were car movements, there were phone movements, there were antecedents of people, the jigsaw fit the puzzle but it took really good intelligence analysts and detectives and specialists to look at all of that information, put it together, and go, ‘You know what? that doesn’t seem right to me. I’ve been doing this a long time and we’re gonna act on it.’ That’s how we get results. Police offered a $1m reward for information but Blanch says there was no key piece that broke open the investigation so that reward won’t be claimed. Acting WA police commissioner Col Blanch criticised members of the public who speculated about circumstances of Cleo’s disappearance, including in some cases accusing family members of being responsible. He told 6PR: Certainly everyone involved at Blowholes [campground] had to go through a process of elimination. That causes internet detectives to jump to conclusions but our detectives, the real detectives, can’t afford to do that. We have to go through this investigation with professionalism and look at each and every piece of data on its merit, and we’ve done that. We’ve found the needle in the haystack. And I think it sends a strong message to people, don’t jump to conclusions on these jobs. Let us do our work, let us do it professionally, but help where you can. Send the information in to us – don’t jump to your own conclusions on the internet. That does not help and it certainly wouldn’t have helped Ellie and Jake during this really tragic and difficult time. WA premier Mark McGowan says he is beyond relieved Cleo has been found: The nightmare is now finally over for Cleo and her family. I’d like to thank the Western Australian community for all their assistance over the past few weeks, and acknowledge the WA police who did incredible police work to bring Cleo home to her parents. The acting WA police commissioner, Col Blanch, is back on Perth radio: Rescuing Cleo, hearing her voice, having her say ‘my name is Cleo’ was an amazing moment this morning, but we have transitioned into full investigative mode ... if we are going to hold someone accountable for this we’ve got to do it right and that is what the team is absolutely laser focused on now. He says he has watched the body camera footage of the moment detectives found Cleo in a locked room, and becomes emotional trying to describe it: It’s burned into my mind ... I saw detectives who have worked for 18 days straight, 24/7, see little Cleo in the room, and just the care that was expressed immediately, the cuddling, the sound of her voice ... she looks straight into camera to say, ‘My name is Cleo.’ Your heart warms just to hear it. Asked how he has personally been affected by the case, Branch says: Eighteen days looking at Cleo’s face. I haven’t slept, the commissioner hasn’t slept, I don’t think anyone in this police force has slept. We have held on to this hope from day one ... this is why we become police. A group of young men who watched the rescue operation have spoken to Nine News. They said they had seen detectives leaving the home and one of them was carrying a young girl: One of the boys shouted and said, ‘Oh they’ve got a little girl there, it might be Cleo’ ... I ran there, stood up toward the detective’s window and I saw Cleo in the back. ‘Yeah, that’s her there!’ Chris Dawson said the community in Western Australia, and particularly in Carnarvon, deserved credit for helping with the investigation: We did get some information about a car being seen and things like that. I can say we are thankful for the way the community came together, because this strikes at the very heart of every parent, of every Australian. You know, to have a young child abducted from, you know, an iconic location, camping with the family, it is really ... it touches everyone. No one is left untouched by this. Asked to provide more detail about the man who was in custody, Dawson said: There’s no family connection. I can simply confirm there is a 36-year-old man in custody. Dawson said it was one of the greatest moments in WA policing history. Oh, look, the find a little girl, a vulnerable little girl after 18 days, you know, obviously people think the worst, but importantly, hope was never lost. And the fact she’s been found alive ... I think Australia is rejoicing, you know, it is such a wonderful outcome. Dawson said he would fly in to Carnarvon to thank the team who were searching for Cleo: There will be a need for us to bring the community together because this brings to the surface a whole lot of emotional outcomes for the community. It’s really important we bring the community together and we don’t let the community split. It’s really important for the team to get their feedback and support the family and, obviously, it will be an absolute joy to be able to comfort the family and just be so, so pleased that the little girl, who was gone, is now back with them. The WA police commissioner, Chris Dawson, told the ABC that police have a 36-year-old man in custody. He said there was “no family connection”. Dawson said police put “everything we had” into the search: So obviously, our homicide squad, trained, experienced investigators and detectives, our analysts, our technical people, drone pilots, air wing, the whole lot. We mounted our general duties police who did a tremendous job within minutes of arriving, the first officers in the scene, within minutes, declared it a forensic scene and sealed it off which was just really, really good policing. From that moment on, it’s just been a really dedicated team of well over 100 on the scene itself and we were prepared for a long haul but we’re so, so pleased. Dawson said he always hoped for a good outcome, but was “very concerned”: Having been around the block a bit, we obviously were very, very concerned so many days [had] passed. That does not mean you give up. You can’t for the family, can’t for the child. I’m so pleased the team kept going, they were not going to leave any stone unturned. They didn’t and it’s just a wonderful outcome as a consequence. A woman who lives in the same street as the house where Cleo Smith was found told Nine News she had not heard the raid at 1am, and had been shocked to learn that the four-year-old has “been that close” all this time. She said she was “very pleased” to hear of the rescue: I actually got a call about 4.30am from my nephew who said, ‘Aunt, I just put the news on and she’s been found.’ I also got a call from my son who was on his way to Perth airport to go to work, and he said, ‘Mum, the kid’s been found.’ And I jumped out of bed and I’ve been awake since then. She added: The main thing is that she was found well and alive. Well done to the Western Australian police force. Nine News Perth is reporting from outside the house where Cleo Smith was found. It looks like an ordinary suburban house in the regional WA town. Carnarvon has a population of fewer than 5,000 people. It’s a fruit and vegetable growing area, with large market gardens, but the township proper is pretty small. Cleo Smith “physically she appears to be in good health but obviously medical professionals are with her at the moment”, Col Blanch said: She’s getting the best of care right now. Col Blanch said the taskforce looking for Cleo Smith included officers, intelligence analysts and specialists: Everyone came together and did the hard slog for 18 days. We all wished it was earlier but we were literally looking for a needle in a haystack and those people, the officers involved in this, led by Det Supt Rod Wilde, [did] an amazing bit of work, absolutely amazing. Police later identified a Carnarvon man who is in custody. Col Blanch said the man wasn’t in the house at the time of the 1am raid but police had caught up with him later: When the detectives went in and rescued Cleo, she was alone at the time. Asked by 6PR host Gareth Parker if police were working on the theory Cleo had been abducted or kidnapped, Blanch said: That’s been our working theory for some time now. He said it was “very early days” in the investigation: I don’t want to make any assumptions. I am very mindful that there is most likely a court process coming up, we have got to be very careful what we say. Our job at the moment is making sure that Cleo is safe and well and getting the care she needs, that parents Ellie and Jake are getting the care they need, and we are doing a full and proper investigation in accordance with the law and we make sure we get everything – dot the i’s, cross the t’s, we’ve got to make sure we get this right. The acting WA police commissioner, Col Blanch, said he had seen “seasoned detectives openly crying with relief”. Blanch told Perth radio 6PR that the result was “just incredible”: To see Cleo being rescued this morning, I am speechless, to be honest. It’s just very rare ... it’s something we all hoped in our heart would come true. Blanch said officers had combed thousands of images, surveillance files, interviews and community reports for any sign of where Cleo might be: We were literally looking for a needle in the haystack and we found it. When she said, ‘My name is Cleo,’ I don’t think there was a dry eye in the house. Pressed for more information on how officers found the house, Blanch said: Literally this was a needle in a data haystack and our very very good officers and investigators and analysis in that taskforce found that needle late last night and as a result executed that search warrant ... just incredible. Ellie Smith, Cleo’s mother, posted the news on Instagram, saying: “Our family is whole again.” The mayor of Carnarvon, Eddie Smith, told Perth radio 6PR that his phone had started ringing at 4am, and hasn’t yet stopped: I still haven’t absorbed it. I just feel so happy for Ellie and Jake that they’ve got Cleo back … I’m a bit emotional as well and I think the whole town is going to be emotional as well, that what we’ve hoped and prayed for has happened. Smith said he had never countenanced any outcome other than Cleo being found alive and well: I did [think they would find her] and most of our community remained positive, they didn’t change. We could see the effort that was going in to finding Cleo, the support, the power of positivity I think can’t be underestimated … it’s just wonderful. He said the Carnarvon community felt “elated, thankful”: I want to do a Bob Hawke and tell everybody to give everybody a day off, you’re a mug if you don’t. It’s just so exciting and, to our police and to everybody who didn’t give up, thank you so much. Cleo disappeared from her family’s tent at the Blowholes campsite near Carnarvon on 16 October. Her mother, Ellie Smith, said she last saw Cleo when she woke and asked for a drink of water about 1.30am. When Smith next woke up Cleo and her sleeping bag were gone and the zip of the tent was lifted almost to the top – much higher than Cleo could reach. A 100-person police taskforce has been based out of Carnarvon for 18 days to search for clues. They were supported by military-style reconnaissance planes, provided by the Australian federal police. The federal home affairs minister, Karen Andrews, told 4BC radio in Brisbane this morning that those planes had played a key role in the search: Yes it did. I am very confident of that so congratulations to everyone involved, it was an extraordinary effort with a great outcome. Missing four-year-old Western Australian girl Cleo Smith has been found in a house in Carnarvon. Police raided the locked home in the coastal town, about 890km north of Perth, about 1am, and found a child inside. The acting police commissioner, Col Blanch, said the girl had identified herself to a police officer who picked her up and asked for her name. She said, “My name is Cleo.” In a statement, Blanch said that it was the outcome “we all hoped and prayed for”: It’s the outcome we’ve achieved because of some incredible police work. I want to thank Cleo’s parents, the Western Australian community and the many volunteers. And of course, I want to thank my colleagues in the Western Australia Police Force. I can confirm we have a man from Carnarvon in custody who is currently being questioned by detectives. Blanch is expected to speak to local radio in Perth just after 6am local time. We’ll bring you the updates as they unfold.America’s recent focus on 22-year-old Gabby Petito, whose body was found last month in a remote part of Wyoming, revived criticism of “missing white woman syndrome” and the media’s failure to convey that Black lives matter too. There are few starker example than Kendrick Johnson, an African American teenager found dead inside a rolled-up gym mat at his high school gymnasium in 2013. How and why he lost his life remains a mystery that has never been solved. “Kendrick went missing: nobody searched for him,” his mother, Jacqueline Johnson, says to the Guardian by phone from Valdosta, Georgia. “Nobody called a US marshal or the FBI for him. Nobody called all those people in. They didn’t put it all over the news. They didn’t do none of it. “You see the imbalance right there. If a Black person goes missing it’s just like they don’t really care. As soon she [Gabby Petito] goes missing, because of her colour, she gets all the media, all the shows, everything. Everywhere you see Ms Petito. Nobody else matters.” Local and state authorities ruled 17-year-old Kendrick’s death a freak accident, concluding that he got stuck in the middle of the mat while reaching for a gym shoe and was unable to breathe. Jacqueline and her husband Kenneth insist that he was murdered, accuse law enforcement and school officials of a cover-up and continue to wage a campaign for the truth. The case is the subject of a new documentary, Finding Kendrick Johnson, based on a four-year undercover investigation into a tangled web of allegations, new evidence and alarming questions over authorities’ handling of the tragedy. With didactic narration by actor and activist Jenifer Lewis, the film demands that attention must be paid. Kendrick was a sports-loving teenager. Jacqueline, 49, recalls: “He was the baby of our family. He was just like the funniest person ever. He played three sports all the way up through high school: he played football and basketball and he ran track. Football was his passion in life. Older kids looked up to him because he would say, ‘Yeah, one day I’m going to make it in football. Y’all going to see.’” The bright shard of memory darkens. “They just took his dream away and they took our goal away because that was our goal for him. He loved football. I would say two or three years old, he was out there playing football with his dad and brothers, and then when he was old enough to get on the field, he was playing football ever since he was four years old.” When she thinks of Kendrick now, Jacqueline says, “it’s so much hurt, so much pain. We can’t even really begin to grieve or mourn because of the fight we’ve had to endure.” Fellow students found Kendrick’s body in the gymnasium at Lowndes high school in Valdosta – a town in the deep south where Confederate monuments still stand - at around 10.30am on 11 January 2013. Kendrick was 5ft 10in; the rolled up mat is 6ft tall. The mat was propped upright against a wall next to the gym bleachers. Sheriff’s investigators closed the case four months later, concluding that Kendrick died in a bizarre accident while reaching for a shoe inside one of the mats. A state medical examiner ruled the cause of death was “positional asphyxia”, meaning the teenager got stuck upside down in a position that left him unable to breathe. But Kendrick’s family were left with many unanswered questions. There were strange gaps in surveillance footage from the gym. The county coroner was not called to the scene until six hours after Johnson’s body was found; under Georgia law he should have been notified immediately. The family secured a judge’s order to exhume the body so that a second autopsy could be performed. A private pathologist found haemorrhaging beneath the skin of Johnson’s jaw and neck and concluded he suffered a fatal blow near his carotid artery that appeared to be “non-accidental”. The second autopsy made another shocking discovery: Kendrick’s internal organs were missing and paper had been stuffed into the cavities (the fate of the organs remains unknown). In October 2013 a federal criminal civil rights investigation was announced, leading to interviews with almost a hundred people, but the justice department closed the case in June 2016, saying investigators “found insufficient evidence to support federal criminal charges”. The Johnson family also pursued various civil lawsuits without success; they were even countersued and face potential legal costs of hundreds of thousands of dollars. “My whole family is hurt because they treated us like we’re the ones who have committed a crime and instead we’re the victims,” Jacquelyn reflects. “We’re Kendrick’s mother and father and family and friends, and they treated us like we’ve committed a crime. It’s hurtful and it’s so wrong on so many levels.” Brian and Branden Bell, white classmates of Kendrick, were reportedly considered persons of interest in the FBI investigation. The brothers were never charged and an FBI video analysis determined they were in different parts of the school when Kendrick went to the gym. (Their father, Rick Bell, was an FBI agent who resigned after his house was raided for evidence.) The brothers told investigators and the media that they did not see Kendrick on the day of his death. But the documentary dug up surveillance footage showing Kendrick standing about four feet from Brian Bell in a school hallway, as well as an unredacted FBI report that states: “Kendrick Johnson is observed in a covered walkway moving towards the camera. Bell is observed in the same location at this time.” The Bell brothers deny any wrongdoing. The film’s writer director, Jason Pollock, first met Jacquelyn when he was living in Ferguson, Missouri, during the uprising that followed the death of Michael Brown, a Black teenager fatally shot in 2014 by a white police officer (the subject of his film Stranger Fruit). After becoming Facebook friends with Jacquelyn, Pollock noticed graphic pictures of Kendrick’s mutilated face cropping up daily in his feed. As the film highlights, Jacquelyn’s willingness to share the harrowing image of her son evokes Emmett Till, a 14-year-old Black boy lynched in Mississippi in 1955, whose mother decided to have an open casket so the world could see what had been done to him. The killers were never brought to justice but the searing image was galvanising for the civil rights movement. Jacquelyn believes that someone first posted the image with malicious intent. “I would never have shared no photo of him looking the way he looked – as a mother, it hurts me that you would see that picture – but I began to share that and remind the people this is what they did to my child.” Moved and incensed, Pollock went on to spend four years researching Kendrick’s death, determined to show that it is a burning injustice long overdue a fresh look. “If a white kid had been rolled up in the gym that day, I wouldn’t have had to do this,” he says by phone from California. “We wouldn’t even be talking right now because the system would have done its job and the system didn’t do its job from day one. They wanted to make this look like it was an accident because they didn’t want to do an investigation.” Pollock continues: “The whole story is just Shakespearean, what they’re going through, watching the state abuse them like this. The film doesn’t come to a conclusion. We’re not trying to support any conspiracy theories but we’re just trying to show the facts that we’re giving the light of day. “I hope this piece of art puts a human face on the trauma as well as just gets the story out there. We don’t know what happened. But this is a story we should be talking about because I do believe he is our generation’s Emmett Till.” The director, who started his career working for the documentarian Michael Moore, has become a fierce advocate for the family. “We are calling on President Biden and his team to review the malpractice at the FBI and the DoJ with the Kendrick Johnson case and unless Washington DC starts looking at this case, the state of Georgia is never going to deal with this. “If you want to clean up the act of our nation, you need to clean up this case because this is a really, really, really bad one and this family deserves way more from America than they’ve gotten. If you care about Black Lives Matter issues, you need to take the Kendrick Johnson case on in Washington and deal with this.” Finding Kendrick Johnson opens with whistleblower Mitch Credle, a 23-year veteran homicide detective with Washington police who investigated Johnson’s death with the US attorney’s office. He says by phone: “I hope the film will wake up law enforcement as far as wanting to look at it again. What bothers me at this point is: who will look into it? “No one’s going to really trust the local jurisdiction there to look into it because of, I guess, the bad feelings, the history. The federal government were recused from the situation. So I don’t know who they will get to come in and look at it and just go based on the facts. “Don’t do it with any villains involved. Just go and investigate it based on the evidence, regardless of who the suspects are. Just start from A and investigate it the proper way. All the families ask for is just do things the proper way. That’s all they want.” Earlier this year Ashley Paulk, a county sheriff in Georgia, reopened the investigation into Kendrick’s death, saying he was reviewing 17 boxes of evidence collected by federal agents that his office obtained from the US justice department. Jacqueline is sceptical of that effort but says: “I remain hopeful. I’m going to stay hopeful and I’m going to stay prayerful that one day the truth will come out.” The memory of Kendrick is with her constantly. But so is the manner of his death. If “closure”, whatever that means, is even possible, it still eludes her. “There’s no days of not thinking about him and the things that happened to him and how can people be so evil? This is eight years’ worth of pain and it is’s growing stronger and stronger every day. They say it gets easier, but it don’t.” Finding Kendrick Johnson is available to rent now in the US with a UK date to be announcedThe French ambassador has denounced the Australian government’s release of a private text message from Emmanuel Macron as “an unprecedented new low”, arguing other world leaders would now worry their words might be “weaponised” against them. Jean-Pierre Thébault said the leaking of the text message from the French president was a setback “in terms of truth and trust”, and it would be “sad” if this was the Australian government’s answer to France’s request for concrete actions to heal the relationship. The Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, told reporters in Dubai on Wednesday he would “never make any apologies” for scrapping the French contract to deliver submarines that were “not going to do the job that Australia needed [them] to do”. Morrison did not dispute a suggestion that his office had leaked the text message, simply saying: “Claims had been made and those claims were refuted … what is needed now is for us to move on.” The extraordinary rift between Australia and France flows from Macron’s accusation that Morrison lied to him over plans with the US and the UK to acquire nuclear-propelled submarines as a replacement for the $90bn French project. Morrison rejected Macron’s claim and several Australian media outlets then reported that the French president had texted the Australian prime minister two days before the Aukus announcement in mid-September to ask: “Should I expect good or bad news for our joint submarines ambitions?” Thébault said far from backing the Australian government’s position that it had been candid with France about its changing needs, the text “demonstrates that until the last minute, we didn’t know where things were heading to”. The French ambassador told the National Press Club in Canberra the leak of the text would not help build confidence to repair the relationship. “This is an unprecedented new low - in terms of how to proceed, and also, in terms of truth and trust,” Thébault said. “You don’t behave like this on personal exchanges of leaders who are allies. But maybe it’s just confirmation that we were never seen as an ally. “But doing so also sends a very worrying signal for all heads of state - beware, in Australia, there will be leaks, and what you say in confidence to your partners will be eventually used and weaponised against you one day.” Asked whether Morrison should apologise to Macron – a suggestion made by former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull – the ambassador said the US had taken concrete steps to mend ties over what Joe Biden called the “clumsy” handling of the Aukus partnership. Thébault said eating “humble pie” may “sometimes be difficult” and it was “up to everyone to make his own decision”. The deputy prime minister, Barnaby Joyce, defended the release of the text message, suggesting Macron had triggered that action by claiming Morrison had lied. “It [the leak] is not as extraordinary as calling the leader of another country a liar when they’re not,” Joyce told ABC TV. The French ambassador was recalled to Paris in September after Australia scrapped a $90bn French deal in order to launch an 18-month study with the US and the UK on acquiring nuclear-propelled submarines. Having now returned to Canberra, Thébault said the Morrison government had acted in a way that was “out of this world” and not befitting of friends, and he questioned whether any other partner could now trust “the value of Australia’s signature and commitment”. Thébault also raised doubts about whether Australia’s new partnership with the US and the UK would deliver nuclear-propelled submarines quickly enough: “Magical thinking will not change the facts.” And he said Australia would be scrutinised by the rest of the world over its “very specific responsibilities”, arguing the deal could have implications “in terms of our common efforts to strengthen nonproliferation norms”. “France will always be a close and loyal friend of Australia,” he said. “No artificial wedge, despite attempts, can be put between our people. If there is a problem today it is with certain aspects of the ‘Canberra bubble’ and its ‘secret city’ practices.” Thébault said the defence and foreign ministers of France and Australia met just two weeks before Aukus was announced, with both sides agreeing to a joint statement that underlined the importance of the future submarine program. “Do you agree on such a joint communique when there is the slightest doubt on something so massive as the official backbone of our cooperation? Maybe on Mars. But not on this planet,” Thébault said. Thébault suggested that the reason the Australian government did not want to be explicit was explained by Morrison on 16 September, when the prime minister said there was never any certainty that the Aukus process would result in a deal. Thébault said that meant it was deemed necessary to keep open the possibility of continuing the French submarine program, “and so it was mandatory to keep us in the dark, on the backburner”. Arguing “the deceit was intentional”, Thébault said: “Because there was far more at stake than providing submarines, because it was a common agreement on sovereignty, sealed with the transmission of highly classified data, the way it was handled was a stab in the back.” He acknowledged that the Australian government would make its own decisions when it came to national security. “But the way this Australian government decided to turn its back on our solemn and far reaching partnership, without ever frankly consulting with France, when there were countless opportunities, without having shared frankly and openly its thoughts or without having looked for alternatives with France, is just out of this world,” Thébault said. “Alarm bells should have rung on the likely consequences. And if it was the case, and they were disregarded, it is even worse.” Thébault said the Naval Group-backed project to deliver 12 conventional submarines had not been “troubled” or suffered cost blowouts, despite an “intensive smearing campaign” about the program. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morningAs Scott Morrison flew towards Australia’s military base for operations in the Middle East on Wednesday, Jean-Pierre Thébault was using an appearance at the National Press Club in Canberra to continue France’s rolling excoriation of Australia’s conduct while dumping a multibillion-dollar submarine contract. By the time Morrison touched down in the desert, the French ambassador had landed a potent extrapolation. If Scott Morrison’s operation was prepared to leak private text messages from world leaders to settle diplomatic scores, who could trust Australia? “You don’t behave like this on personal exchanges of leaders,” Thébault said in Canberra. “Doing this also sends a very worrying signal for all heads of state. Beware, in Australia, there will be leaks, and what you say in confidence to your partners will eventually be used and weaponised against you.” I doubt you’ve missed the saga of the text messages, but just in case – the morning after Emmanuel Macron told Australian journalists on the sidelines of the G20 summit in Rome that Morrison had lied to him during the fracas, one of the president’s private texts turned up in some Australian media outlets. Two days before Morrison, Boris Johnson and Joe Biden terminated Australia’s contract with the French Naval Group to build diesel submarines in mid-September and replaced it with the Aukus pact, Macron had asked Morrison: “Should I expect good or bad news for our joint submarines ambitions?” This text was submitted as evidence that Macron’s outrage – the accusations about lying and Australia stabbing France in the back – were entirely confected, because the president knew all along the French contract was about to be dumped. Actually, the message confirmed exactly the opposite. It shows Macron didn’t know what was happening two days before three leaders humiliated France with the Aukus announcement – which you’ll recall was livestreamed to the world. So as ruthless exercises in domestic damage control go, this was a particularly wild one. Measured in terms of international relations, this was high-cost, low-efficiency. Presumably, the score-settling reflected the fury of Australia’s prime minister after Macron launched his drive-by character assassination at the G20. Morrison was as angry as I have ever seen him on learning of Macron’s accusation. But if it was an impulse, a lashing out, his revenge play, once unleashed, could not be rescinded. Morrison has had plenty of opportunities to deny his office leaked the texts. He has not done so. He has also not expressed any remorse about it either. Asked on the ground at the Al Minhad air base what the threshold had been for engaging in retributive conduct entirely outside diplomatic rules of engagement – was the trigger one world leader (Macron) accusing another one (Morrison) of lying – Morrison doubled down. “Claims had been made and those claims were refuted,” the prime minister said. Implicit in this is Macron was the one who shifted the goalposts by launching a personal attack. Morrison does have a point. There was nothing diplomatic in the French president’s observation at the G20. It was an extraordinary moment. Morrison responded with an extraordinary moment of his own. But the rapid escalation has removed all the guard rails and conventions that normally restrain the apex predators of politics from engaging in unmasked aggression against their peers. Morrison understood he was now in uncharted territory – which is why the prime minister declared an armistice during his brief stopover in the Middle East. The prime minister thought now everybody had got various things off their chests, it was time to get past the muck. “Claims were made and claims were refuted, what is needed now is for us to move on – that is what is important the Australian people”. What’s important, according to Morrison’s telling, was he, Scott Morrison, had made the right call by replacing French diesel powered submarines with nuclear ones. He, Morrison, had “delivered an incredibly important capability to Australia to keep us safe and defend and protect Australia – that’s the most important thing, that is what is at issue here”. “That is the thing that matters most to Australians – that we do everything we can to ensure the Australian defences are the best they possibly can be and the men and women who serve get the best. That’s what I was seeking to do and if others have other motives, others have other agendas, well that’s for them”. The means justify the ends, in other words. Nothing else matters. Morrison is still a relatively new player on the global stage, but his global counterparts have learned something important about Australia’s prime minister in this episode. Morrison doesn’t need to be liked. He doesn’t need to be trusted – and in a domestic political context, Morrison is not trusted either by colleagues or by adversaries. Morrison’s confidence in his own instincts and decisions is absolute. He doesn’t need anyone to prop him up, or validate his choices. His emotional hinterland is outside of politics. In the prime ministership, he is an island. What’s important is the will to power, which for Morrison, takes form in a sense of relentless righteousness. What is important to Morrison is whatever it takes to win the next political battle. International relations are only important insofar as they express themselves through the prism of domestic politics. Morrison thinks he’s on a winner. Macron might be a casualty of that. Australian taxpayers might have to fork out billions to decouple from the Naval Group. But if it’s a winning play, the costs don’t matter.Top story: China and Russia ‘didn’t show up’ – Biden Hello, I’m Warren Murray. There is a prosperity of news today, and prosperity ought to be shared. The heatwaves and wildfires that caused devastation in Europe this summer would not have happened without global heating, new analysis shows. The summer of 2021 was the hottest ever recorded on the continent, with average temperatures about 1C above normal that caused wildfires and premature deaths. There is a stark message from scientists to leaders at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow: if countries do not achieve drastic reductions in carbon emissions by 2030 and hit net zero by 2050, the record heat of 2021 will strike every year by the end of the century. Meanwhile a new report from the World Economic Forum (WEF) and PwC says creating an international price for carbon emissions could reduce global greenhouse gases by 12% at a cost of less than 1% of global GDP. The cost would be less than the economic losses triggered by the fallout of a runaway climate crisis, with the “carbon revenues” raked in from polluters used to help hard-pressed households or ploughed back into green industries. Joe Biden has attacked the failure of the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, to attend the Cop26 summit. “They didn’t show up … It is a gigantic issue and they just walked away,” he said, also criticising Russia and Vladimir Putin. “How do you do that and claim to have any leadership mantle?” * * * ‘Hope was never lost’ – Four-year-old Cleo Smith, who went missing from a campsite in Western Australia more than two weeks ago, has been found alive and well. Police said they had found Cleo alone in a house in Carnarvon at 1am on Wednesday and arrested a man soon afterwards. Cleo was reunited with her parents a short time later. The state police commissioner, Chris Dawson, said police had a 36-year-old man in custody and there was “no family connection”. “To find a little girl, a vulnerable little girl, after 18 days, you know, obviously people think the worst, but importantly, hope was never lost,” Dawson said. The deputy commissioner, Col Blanch, said police broke into the locked house and found Cleo in one of the rooms. “One of the officers picked her up into his arms and asked her, ‘What’s your name?’ “She said, ‘My name is Cleo.’” * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; In Virginia, the Republican Glenn Youngkin will be the next governor after an upset victory over the Democratic candidate Terry McAuliffe that is a blow to Joe Biden. Some consolation for the Democrats in New York City, though, where the former police officer Eric Adams will be the next mayor, after defeating Curtis Sliwa, the Republican candidate, in Tuesday’s election. Adams, 61, will in January succeed Bill de Blasio, a fellow Democrat whose two terms as mayor will be up. &gt; Boris Johnson is to back an unprecedented bid today to overthrow an independent inquiry that found the former cabinet minister Owen Paterson committed an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules. &gt; Met police officers PC Deniz Jaffer, 48, and PC Jamie Lewis, 33, have entered guilty pleas to misconduct in public office after sharing photographs from the crime scene in a London park where sisters Nicole Smallman, 27, and Bibaa Henry, 46, were found stabbed to death. &gt; Facebook has announced it will stop using facial recognition to identify people in photographs and delete the “faceprint” data of around 1bn users, due to the “many concerns” about the technology. Here is what it means for users. &gt; A British waitress has won her case in Australia’s highest court against the “backpacker tax” under which overseas workers have for years paid a higher rate of income tax than Australians. Five judges unanimously agreed Catherine Addy had faced “more burdensome taxation” because of her nationality. * * * Mobile testing pay cut – NHS mobile test-and-trace units run by Mitie are cutting the guaranteed pay of workers by a third after winning a new contract from the government. The outsourcing firm, which employs about 1,000 people at the mobile sites, has told workers that from 8 November they will be guaranteed eight hours’ pay rather than 12 for each daily shift, slashing secure pay to £80 a day from £120. In the US, the CDC has fully approved giving Pfizer and BioNTech’s Covid-19 vaccine to children aged five to 11. * * * Dacre’s next move – The prospect of the former Daily Mail editor Paul Dacre becoming head of the media regulator Ofcom may have moved a step closer after his apparent departure from his residual figurehead role of chairman and editor-in-chief of Associated Newspapers. The exit clears the way for Dacre, 72, to make a new application to be chair of Ofcom after he failed the interview process on the previous attempt despite the backing of Downing Street. The new job advert has been rewritten to favour a more confrontational candidate after Dacre was judged not to have met the original criteria. Dacre stood down as editor of the Daily Mail in 2018. Today in Focus podcast: If China tried to invade Taiwan With a record number of Chinese fighters flying sorties over Taiwan in October, and rhetoric on all sides becoming more heated, many observers say the past few weeks have been the most tense in the region for decades. How serious is the prospect of an attempt by Beijing to take over the island – and would it draw the US into a major international conflict? Lunchtime read: Are interest rates about to go up? It is a sign of the confusion surrounding the Bank of England’s interest rate decision on Thursday that investors are unusually divided over which direction the central bank will go, writes Phillip Inman. Sport Cristiano Ronaldo produced two equalisers, including a volley in stoppage time, to earn a vital point in a 2-2 Champions League draw with Atalanta in Bergamo. Hakim Ziyech’s second-half goal earned Chelsea a 1-0 win at Malmö to keep up their pursuit of Juventus in Group H, who secured their progress with a 4-1 home win against Zenit. Antonio Conte said he was determined to turn Tottenham back into contenders for trophies after being confirmed as the club’s new manager on a £15m-a-year contract to June 2023. Joe Root fancies the shellacking England’s Twenty20 side handed out to Australia last Saturday has increased confidence before the Ashes campaign. Pakistan became the first side to guarantee their place in the T20 World Cup semi-finals after comfortably beating Namibia by 45 runs in Abu Dhabi. Kobe Bryant’s widow will not have to undergo psychiatric testing for her lawsuit over graphic photos of the 2020 helicopter crash that killed the basketball star, a federal judge has ruled. Yorkshire are facing the wrath of senior political figures over their handling of Azeem Rafiq’s allegations of racism at Headingley. Alun Wyn Jones has been ruled out for the rest of Wales’ autumn Tests after it was confirmed he requires surgery on the shoulder injury sustained in the defeat against New Zealand on Saturday. The All Blacks have expressed their sadness in the wake of Carl Hayman’s early onset dementia and probable chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) diagnosis at the age of 41. And after 109 years as an Olympic sport, modern pentathlon’s governing body has voted secretly to remove horse riding and replace it with cycling, the Guardian can reveal. Business Shares have been mostly lower in Asia, weighed down by concerns over disrupted supply chains and shipping, despite the Dow Jones Industrial Average’s first close above 36,000 points. Benchmarks fell in most regional markets apart from Sydney and Taipei. Tokyo markets are closed for a holiday. The FTSE is seen opening lower as well, while the pound is worth $1.363 and €1.176 at time of writing. The papers The Guardian’s front-page lead today is “Devastating fires of 2021 pinned on global heating”, accompanied by “World’s top banks vow to fund shift to net zero”. More than 450 financial institutions in 45 countries with assets worth $130tn are taking part in the pledge, the UK government will announce today, but experts and campaigners complain they are still free to pour cash into fossil fuels and need only divert a small slice of their funding to low-carbon ends in the next decade. The Financial Times suggests we’ve seen it all before: “Banks under fire for diluting green pledges since Paris climate accord”. The Times has “PM hails deal to cut methane emissions” while the Metro looks a day behind with “Pledge to save Earth’s lungs”, which is about the pact to halt deforestation. The Telegraph has “PM seeks to replace standards watchdog” as it leads on the Owen Paterson saga. “Booster jabs roll-out for over-50s has stalled” warns the i – here is the Guardian’s version. “60,000 carers face sack over jabs” – that’s the Mirror on vaccine refuseniks and the “Covid worker crisis”. “How low can the Met go?” – the Daily Mail takes aim at Cressida Dick again, this time over the conviction of two officers who took and shared photos from the scene of two sisters’ murder. “Free blood pressure monitors to save lives” – the Express on an NHS public health initiative. The Sun’s jumble of front-page furniture translates as Richard Madeley will replace Piers Morgan on Good Morning Britain. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendThe Commonwealth Bank will allow its customers to buy and sell cryptocurrency through its app, in the first move of its kind by a major Australian bank. Australia’s largest bank announced on Wednesday it had partnered with US-based crypto exchange Gemini and blockchain analysis firm Chainalysis to offer the service to its 6.5m CommBank app users. Customers will be able to buy up to 10 crypto assets including bitcoin, Ethereum and Litecoin. The bank will conduct a pilot in the next few weeks, ahead of a wider launch in 2022. “We believe we can play an important role in crypto to address what’s clearly a growing customer need and provide capability, security and confidence in a crypto trading platform,” CBA’s chief executive Matt Comyn said in a statement. The bank said research on its customers found many had either expressed interest in crypto assets, or were already trading crypto through exchanges. “Customers have expressed concern regarding some of the crypto services in the market today, including the friction of using third party exchanges, the risk of fraud, and the lack of trust in some new providers. This is why we see this as an opportunity to bring a trusted and secure experience for our customers,” Comyn said. Dr Dimitrios Salampasis, a lecturer of fintech leadership and entrepreneurship at Swinburne Business School, said he was not surprised CBA had entered the cryptocurrency field. He said the bank was trying to get first mover advantage in Australia, and hoped it would bring more legitimacy to the cryptocurrency space. “Having this coming from a systemic and the biggest bank in Australia, it’s definitely a move that will change a lot,” he said. “And it will hopefully bring legitimacy, bring further harmonisation, push further regulation and also minimise debanking, which has been a massive pain for all cryptocurrency startups in particular.” Debanking is where financial institutions refuse to offer services to businesses in Australia. A Senate select committee report on fintech services in Australia, tabled this month, cited several cryto businesses that had been rejected by dozens of financial institutions in Australia, such as the exchange Bitcoin Babe. The committee, chaired by Liberal senator Andrew Bragg, recommended the government regulate the sector to allow it to fully operate in Australia, including a market licensing regime for digital currency exchanges, and for the government to develop a clear process for businesses to deal with debanking. Salampasis said the committee’s report, along with CBA’s gradual move into the sector, would likely foster regulation of cryptocurrency in Australia. “There has to be regulation, there has to be provisions, especially in relation to custody, especially in relation to licensing,” he said. “I do believe that Australia has a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to become a leader in the space and really drive a complete regulatory framework around cryptocurrencies.” Bragg welcomed the announcement from CBA. “For too long, banks have cast aside cryptocurrency as an illegitimate fringe pursuit. I am pleased the tide is turning, as digital assets are mainstreamed,” he said. “Now banks are adopting cryptocurrency, they should stop ‘debanking’ hardworking Australians.” CBA told the committee that it “does not have a policy” around debanking due to “competitive or market factors” but when making a decision on lending to new customers, “we take a range of risk considerations into account including the terms and conditions of any loan documentation and possible security provisions provided.”OK, I’m calling it: we have reached peak milk. First we had soy milk, then people started milking almonds, then coconuts, and hemp had a moment, then oat milk became the plant-based milk of choice. Now, according to Waitrose’s annual food and drink report, “it is the turn of the potato.” The supermarket chain is going to start stocking a Swedish brand of potato milk called Dug next year. How exactly does one milk a potato? Do you take the baby potatoes away from their mothers? Do you squeeze the spuds really hard? No, according to Dug, the drink is “a patented emulsion of potatoes and rapeseed oil developed by Professor Eva Tornberg at Lund University in Sweden”. Yum? Potatoes may be hot now, but the emulsified spud people shouldn’t get complacent. The milk market is fiercely competitive. Any minute now, camel milk might become the hipster alt-milk beverage of choice. And, you never know, old-fashioned cow’s milk could have a comeback: in August, New York Magazine caused quite a stir with the claim that “hot girls” were ditching alternative milks and going back to the full-fat, traditional stuff. Still, it’s going to take more than hot girls to save dairy. One in three Britons drink plant-based milk, according to a recent Mintel report. Alt-milks are very much mainstream now. Big dairy is obviously less thrilled by this and has been working overtime trying to restrict what “milk” means. Plant-based milks, after all, would be rather less appetising if they had to be known as “nut juice” or “grain water”. Last year, the dairy industry tried (and failed) to get a “dairy purity” law passed in Virginia that would define milk as “the lacteal secretion … obtained by the complete milking of a healthy hooved mammal”. This was obviously udderly mad. Still, if you’re a woman who has ever breastfed an infant you may want to check yourself for hooves … Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistBeneath the Spanish moss that swayed from an oak tree, Diane Arbery Jackson took a seat in the morning shade as the three white men accused of murdering her nephew sat in the courtroom a few feet away. For the past two weeks, Arbery has attended the jury selection process at the Glynn county courthouse every day. And every day, bar one, she has elected to stay outside on the grassy courtroom grounds. “It hurts to be in the same room as them,” she said. “It’s hard when you look at them, you think: ‘How could they do a child like that?’ Ahmaud was a good kid. All you had to do was stop and talk to him. You didn’t have to go out to him with no guns. “But I know God is going to deal with them.” It was February last year when Ahmaud Arbery, a Black 25-year-old, was jogging in the small coastal town of Satilla Shores. The three men accused of murder, Gregory McMichael, 67, his 35-year-old son Travis McMichael and their neighbor William “Roddie” Bryan, 52, all pursued Arbery claiming they suspected him of involvement in a series of burglaries in the neighborhood. Arbery had been recorded on surveillance footage entering and leaving a semi-constructed house in the area, but no evidence has linked him to any offense. A scuffle occurred as the McMichaels, both carrying firearms, attempted to corner Arbery, who was unarmed, with their pickup truck. Travis McMichael then opened fire three times with a shotgun. On Tuesday, after 11 days of jury selection, a panel of 65 jurors was finally selected from a pool of hundreds. Barring any unforeseen delays, including last-minute motions defense attorneys have suggested they will file, a final jury of 12 and four alternates will be seated this week, with opening arguments to follow, probably on Thursday. The trial of the three men, who have pleaded not guilty, occurs six months after the conviction of Derek Chauvin, the white former police officer who murdered George Floyd in Minneapolis after pinning his neck to the ground for nine minutes and 29 seconds. That trial was undoubtedly a landmark moment for police reform advocates around the country, but, say many observers, the case of Ahmaud Arbery is a sterner litmus test for the state of racial justice in the US. “This case is almost a straight line from Emmett Till,” said the civil rights attorney Lee Merritt, who represents the Arbery family. “Our legal system is statistically and continuously biased but it’s more of a test than Minneapolis and George Floyd because we are in the heart of white supremacy here in south Georgia.” Merritt’s point was illustrated by the immediate surroundings. He spoke to the Guardian on the steps of the courthouse – less than a mile away a monument to the Confederacy, wrapped in protective plastic since the start of the trial, still stands in a local park. City officials have said it will eventually be removed. But the legal particulars of this murder trial also point to history as well. The McMichaels’ defense is expected to hinge on a now defunct Georgia law that traces its roots to the state’s era of slavery and essentially allowed private citizens the power to arrest people if they had “reasonable and probable grounds of suspicion” of a felony being committed. In the wake of mass protest following Arbery’s death, Georgia’s Republican governor repealed the law, but attorneys for all three defendants are expected to utilize it throughout the trial. “They changed the law, but changing the law doesn’t affect us. It doesn’t change what was the law of the land at the time,” said Bryan’s defence attorney, Kevin Gough, last month. The backstory to the prosecution, too, points to evidence of insider politics and institutional racism in the local criminal justice world here. One of the first prosecutors assigned to the case, George Barnhill, initially recommended not charging any of those involved, claiming the pursuit was “perfectly legal” due to citizen’s arrest statutes. Barnhill, who had a chequered history of aggressively prosecuting Black residents in his jurisdiction, eventually recused himself from the case. Another former prosecutor initially assigned the case, Jackie Johnson, has been criminally charged for alleged misconduct in the process as Gregory McMichael had worked as an investigator in her office. The past two weeks have also highlighted the difficulties in impaneling a jury in this small rural county, composed of 69% white residents and 26% Black residents, and which voted 61% for Donald Trump in the 2020 presidential election. Defense lawyers have argued many potential jurors have not shown up for jury duty as the court whittled the final number down to 65 people. Prospective jurors were questioned about their prior knowledge of the case, whether they had expressed support for the Black Lives Matter movement, and if they knew any of those involved. In a striking remark on Friday last week defense attorney Gough complained to the judge: “It would appear that white males born in the south over 40 years old without a college degree … which he might also be known as Bubba or Joe Sixpack … seem to be significantly underrepresented.” Still, despite these hurdles, Merritt was explicit about his expectations for accountability in the case: “We expect convictions on all charges. These men should be in prison for the rest of their lives. That will get us on the road to justice.” *** Among the small group of activists seated on the grass outside the courthouse was 68-year-old Patricia Fields, from the nearby town of Waycross. Like Diane Arbery Jackson she too has come to the courthouse every day and, in a recent week, went to visit Satilla Shores, the small neighborhood where Arbery was killed. “It’s eerie there,” she said. “It feels like there’s a shadow over it. That something is just not right.” On a trip earlier this week few residents of Satilla Shores wanted to speak about the Arbery murder case. Along neatly kept lawns, a number of houses still display Trump 2020 presidential campaign placards and a golf cart was daubed in a sign that read: “Impeach Biden”. There is no memorial or marker at the site where Arbery was gunned down. For a case that is tied so deeply to atrocities of the past, the murder of Ahmaud Arbery is also closely linked to prosecutions from recent memory. The presence of eyewitness video, filmed by Bryan as he took part in the pursuit from behind, is set to play a pivotal role in the case. It took months for the footage to emerge, as the case sat in relative obscurity away from the gaze of most national media. The absence of publicly available footage undoubtedly contributed to the initial decision not to indict the three men now standing trial. It was not until the video was made public that the case was handed to Georgia state investigators who promptly recommended charges against the accused. In the same way that Darnella Frazier’s eyewitness video of the murder of George Floyd thrust the incident into global consciousness and played a pivotal role at the trial of Derek Chauvin, so too does this footage hold the key to the case. The trial also bears striking similarities to the prosecution of George Zimmerman, charged with the murder of the unarmed Black teenager Trayvon Martin in the neighboring state of Florida in 2012. Zimmerman, a volunteer neighborhood watchman who shot and killed Martin after chasing him down for “suspicious” activity, was acquitted at trial claiming self-defense under stand your ground statutes – a similar line of argument tied to self-defense that the McMichaels are likely to make at trial. Crucially, however, there was no witness video in the Zimmerman trial. *** Diane Arbery Jackson ate lunch on the lawn; shrimp, corn and grilled potatoes, donated to the small group of activists by a local racial justice coalition. She told the Guardian of her fondest memories of her nephew, whose death prompted the state of Georgia to ratify its first hate crime statute in June last year. “He always showed love to everybody,” she said. “Every time he sees you, he always gives you a kiss. ‘I love you,’ he always said. ‘I’m good.’” She described her family’s history in Brunswick, which dated back to beyond the civil rights era. Her father and grandmother had marched in the 1960s, she said and were beaten by white residents. “And that’s why we’ve got to keep doing this, so we can keep going where they left off at. We have to come together as a community and continue the fight.”A government contractor has paid out “substantial” compensation following the death of a young mother who took an overdose after her disability benefits were removed. Philippa Day, 27, a single mother from Nottingham who had longstanding mental health issues, died in hospital in October 2019, two months after taking an overdose. She had endured months of stress and anxiety after a long struggle with the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) and Capita to reinstate her benefits. An inquest into her death identified 28 instances where “systemic errors” by both the DWP and its contractor had led to failures in the handling of Day’s claim. These failures were a “stressor” in her decision to take the overdose, the coroner ruled, although he was unable to conclude she had intended to take her own life. In May, Day’s family issued a compensation claim for negligence to both the DWP and Capita. The latter subsequently agreed to settle out of court. The sum was not disclosed but is understood to be in line with what the family was asking for. The family said the money would be used to provide for Day’s son’s future. Imogen Day, Philippa’s sister, said: “Our family has always maintained that my sister’s treatment by Capita, on behalf of the DWP, directly impacted her mental state and in the end is the reason for her death. Capita’s wall of bureaucracy, with no consideration for Philippa’s mental state, exacerbated her despair at her debt and poverty. She was met with cold, uncaring call operators who would not listen to her cries for help.” She added: “This settlement will in some measure provide for Philippa’s family and a materially stable upbringing for Philippa’s son, but he has lost his mother, and there is nothing Capita can do to put right the wrong that contributed to Philippa’s death.” It is believed to be the first time an agent of the DWP has settled a legal claim brought as a result of their errors. Capita, which administers disability benefits under contract to DWP, has also agreed to meet the family to discuss ways to improve its interactions with benefits claimants. A Capita spokesperson said: “We are very sorry for the mistakes we made in processing Philippa’s personal independence payment (PIP) claim and the additional stress this caused her. In partnership with the DWP, we have considered and reviewed the coroner’s report and we are implementing all the recommendations that are relevant to us. “Following this incident, we have strengthened our processes and we are working to continuously improve and deliver a professional, efficient and kind service for every PIP applicant we assess.” The family’s lawyer, Merry Varney of solicitors Leigh Day, welcomed the settlement: “Capita has shown acceptance of their failures and a willingness to ensure their mistakes are not repeated. However, there remain too many examples of the DWP, which controls the financial circumstances of the majority of people too sick to work, acting inhumanely to those receiving benefits and a continued resistance by the DWP to transparent investigations into benefit-related deaths.” A DWP spokesperson said in statement: “Our condolences remain with the Day family. We cannot comment on active legal proceedings.” It is not clear to which legal proceedings they refer to as Leigh Day has confirmed Capita’s settlement means no further legal action is outstanding regarding the Philippa Day case. The DWP was issued by the coroner with a prevention of future deaths notice at the inquest requiring it to set out how it would improve its services. In its formal response in April it said it recognised “the need to treat everyone with empathy and care; especially those with mental health conditions”. It said it had introduced specialist mental health and behaviour and relationships training for all new staff handling disability benefits. It added it was “determined to learn from this deeply tragic case”. Day was described by her family as an intelligent, beautiful and “effervescent” woman who loved her young son and had ambitions to train as a nurse. She had endured mental illness and type 1 diabetes since childhood. She had a record of self-harm and suicide attempts and had several stays in psychiatric care. Her life became increasingly stressful and chaotic after her benefits were reduced from £228 a week to just £60 as a result of a botched benefits application. Her distressed state was captured in a recording of a phone call to a benefits official in June 2019, played at the inquest, in which she pleaded for help. In tears, Day had told the official: “I’ve been waiting for six months now. I’m literally starving, I can’t survive for much longer.” She added: “[I’m in] £5,000 debt. Nothing to eat. I’ve lost all my [benefit] premiums … I cannot survive … without any money. I need something to live for.” After her benefits were finally reinstated, Day – who was agoraphobic – became increasingly terrified and anxious as DWP officials insisted she be retested at a face-to-face meeting at a benefits assessment centre or face losing her benefits. Her sister told the inquest this was the “straw that broke the camel’s back”.I’m standing on one of the most beautiful and dramatic spots on Skye – which given the stiff competition offered around the island is saying something. Across the waters of Loch Slapin loom the serrated peaks of the Black Cuillin ridge to the west, while the more rounded hills of the Red Cuillins around the bay are to the north. Over the deeper water, and outlined by the afternoon sun, stands the island of Rum, while around me on the headland of Suisnish, the banks of the glens are cloaked in heather. Along the three-mile walk it took me to get here, I was accompanied by gulls coasting with the strong south-west winds and at one point saw an eagle being mobbed by hooded crows at the top of a crag. The headland of Suisnish is an idyllic and wild place. But it is also an elegiac one. There is a sad and tragic history underlying this beautiful landscape. Underneath the heather that stretches away, like a face beneath the sheet, one can still make out the old ridges of the “runrig” system when the land was parcelled out in strips for the villagers who once lived here. Closer to the shore are all that remains of their houses. For the deserted village of Suisnish is one of the most poignant memorials to the Highland clearances of the 19th century, when villagers had to leave their homes to make way for sheep. In 1852 Lord MacDonald’s factor, a man called Ballingall, arrived here with his team of what euphemistically were called “ground officers”. The crofters were “asked” to leave the village that their ancestors had lived in for generations. If necessary, they were forcibly evicted and their houses destroyed. One of the more hypocritical reasons given for this destruction was that their landlord, Lord MacDonald, was doing it out of piety because the villagers were too far from any church. It is very difficult not to feel both anger and sadness at the plight of these Highland communities faced with eviction in the middle of winter. One curious question seldom mentioned when discussing this most emotive of subjects is why local landlords should have suddenly developed such a passion for sheep so late in the 19th century. The answer lies in the accidental discovery that it had always been believed that sheep would never survive the harsh winters of the Highlands, but it was found there was in fact one breed – the cheviot – that could. Today, only one modern house stands on the headland, built originally, one imagines, for a shepherd to keep control of the sheep that still roam here. On my return journey I see the carcass of one being mauled by a murder of hooded crows. The birds are also incomers, as a few decades ago their range did not extend as far as Skye. This has never been a static landscape. Most of the misfortunes suffered in the Highlands and islands seemed to occur with peculiar force in Sleat, a peninsula on the south of the island. The 19th-century kelping industry, which processed seaweed, did well for a while, with a consequent growth in population because it was so labour-intensive, but then suffered a huge setback when the chemicals derived from seaweed were found to be more easily obtained elsewhere. From one year to the next, the bottom dropped out of the market. Then potato blight here, as in Ireland, wreaked havoc. And in the 20th century, the decline of the herring industry affected it badly. But help and a certain amount of prosperity for Sleat have come from an unexpected corner. In the late 1970s, Sir Iain Noble, a banker from Edinburgh, arrived with a goal: to create Scotland’s first Gaelic college and to reinvigorate the community with a renewed sense of purpose. His mission was made more quixotic by the fact that he had not been brought up to speak Gaelic himself, and at first he met some resistance from locals suspicious as ever of any incomer, particularly one from a patrician background. Noble arrived at a time when Sleat was at a low ebb. “After dark, there wasn’t a single light on in any of the houses,” said his widow Lucilla, whom I met at the hotel of Eilean Iarmain at Isleornsay, where Noble also set up his own whisky blending business so that he could stock bottles with Gaelic labels – and drink a fair amount of it himself. He had a reputation as a bon vivant and storyteller, and his wake after he died in 2010 was a lock-in at the bar that lasted from the Friday evening to the Monday morning. Gaelic in the 1970s was still a divisive subject. “People might speak it in the home, but not on the bus. There was a sense of shame about it,” Lucilla said. Although Noble ended up attracting considerable support for his college across the parties, from the Conservatives to the SNP, politicians were initially unsure about its virtues. His National Centre for Gaelic Language and Culture, Sabhal Mòr Ostaig, reversed that and gave a sense of confidence and entrepreneurship to many of the crofters who lived nearby. Beginning with just a handful of students, Sabhal Mòr Ostaig has expanded considerably over the years, from the original seven who came when it opened in 1983 to the 500 full-time and 1,000 part-time students it gets annually today. It has also now started a programme to offer affordable housing, a problem on an island where visitors have started to inflate house prices. In Tarskavaig, the small vibrant crofting community on the north coast of Sleat, half the population speak Gaelic, a proportion far higher than in most areas in Scotland. One welcome by-product of the Gaelic college is the installation of fibre broadband around the peninsula, making rural businesses far more viable. I first stayed in Tarskavaig almost 20 years ago, and it’s a place I have kept returning to for its sense of wild isolation and what is thought to be the best view of all of the Cuillin mountains across Gauscavaig bay. You reach it by a fabulously small and winding road that delivers you from the other side of the Sleat peninsula. At nearby Tokavaig are the romantic and ruined remains of the “fortress of shadows”, Dunscaith Castle, the principal seat of the MacDonalds in the 15th century. Because the college has been so successful in helping the promotion of rural businesses, the ratio between tourism and life seems a healthy one; there are plenty of visitors but not in an overwhelming way. The community centre at An Crùbh (the Hub), built just a few years ago, is a triumph of light airy architecture. Its cafe sells cullen skink – a thick soup typically made of smoked haddock, potatoes and onions – and a powerfully full Scottish breakfast, best undertaken if you’ve walked several miles to get there. Other rural businesses that have started up since the college established itself include a distillery at Torabhaig and several art galleries and architects’ practices, as well as some specifically Gaelic projects such as Faclair na Gàidhlig, which is compiling a Gaelic historical dictionary. Sleat is sometimes described as the garden of Skye, with more woods than elsewhere on the island and a fine array of birds and wildlife. While I was staying on the shore near Tarskavaig, I could swim each morning with great northern divers ducking around me and the odd seal coming to check how anybody could be so foolhardy as to dunk themselves in such cold water. A heron stalked over the shingle and one evening, driving back over the headland, I caught the unmistakable silhouette of a hen harrier flying ahead of me in the lights. Although difficult to restock the woodland, given the presence of so many deer, there have been attempts to bring in more rowan, birch, oak, holly and hazel; somewhat counterintuitively, Nature Scotland refuses to put in any Scots pine on the grounds that, however well it would grow, it is not indigenous. But for all the regeneration, it is difficult not to forget the deserted villages like Suisnish. As Lucilla told me as we nursed a Gaelic whisky, when she goes there she tries to close her eyes and imagine what it must have been like, and of how hard that is “when there is no sound of their voices or of children laughing”. Their buildings may have been demolished but at least their language and some of their inheritance is still being preserved. The great Gaelic poet Sorley MacLean, one of the first supporters of the Gaelic college, wrote in Hallaig (translated by Seamus Heaney) of the ghosts of village girls returning from Suisnish, “still lightsome and unheartbroken, / Their stories only beginning”. Way to go Take the train to Kyle of Lochalsh, and local buses such as the 917 over the bridge to Skye and on to Portree, or travel by bus direct from Inverness to Skye. Or take the train to Mallaig and ferry to Armadale, although the service has recently been intermittent. Stay Eilean Iarmain, the hotel revived by Sir Iain Noble in Isleornsay, which has an excellent restaurant, bar and distillery, has doubles from £85 B&amp;B. Àird a’ Bhàsair, formerly the Ardvasar hotel, one of the oldest inns on Skye, and the only one within walking distance of the Mallaig to Armadale ferry, has doubles from £75 B&amp;B.Josie, 19, landed her first “adult” job as an IT support worker last November, just a few months after graduating from high school. Though the job could be done fully remotely, managers insisted that she come into the office – despite the pandemic. At first, her co-workers and managers wore masks, but often incorrectly; when the local mask mandate was lifted, people stopped wearing them altogether. “It was honestly scary,” Josie recalls. She’d just moved into her first apartment with her partner; both have pre-existing health conditions that increase their vulnerability to severe illness from Covid-19. But as the sole earner in her two-person household, Josie felt resigned to the daily risk at work. “It was like getting shot out of a cannon into adulthood,” she says. This August amid the rise of the Delta variant, she finally quit – becoming one of the 4.3 million American workers to voluntarily leave their jobs during that month alone. It was a record-breaking month for resignations since the government began tracking monthly job turnovers more than two decades ago, according to labor department data released in mid-October. Between January and August of this year, at least 30 million Americans quit their jobs. Whether you call it the “Great Resignation” or a “nationwide reassessment of work”, the labor market shake-up of the pandemic could have unexpected aftershocks for years to come. That may be especially true for early-career workers like Josie, who have now spent a major chunk of their working lives under the strain of Covid-19. Many of these workers say their job experiences in the pandemic have led them to recognize their real priorities in life – and leaving a job is perhaps the boldest assertion of those priorities they can make. ‘It gave me this unbelievable sense of freedom’ “I never imagined it would happen this way, but here I am,” says Alex, a 27-year-old marketing professional who had worked at the same Boston-based consumer tech startup since she graduated from college until early October, when she resigned from the company via email. Pre-pandemic, the company’s culture was relaxed. But the switch to fully remote work in March 2020 was swiftly followed by a sharp boom in product sales. Over time, an “always on” work culture crept in as a result, with co-workers communicating at all hours. When a colleague left the company, Alex’s workload doubled with no additional pay. “I just felt like I couldn’t let things go, because [the company was] really small,” she says. “If anyone were to leave, it just seemed impossible.” Alex reached out to teammates for help, only to discover that they were just as burned out as she was. But because this was the only job she’d ever had, she didn’t initially recognize that the extent of her overwork – and her sense of personal obligation to the business – were not necessarily normal or healthy. That is, until she talked to others outside the company. Quitting has been more than a relief. “It gave me this unbelievable sense of freedom that I could do whatever I wanted, and made things so much clearer,” says Alex, speaking from her parents’ home near Washington. She plans to spend a few months relaxing with family before finding a new job, possibly in non-profit work. She has also begun revisiting long-deferred plans to pursue a graduate degree in public administration – plans that were easy to neglect in the face of an ever-mounting workload. Like Alex, 28-year-old Cassie also experienced a pandemic burnout in her role as a case manager for a life insurance company in central Pennsylvania. A visual artist by training, Cassie joined the firm in July 2019 after a stint doing freelance graphic design work. It wasn’t her dream job, but the stability was a nice change at first. Then in the second half of 2020, her workload multiplied seemingly overnight. Before long, Cassie was fielding more work calls than any single person could handle. Work became so all-consuming that she converted her home studio space, originally set up for unwinding and making art, into a makeshift home office. “[The pandemic] turned this space for good times into work times, and eventually bad times,” Cassie recalls. While she remains grateful to have had the ability to work from home in 2020, losing the time and space for a creative outlet was a blow. A few weeks ago, she opted to leave the job for good. Thanks to a salaried live-in partner and some personal savings, she feels fortunate to have a “coasting budget” to live from while she explores what comes next. She hopes to find a job that’s both creative and stable. ‘My life is my life and my job is my job’ For 27-year-old Lloren Zeigler, quitting was a way to regain control of her time. Leaving her job as a television production manager, last December, was easy. “They wanted me to work through the holiday and I said abso-fucking-lutely not,” says Zeigler. Since walking away from her entertainment industry role nearly a year ago, the Los Angeles-based Zeigler has devoted herself full-time to the small business she began in 2020 with her partner, Liz Sanchez. The pair make incense that they sell at local swap meets and flea markets under the brand Le Trois Apothecary. It may or may not become a forever-job, but Zeigler appreciates the opportunity to nurture her entrepreneurial streak. Nancy, 30, a PR professional who also lives in Los Angeles, similarly resigned from her job for the greener pastures of self-employment. Working remotely during quarantine, she realized that she didn’t need to rely on a hovering boss to be productive and do work that she could feel good about. In October, she left her position at a small recording company after just three months – her second time quitting a job during the pandemic. “My job is not my life,” Nancy says. “My life is my life and my job is my job. I’m willing to take on the uncertainty [of unemployment] simply to have my own time under control, and have my own life available to me.” While Nancy remains open to the possibility of another full-time role, she says that a prospective employer would need to respect her boundaries and trust her to manage her own schedule. For the time being, she plans to pursue freelance music marketing projects and related project management. Josie, the 19-year-old in Ohio, is similarly protective of her personal boundaries in a work setting. Since quitting, she’s found a new job doing similar work for a different company. This time, however, the position is fully remote. Though she isn’t sure where her future will lead, Josie says she now knows what her rights are as a worker. They include the right to leave a job without remorse. “Companies don’t care about me, either,” she says.Nigel Farage’s Brexit party may have saved up to 25 Labour seats in the Midlands and the north at the 2019 general election, denying Boris Johnson a landslide majority of 130, according to new analysis. Farage’s party failed to win a single seat in December 2019 as Boris Johnson sought to hammer home the message that the Conservatives would “get Brexit done”. But elections experts John Curtice, Stephen Fisher and Patrick English say that by attracting Leave-supporting former Labour voters who might otherwise have backed the Conservatives, Farage may have significantly cut the scale of Labour’s defeat. By modelling the behaviour of Labour Leavers elsewhere, they suggest that in the absence of a Brexit party candidate, 70% would likely have turned to the Tories and 30% stuck with Labour. Meanwhile, Conservative voters who switched to Farage’s party were likely to have voted for Johnson. “As a result, the Brexit party may have cost the Conservatives about 25 of the seats that Labour managed to retain – most of them Leave-voting seats in the north of England and the Midlands – and thereby enabled Labour to avoid an even heavier loss of seats,” they say in a new book, The British General Election of 2019, published on Tuesday. Labour’s performance was already its worst in terms of seats won since 1935, prompting Jeremy Corbyn’s resignation after a chaotic campaign. The Brexit party stood its most prominent candidate, Richard Tice, in Labour-held Hartlepool where he took more than 10,000 votes but came in behind Labour and the Conservatives. The seat fell to the Tories in a byelection this year, raising questions about Keir Starmer’s ability to win back the so-called red wall. Farage repeatedly sought an electoral pact with Johnson’s Conservatives in 2019, offering to stand aside in Tory-held seats in exchange for a free run in former Labour heartlands constituencies. With no deal forthcoming, he unilaterally decided not to field candidates in seats where there was an incumbent Tory MP. This move had less of an effect on the UK-wide result, the authors say – but it did have an impact in a few key seats that the Tories only narrowly held. “There was just a handful of seats where the decision of the Brexit party to stand down might have helped avoid a Conservative defeat, though they include the seats of two prominent Brexiters, Iain Duncan Smith (Chingford &amp; Wood Green) and Dominic Raab (Esher &amp; Walton).” The Liberal Democrats are heavily targeting Raab’s Surrey constituency, which he held by just 2,700 votes. Edited by academics Tim Bale, Robert Ford, Will Jennings and Paula Surridge, the new book is the latest edition of what is widely viewed as the definitive academic guide to general elections, with the first edition published in the wake of Labour’s landslide victory in 1945. By analysing constituency-by-constituency results, and responses to the British Election Study internet panel, covering 30,000 voters, Curtice, Fisher and English show that Brexit heavily skewed the outcome in contests right across the country. “The Conservatives’ share of the vote increased by nearly six [percentage] points on 2017 in seats that are estimated to have backed Leave most heavily in 2016, while the party’s vote fell by a couple of points in constituencies where most had voted Remain,” they say. By contrast, they add: “While Labour’s vote fell by six points where most voters had backed Remain, it dropped by nearly nine points where a majority had supported Leave.” They say this pattern was “disruptive of much of the existing geography of party support” so that “all of Britain’s parties often recorded some of their best performances in relatively unfamiliar territory” – including the Conservatives’ advances in the North and Midlands.The setting sun brings a warm glow to the huts in the village of Umoja in Samburu county, Kenya. Christine Sitiyan sits outside her home with her beadwork, carefully running the thin thread through tiny bead holes, hoping she can finish the colourful belt she is making before darkness sets in. The traditional belt can fetch 3,000 Kenyan shillings (£20), enough to cover her needs for a month. This tranquil scene is very different from her troubled past. Like many girls in her community, Sitiyan never finished school but was married off as a young teenager. Seven years later, with two children, she left her husband, unable to endure the beatings from a man she says could no longer fend for the family in an increasingly harsh environment. “He would beat me almost every evening out of frustration,” says Sitiyan, 25. “The drought killed part of his family’s livestock, while raiders from a neighbouring community stole the rest.” He took up manual labour, earning 300 shillings a day, barely enough to provide for the family. “One day, I just took off with the children and found refuge here.” Sitiyan is among scores of women and girls in Umoja, a village that has become a rescue centre for women and girls escaping domestic violence, female genital mutilation (FGM) and early marriages. There are no men in this manyatta, the traditional homestead. While the women may have escaped these threats, they are still potential victims of “drought-instigated violence”. Along with women in other marginalised counties such as Garissa, Marsabit, Mandera, Isiolo, Wajir and Turkana, they are at great risk of sexual molestation as they trek long distances in search of water. John Kitui, country director of Oxfam Kenya, an organisation that works with local groups helping to build resilience, says: “As the drought continues, families have nothing to fall back on and are forced to marry off daughters early to receive dowry payment. Without school fees, it is often girls who are forced out of class who then bear children at a young age. The resulting stress often leads to domestic violence.” Women are also the unintended victims of tribal conflicts as communities fight over dwindling resources. Men are forced to move remaining livestock tens of kilometres away to find foliage, and the women and children left behind are at increased risk of attacks by bandits. A 2021 food and water assessment report for Samburu states that conflicts triggered by “competition for rangeland resources … have resulted in loss of people’s lives and their livelihoods”, with local leaders reporting increasing climate-related cases of domestic violence. Henry Lenayiasa, a chief in Samburu, says cases of violence against women by men who can no longer eke out a living in the harsh environment are on the rise. He says residents may have heard about climate breakdown and how it affects them, “but men who are unable to cope with the drought take it out on women”. “We have lost livestock in great numbers during the drought. In Kenya’s arid north, a man without livestock cannot provide and loses self-esteem. This is likely to trigger cases of domestic violence. If we do not address climate matters adequately, such cases will only escalate,” says Lenayiasa. Women in these marginalised communities are exposed to risk of attacks from other men and from wild animals as dwindling resources mean they have to travel farther from their homes to get water or firewood. “No place is safe for us,” Sitiyan says. “I was almost beaten up after some young men waylaid me on the way to the river, but I managed to escape. It is a risk we take daily in order to provide for our children.” For Sitiyan and the 38 women in Umoja, the nearby Ewaso Ng’iro River was their main source of water. But its flow has been interrupted by extensive droughts that at times left the river bone dry. A decade ago, Nasa’s Earth Observatory described the riverbed as “a pale tan ribbon of sand” after a prolonged drought in 2009. At other times, the river has flooded and displaced thousands. The river has little water currently, and what there is is contaminated by domestic and wild animal waste. On a hot Thursday morning last week, the Guardian joined three women – Jane Nomong’en, Paulina Lekureiya and Kareni Lematile – for the 25-minute walk to the river. The unmarked route weaves through thick bushes. “This is where they hide,” Nomong’en says, pointing to a nearby thicket where a moran (young Samburu warrior) tended some goats. “There are no men in our village to protect us from the [troublemakers].” Along the route are several water pans dug in recent years to collect rainwater. It never rained. A steep gulley leads us to the riverbed where the women find a spot with soft sand and hope it will yield some underground water. Lematile, the youngest, is tasked with scooping out the sand with a cup to make a hole wide enough for water to seep up. It is exhausting. She takes a break every few minutes while the others keep watch. “A 14-year-old boy was killed by a crocodile while fetching water up there,” Lekureiya says. “A woman was also attacked by a crocodile near the same spot. She was five months pregnant. We run away from men only to meet crocodiles.” It takes Lematile 20 minutes of scooping out sand before water begins to collect at the bottom. Using the cup, she painstakingly collects the water in four, 10-litre containers. This takes another hour. The women take a cupful each, and so does Lematile’s son. “We get some stomach upsets but what options do we have?” says Lematile. About 100 metres away, a group of young men are scooping out large quantities of sand from the river to fill a truck and sell to developers, much to the chagrin of the women. Sand harvesting leaves the riverbed bare, unable to hold water during the dry season. It also results in floods during heavy rains. The women are afraid that if it goes on they will have to walk even farther to find water, exposing them to more risk of violence and attacks from wild animals. The women in Kenya’s arid areas know that their future security depends on political efforts being made far away this week at the Cop26 climate talks in Scotland, a country where turning on a tap brings instant water. “World leaders at Cop26 must deliver on promises to provide finance to these communities to enable them cope with the effects of climate crisis by addressing its root causes,” says Kitui.I was 19 when, in September 1987, I got a fortnight’s work experience on my local free newspaper, the Kingston Guardian, in south-west London. It was a small but dedicated team of reporters operating out of an office in Twickenham and they were incredibly generous, taking me under their collective wing and sending me out on all kinds of assignments. By the end of the two weeks, I had a handful of bylined pieces and had written my first investigative feature – a tug-of-love dog ownership dispute over a whippet. But the moment that changed me came on the very first day, on a story that I didn’t even write. The team had suggested I go out in the evening with an older reporter on a “death knock” – going to visit a family after a death. They didn’t call it a death knock and it wasn’t one of those notorious tabloid visits, when a reporter turns up out of the blue and confronts a bereaved family. It had been agreed in advance with the parents of the deceased, a 17-year-old schoolboy who had died in a car accident, not long after passing his driving test. It was the kind of awful, accidental death that happens regularly, all over the country. The reporter drove us to the house and we rang the bell. I was very nervous at the idea of meeting people suffering such grief. But when the father came to the door, he shook our hands, smiled and welcomed us in. He had been waiting for us and was happy to tell us all about the kind, wonderful young man his son had been. We sat on the sofa and I listened while he talked about his son: what a good person he had been, all his achievements at school, his hopes and plans. I still remember that he had got a place at the University of York, because that was where my brother had studied. The reporter was kind and professional and took it all down in shorthand. He asked more questions to make sure he had enough details. It probably took about half an hour. When we had finished, the reporter asked if the family had had a chance to think about a photo for the paper to use. Again, they had asked in advance of the visit. The father had remembered the request and had a lovely portrait ready on the mantelpiece, which he handed over. The reporter said he would make sure it was returned to them. It was very matter-of-fact and very English. The father seemed calm and polite. The reporter was kind and sensitive. I had never confronted death with a stranger before. There were no tears. I felt there might be some small comfort in knowing your child’s life and death were going to be marked and commemorated in the paper. It made me realise how journalists could provide an important service to their community, that they could be welcomed into the home of a bereaved family to help remember a life and record how a loved one mattered. I have taken that memory into every crime story I have covered. In 2006, while working as a reporter at Channel 4 News, I met the family of 15-year-old Rochelle Holness, who had been murdered by a serial rapist, a man with a long criminal record of violence against women. Her remains had been found in bin bags near his flat. The Sun had published a horrible and untrue story, claiming that police told them she had still been alive when he dismembered her body. The Met police commissioner, Sir Ian Blair, had recently said the press were racist in how they treated black victims and this seemed evidence of that. Rochelle was a black girl from a south London council estate. Would the Sun have speculated in print that way about a white girl? Rochelle’s mother, Jennifer Bennett, had kept a cuttings book of all the news clippings – even that Sun story. I was determined to counter the cruelty of those lies. In my report, after the killer was sentenced to a whole-life tariff, I interviewed Bennett, talking about what a fun daughter Rochelle had been. I showed a sequence of photos of her – from babyhood to her teenage years. She had been a loved child with her whole future ahead of her. I wanted viewers to know that her life mattered. Just as that 17-year-old boy’s had. I still have all my early clippings in a cuttings book. The story of that first death knock isn’t in it, of course, as I didn’t write up the report. But it is the experience that made me the journalist I am. Or at least try to be.We booked a last-minute holiday to Malta in August and checked post-Brexit entry requirements on the government website. It stated that passports need to be valid for at least three months after the day you planned to leave Malta, or any other Schengen country. I had five and a half months left on mine. However, when I tried to check in for our Ryanair flight, the airline told me travellers must have at least six months left on their passports in order to fly, and that we would be denied boarding. We therefore lost the £1,200 we’d paid for the holiday, and spent another £1,600 on an alternative week in Cornwall. I can’t be the only person caught out by this confusion about the rules. MF, Ipswich, Suffolk Indeed, you are not, and the fault lies, in part, with the Home Office. For nine months it published misleading information about post-Brexit passport requirements to Schengen countries. The guidance on the HM Passport Office website, published in October last year, stated that at least six months must be left on a passport for travel to most European countries. At the end of July, the government amended the guidance after reports of holidaymakers who had been denied boarding by airlines because of the error. The website now confirms the three-month rule and merely recommends that passports have six months of validity. Since you were due to fly in mid-August, Ryanair should have been aware of the rules and of the government correction. It had no business refusing to fly you. Not that the airline is admitting any fault. “Ryanair complies with all European Commission travel regulations and passengers travelling between the EU and the UK after the end of the transition period must have a passport that is not valid for more than 10 years,” it says, completely missing the point. EU requirements do state that passports cannot be valid for more than 10 years (some older UK ones are) but since your passport reaches its 10th anniversary next February that is irrelevant. I pointed this out to Ryanair, but was met with resounding silence. The Home Office also focuses on the irrelevant 10-year rule to save face. Not only does it decline to apologise for misleading travellers, it claims its erroneous advice was doing travellers a favour. “To avoid the possibility of citizens encountering difficulties at any particular border when complying with these rules, our advice continues to show that any extra months added to a 10-year passport may not count. We make no apology for taking a risk-averse approach to ensure our citizens do not face issues at borders.” When I again asked why, if the government stood by its guidance, it had been quietly rewritten in July, there was no further response. The good news is that, according to the specialist aviation solicitor Bott &amp; Co, you can try to claim compensation from Ryanair and argue you were denied boarding without reasonable grounds under EC 261/2004 which has, since Brexit, been enshrined in UK law. The bad news is, the sum payable is limited to £350 and that still leaves you more than £2,000 out of pocket. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsWestern leaders at the Cop26 climate summit have been urged to embrace a far more holistic view of humanity’s place in the natural world by an art project celebrating indigenous minority languages. The Living Language Land project has identified 25 words from minority languages and dialects around the world – including Native American Lakota, Murui, a native language of Colombian and Peru, and Scots Gaelic – that highlight each culture’s ties to their land. Those words, streamed online with films and indigenous visual art, include a Namibian bushman’s word for magical journey; one from the Philippines to denote a forest within a forest and an indigenous Chilean word for the tangible and intangible parts of life. They have released 26 recordings to match the number given to this summit, Cop26, including one of wind blowing near the Halley research station on the Brunt ice shelf on Antarctica, the world’s only continent without permanent inhabitants. Four come from the UK, with Welsh, Doric, the Scots language as spoken in the north-east of Scotland, and Northumbrian coastal speech joining Scots Gaelic. The work, funded by the British Council, is being featured at the summit in Glasgow on Wednesday by its producers, Philippa Bayley and Neville Gabie, with partner organisations worldwide. Three further words, from the Namibian Khwe language, are being released later this week. Gabie, a visual artist living in Gloucestershire, said they hoped to promote a shift in thinking about the climate crisis to focus on humanity’s integration with and dependency on the natural world. “The conversations in Cop26 are dominated by a western notion of how we address climate change,” he said. “We’re trying to say part of the solution is a change of thinking, which can be inspired by other communities who have lived with nature in a very different way to our own. “It’s opening ourselves to those different voices, that different conversation, and a different dialogue with nature and the environment that I think is so vital and necessary.” Bayley, a research manager, said indigenous and minority languages were rooted in their bonds with the surrounding environment. “Language grows out of a place so the specifics of that place – the creatures, the plants, the landscape, the climate – are all represented in the language,” she said. “But also language describes more deeply the relationships of humans to the more than human, but also all those other relationships to each other.” Bayley cites the word tshinanu, from the Innu language Nehluen spoken in the Quebec province of Canada that means an all-inclusive “we – all as equals”. “We’re very much driving the [Cop26] negotiations from a point of fear, ‘If we don’t do this, we’re all screwed’. As if we need to feel the heat turning up, the pressure increasing, in order for us to take action,” she said. “Our project is aiming to say it’s all about relationships. From a sense we belong in nature, and that it’s not a battle between either we win with our development model, or nature wins and we have to give up all that stuff. We’re on the same side: we’re in relationship with each other. The earth wants us to be here, because we also support her: there’s a mutuality about it.” Five words from the Living Language Land collection Itrofillmongen From the Mapudungun language of Chile, this means the indivisible elements of the diversity of life, both tangible and unseen. Aibidil This Scottish Gaelic word was chosen to represent the 18 letters of the Gaelic alphabet, which has its roots in the tree-like script of Ogham. |Xau A verb from the bushman’s language of |Xam from Namibia, |xau means “to shoot with a magical arrow or go on a magical expedition”. Napuro This word from the Cuyo islands of the Philippines means a forest within a forest, signifying an island of ancient trees, surrounded by younger forest. Wíyukčaŋ This Lakota word, chosen by Tiokasin Ghosthorse, means consciousness or knowing. Lakota is a language of verbs because it is believed all things are alive.Throughout the 2021 United Nations climate change conference, the Guardian will be publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. Gennadiy Shukin, Taymyr, Russia I was born in 1962 in a family of deer herders in Taymyr, on a peninsula in the very far north of Russia. I am part of the Dolgan community: we are an indigenous Russian group and there are around 6,000 left of us living in the tundra. Growing up, the Soviet Union tried to deny us our traditional way of life, but since then climate change has become the biggest challenge to our survival. Our community lives by hunting, fishing and herding deer. Scientists say that Taymyr has the most rapid temperature increase in Russia, and we can really feel it. Because of the warmer winters, we have seen that deer are giving birth earlier in the year. Many are born too weak and don’t survive the long journeys they have to make. This means there is much less deer for us to hunt and it hurts the whole ecosystem. Rivers and lakes that we use for fishing have also started to dry out. Others are too polluted after all the big oil and gas plants have sprung up over the years in our lands. Some days we don’t catch any fish at all. For generations, we have sold the food we caught to local towns and cities to buy basic products like sugar and wheat. Without animals, we cannot survive. Big craters are also forming because the Arctic permafrost is starting to melt under our feet. This means the routes that we have used for decades to travel, hunt and fish have to be adjusted as whole roads have sunk. It is also dangerous as you never know where the next crater will form. Our ecosystem is changing quickly: animals such as sables that I have never seen before in my life have appeared in the tundra. And now we also have to deal with giant mosquitoes and bugs that attack our livestock. The summers are becoming unbearable. It’s madness. The youth sees that climate change makes our traditional way of life impossible and they are forced to move to the bigger cities to find jobs, which are often low-paid. Our culture is disappearing.Helen Oyeyemi is a bamboozler, a discombobulator, a peddler of perplexity. She crushes fables and fairytales down to a powder and then laces her fiction with it like some kind of literary hallucinogen. Her novels should come with pharmaceutical warning labels: do not operate heavy machinery under the influence. Symptoms may include slurred realism and a persistent allegorical itch. In her most recent books, the British author seems to have been experimenting with how much expository and explanatory weight she can jettison to make space for filigree and romp. In 2019’s Gingerbread, the result was something akin to immersive theatre – an invitation to explore. What we lost in orientation, we gained in play space. Gingerbread could be read as a novel about Brexit insularity, the tenacious forces of social immobility, or just a high fantasia about stupendous biscuitry. Oyeyemi’s seventh novel, Peaces, is set on a train, a chimerical engine so scaled and silvered it seems almost creaturely. Inside its carriages, the laws of physics don’t quite apply; the air crackles with ontological doubt (“If you stuck out your tongue it would dance there, right at the tip: the fizz of conditionality”). Trains provide a “sticky mix of enclosure and exposure”, Oyeyemi writes; an “incubator for intense encounters”. This one – The Lucky Day – comes replete with a postal sorting office, portrait gallery, sauna and holding cell. Not to mention a glass-panelled greenhouse car. And that’s what Oyeyemi has built here: a hurtling hothouse of a novel. In the wilds of “deepest Kent” we join Otto and Xavier Shin – a mesmerist and his ghostwriter lover – as they embark on their “non-honeymoon honeymoon”. The trip is a gift from a wealthy insomniac aunt (“she looks so tired nobody realises she’s rich”), and they are accompanied – as always – by Árpád, Otto’s companion mongoose, 30th in a distinguished line of companion mongooses stretching back two centuries (mongooses should travel before they hit middle age, Oyeyemi explains, “otherwise they get narrow-minded”). Otto and Xavier share The Lucky Day with three others: a composer-cum-driver, a debt control officer (mystical trains are expensive), and the train’s owner, theremin virtuoso Ava Kapoor, who – rumour has it – never disembarks. Is she a recluse or a captive? When our lovers catch a glimpse of her through a window, they can’t tell if the sign she’s holding says “HELLO” or “HELP”. It’s all so drenched in quirk and whimsy – the leashed mongoose, the theremin, the brocade fainting couch in the train library that is “the colour of Darjeeling tea in the fourth minute of brewing” – the stuff of Wes Anderson fever dreams. But, unlike Anderson’s The Darjeeling Limited, the legacy of empire is wild and wakeful on Oyeyemi’s train, not just elaborate wallpaper. The Lucky Day was once a tea smuggling train, with shady connections to the East India company. With old money come old cruelties. “I’m sure almost no one deludes themselves that all their ancestors were decent,” Otto reminds us. As The Lucky Day lurches through a landscape our lovers don’t recognise, Peaces lurches in and out of time and memory, accumulating symbols and backstories like clues to a grand whodunnit. What do a burning house, days-of-the-week boxer shorts, a board game duel, a handful of emeralds, a contested inheritance and a man in a peacock-green scuba suit have in common? Why is it that each of the passengers sees a different image emerge from the white-on-white paintings in the gallery car? Just as we suspect Oyeyemi has lost control – as her locomotive careens into Dadaist chaos – Ava arrives brandishing an envelope bearing the officious little stamp of the “Agency for Introducing a Sense of Proportion into Novel Writing”. Whether that missive delights or maddens will depend entirely on the reader. By the time Oyeyemi’s wilfully disproportionate train has stopped, a unifying character has appeared in silhouette: the artist who painted those shapeshifting canvases. As his connection to our cast is drawn out, so is a parable of connection, of the ways we shapeshift to fulfil each other’s desires. Peaces turns the existential terror of feeling unseen into a corporeal reality. How easy it is to lose yourself – or erase someone else – with the heat of your own wanting. To live unseen is a tragedy, but Peaces continues Oyeyemi’s career-long project of helping us to unsee – unsnarling the neural knots that childhood fairytales tied in us: those tales of sovereignty and dominion, of limp princesses and their flaxen-haired suitors, of snowy purity and moral absolutes. White-on-white. “Here’s to unseeing the world,” Ava rejoices. What we lose in orientation in this novel, we gain in a kind of merciless velocity. It’s hard not to feel like a passenger aboard this book, a little queasy from watching the narrative blur and judder. But for all of her twee excesses, there are few writers who can match Oyeyemi’s creative glee. On a first read, Peaces works best when you stop trying to solve it, and instead surrender to that exuberance. Far better to sit back and revel in this book’s queer sensualities and the sherbet fizz of its wit; to enjoy the company of platinum-furred, jewel-hoarder Árpád, lithe as Nijinsky reincarnate; or perhaps try to imagine a melody that makes a “theremin sound as if it was looking back on a long life of crime”. Then when it’s over, return – clear-eyed – for a second trip. • Peaces by Helen Oyeyemi is published by Faber (£14.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.A doctor who was director of obstetrics and gynaecology at a Victorian hospital during a cluster of baby deaths has been effectively banned from practising medicine again. However, the disciplinary action has come years after he already retired. Dr Surinder Parhar has not practised medicine since October 2015, after an investigation into a tragic cluster of newborn and stillborn deaths at the Bacchus Marsh hospital. He worked at the hospital for 30 years. The Victorian Civil and Administrative Tribunal made nine findings of professional misconduct against Parhar, banning him from practising for another 12 years. While it was not alleged Parhar directly caused any of the deaths, the tribunal found in its decision published on Wednesday that he “failed to recognise that what was happening needed to be addressed, and that he had individual responsibility to do something”. The case concerned Parhar’s actions related to 27 maternity patients at the hospital between 2008 and 2015. Twenty-one of those patients experienced stillbirth or death of their baby shortly after birth, while others experienced various adverse events, a rate much higher than what would be expected for a hospital of the size of Bacchus Marsh. “As a low-risk birthing facility, the number of adverse outcomes over a short period of time should have led to ‘alarm bells ringing’ but did not,” the tribunal found. “Little action was taken to identify the causes of the adverse outcomes or implement changes in practice. The failures in practice were not identified and continued for a significant period of time putting more patients at risk.” The tribunal found deficiencies in Parhar’s direct clinical care of one patient after he failed to recognise her symptoms were the result of the death of her baby. He also failed to ensure there were adequate clinical reviews of 19 perinatal deaths; to ensure there was adequate open disclosure with patients in relation to 15 perinatal deaths; to ensure necessary policies were in place to improve patient safety; to provide adequate supervision of three junior doctors; to improve or maintain his own professional performance; or to keep proper records. Parhar admitted to all of the allegations. “He is highly remorseful – he is sorry for himself and his role in this ‘sad story’ but also sorry for the impact on the parents and the community,” the decision said. “He recognises that his career has ended in shame and ignominy. Much of what has been identified is very much ‘with the benefit of hindsight’.” The tribunal decision said Parhar was not the only staff member to fail patients, noting “an almost systemic complacency and misguided self-congratulation about the quality of the maternity service”. Other cases involving former hospital staff at the time are due to come before the tribunal. But the tribunal found there had been “years of missed opportunities to recognise and acknowledge what was going wrong, and act to prevent future avoidable deaths and adverse patient outcomes”. “Parhar was not the only senior health practitioner … to be blind to the pattern emerging and to fail to recognise that alarm bells should have been ringing,” the decision said. “Nevertheless, he occupied a significant leadership role as the director of obstetrics, although he did not apparently recognise that; and he had undoubted responsibilities as a medical practitioner and senior obstetrician, which he did not properly discharge.” The tribunal acknowledged that its decision to ban Parhar from practising medicine for 12 years would have little practical impact on his career given he was already retired. “But it sends a clear message to those who may still expect to have years of medical practice before them that, if they engage in similar conduct, their time as a doctor is likely to end well before their planned retirement,” the decision said. In 2015, the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (Ahpra) apologised for the length of the investigation into the health service, after first receiving a complaint in 2013 about the care a different doctor provided to a mother after a stillbirth. Ahpra has investigated 43 health practitioners who then worked at Bacchus Marsh hospital. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On Wednesday Ahpra chief executive, Martin Fletcher, said this tribunal decision was a strong outcome in response to “tragic and sad events”. “It is important to hold accountable practitioners in leadership roles who have clear responsibilities for patient safety and who fail to act,” he said. The case against Parhar was brought by the Medical Board of Australia. The board’s chair, Dr Anne Tonkin, described the failures of the hospital as “tragic”. “While we recognise this decision may be of little comfort for the families who so sadly lost their babies, it highlights the importance of registered medical practitioners, especially those in senior positions, understanding and acting on their responsibilities to ensure safe patient care,” she said.Lawyers for the resources minister have conceded the Morrison government’s “regrettable” conduct in a federal court case denied environmentalists the opportunity to prevent the Coalition from signing contracts to pay Empire Energy $21m to frack the Beetaloo Basin. The federal court is currently hearing a case lodged by the Environment Centre NT challenging a grants program designed to accelerate fracking in the Northern Territory as part of the government’s gas-led recovery. The $50m program has already awarded almost half its funds to a single company, Empire, which is seeking to drill three exploratory wells in the basin. The central allegation in the case is that the grants were not lawful because the resources minister, Keith Pitt, failed to properly consider the risk to global heating posed by opening up the region to fracking. Earlier this year, as lawyers on both sides prepared for the current hearing, government solicitors wrote to the Environment Centre NT and promised it had no imminent plans to sign contracts with Empire. But, without any notice, it did precisely that in September. The court heard the government’s actions effectively denied the opportunity for the Environment Centre NT and others to seek an order from the court to prevent the signing of such agreements until the case was resolved. The government’s actions sparked a furious response from the federal court, where justice John Griffiths said they were “unfortunate and not reflecting well on the minister”. The issue reared its head again on Wednesday. The Environment Centre NT and other applicants now allege the government signed the contracts in “order to stymy the applicants’ claim in this litigation”. They argue the government wanted to lock the contracts in before the court had the opportunity to determine whether the grants and the grant scheme were lawful. Tom Howe QC, representing the minister, agreed the government had failed in its duty to act as a model litigant. Howe agreed the government’s actions had denied those mounting the challenge the opportunity to seek interlocutory relief to prevent the contracts from being signed until the case was finalised. “What happened should not have happened. What the commonwealth should have done when the opportunity to enter the contracts was brought forward was to write to the applicant and give them notice, reasonable notice of that so that they could make an application for interlocutory relief,” he said. “That should have happened and it didn’t and that was quite regrettable conduct that involved a departure from model litigant standards.” But Howe denied, in strong terms, that the government had signed the contracts with the intention of thwarting the case or the applicants. “Your honour knows that very often, when conspiracy or malice is alleged, that it can often be truly explained on the basis of error,” Howe said. “Sometimes error of a serious kind, but not of a kind that involves intended wrongdoing.” Howe also criticised the fact that the allegation had only been levelled at the government late on Friday. “It is a most serious allegation to raise. It’s a serious allegation to raise very late in the day, for the first time after the close of evidence and only in submissions in reply.” But the judge said the commonwealth was guilty of the same failing, having only notified the applicants of a key part of its argument and relevant case law on Sunday. The hearing concluded on Wednesday. Griffiths has reserved his decision.And with that, we will wrap up the blog for today. Here is what went down: Missing WA four-year-old Cleo Smith was found “alive and well” in a home in Carnarvon, and a man was arrested, with the news welcomed across the country. The fallout from the cancellation of the French submarine deal continued, with Ambassador Jean-Pierre Thebault calling the PM’s decision a “stab in the back.” Acting prime minister Barnaby Joyce shot back, saying “You can’t go around calling people liars.” Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull weighed into the discussion, saying prime minister Scott Morrison had a “reputation for telling lies” NSW recorded 190 new locally acquired cases and four deaths. Victoria recorded 941 new cases and eight deaths. The ACT recorded 15 new cases. Victorian Liberal MP Tim Smith said he is still considering his future despite his leader calling for him to quit politics following a drunken crash. The Australian privacy commissioner ordered controversial facial recognition firm Clearview AI to cease collecting photos of Australians from the internet as part of its service. Queensland will only open international borders for ‘safe’ countries, and will continue to enforce quarantine for returning international travellers from countries that aren’t deemed safe by the commonwealth. WA border restrictions for NSW eased slightly today, due to the high vaccination rate and low case numbers. If you’re looking for a wrap on the ongoing fallout from the French submarine deal, look no further than Katharine Murphy’s latest column: And you can read Elias Visontay’s report on Cleo Smith’s rescue at the link below: WA Police have released the incredible footage of the moment Cleo Smith was rescued: An injunction to stop Victoria’s largest public health service from firing nurses who are refusing the Covid-19 vaccination or refusing to disclose their vaccination status has been thrown out by the federal court ahead of a trial challenging the vaccine mandate. Nick Ferrett QC is representing about 90 nurses at Monash Health, and told the court on Wednesday that under Victoria’s Occupational Health and Safety Act, the nurses should be consulted before any disciplinary action is taken against them. A directive from Victoria’s chief health officer under the Public Health Act makes it clear that health workers must be fully vaccinated, having received at least their first Covid-19 vaccine dose by 29 October, in order to work in a healthcare setting. They must provide evidence of vaccination to their employer. But Justice John Snaden said there was “no evidence” that Monash Health was trying to prevent nurses from exercising their workplace rights by commencing disciplinary action to fire them. You can read more on the court ruling in this report from Melissa Davey: Sticking with Joyce for a second, he’s asked what he thought of former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull saying Scott Morrison has a “history of telling lies”. Joyce: The marvellous thing about Malcolm is that I don’t think I would have ever heard John Howard say something like that, Julia Gillard, other former prime ministers. Malcolm, he is one-of-a-kind. I think he needs to reflect on what he is doing to his own legacy, and how people will remember him. Wasn’t he talking about diplomacy? I mean, Malcolm, is this your example of ... is this from the book, chapter one of Malcolm Diplomacy, that you will also get yourself on international television bagging the living so-and-so, and the nation you once was the prime minister of? The acting prime minister Barnaby Joyce is on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing, and was asked if leaking text private messages represented a low point in Australian diplomacy. Joyce dramatically sighed, before echoing the PM’s call to “move on”: This issue has got to go behind us. Lambasting in prosecuting again. This issue regarding the submarines, it didn’t happen overnight. This went back to February when it was written about. They were looking through contingency plans. It was in the Senate back in June. We had shadow minister Penny Wong, and Rex Patrick, a former submariner asking questions. We had the head of defence saying that they were looking at contingency plans. There is no surprise to theirs. The sort of feigning of it being a great surprise, I suppose that isn’t a great surprise but it is just not true. Pushed on concerns around the leaked texts, (an increasingly exasperated) Joyce stands his ground: We had a major political leader call the prime minister of Australia a liar, and you can’t do that, diplomatically. You can’t go around calling other leaders of other countries a liar. Not the great nation of France. This isn’t some tinpot nation [in the] middle of nowhere. When a nation goes out it makes a great statement that you are a liar, what you do? You have to defend it and say, you are not. So leaking messages is defendable? If someone calls you a liar, especially for someone of the prominence of the French president, you should stand by your position. It is obvious that the prime minister isn’t a liar. You can’t go around calling people liars. He goes on to essentially say the leaks were justified because the PM was called a liar. An interesting take. AAP is reporting that a suspicious package has prompted the evacuation of Victorian premier Daniel Andrews’s electorate office in Melbourne’s south-east. Emergency services were called to the Noble Park office on Wednesday afternoon following the discovery of the package. “Safety checks are in the process of being conducted, with the building evacuated as a precaution,” Victoria Police said in a statement. “There is no threat to the community and no one has been injured.” Footage uploaded online shows the Princes Highway office has been taped off, with multiple fire trucks and an ambulance parked outside. Fire Rescue Victoria has confirmed it is supporting police with a pumper and hazmat appliance on the scene. WA police are due to give a press conference on the rescue of Chloe Smith shortly, and you can keep up with updates from Calla Wahlquist at the liveblog linked below: Foreign minister Marise Payne was just on 2GB to address the growing diplomatic stoush between Australia and France, echoing the prime minister’s indication that they want to move on. Payne was asked about the strong language used by the French ambassador earlier today, and she stood behind the government’s decision: I certainly understand that it has been deeply disappointing for France. We have acknowledged that, we’ve been very clear in saying we understand that. But our job in working together as nations in the Indo-Pacific is to work to work through this and to prioritise, if you like, the security and the stability of this region. Certainly that is the the approach that we have been endeavouring to take and when we make a decision in Australia’s national interests, we will be clear with Australians as to the nature of that decision. Asked what she thought of French president Emmanuel Macron calling Scott Morrison a liar, Payne pointed out that the PM “swiftly clarified that” and he “set out the timeline”. A British woman who worked as a waiter in Sydney has won a long-running legal dispute against Australia’s “backpacker tax” in the nation’s highest court. On Wednesday the high court ruled in favour of Catherine Addy, finding the tax which slugged working holiday-makers thousands of dollars more than Australians discriminated against her on the basis of her nationality and infringed upon a treaty Australia signed with the UK. You can read more from Paul Karp’s report here: South Australia has once again recorded zero locally acquired Covid cases. The state also has zero active cases for the first time since 1 February. And a curt Scott Morrison wraps up his presser, but not before a journalist gets in one last question on what it would take to “work through this.” The PM gave another short, almost irrelevant answer: The objections to the Australian decision not to proceed with those submarines, and go forward with nuclear powered submarines, was made in the interest of Australia, those who have elected to that decision have objected for various obvious reasons, for various obvious motives, but I know what side I’m on. Thank you. A reporter has asked how any world leader can trust Morrison in light of the leaked text messages. I have outstanding relationships with so many leaders around the world. It appears to be a recurring theme here today. Morrison is asked point blank what he will do to repair the relationship with France, in light of the ambassador claiming he had stabbed France in the back. I’m going to move on and get the job done. Claims were made and claims were refuted, what is needed now is for us to move on, that is what is important the Australian people, the United States and UK get on with the historic agreement we came to to deliver an incredibly important capability to Australia to keep us safe and defend and protect Australia. That’s the most important thing, that is what is at issue here, that is the thing that matters most to Australians that we do everything we can to ensure the Australian defences are the best they possibly can be and the men and women who serve get the best. That’s what I was seeking to do if others have other motives, others have other agendas, well that’s for them. Ok we’ve gotten to the juicy part, with a reporter asking if leaders should be wary of dealing with him, in light of the leaks. Morrison summed it: We should “move on.” I was very clear about what that communication was, and what was necessary in the matters raised, I don’t think there is any further profit for anyone continuing down this path, we made the decision we did to make in the Australian national interest, we understand the concerns and actions that have come in relation to that, they were understood when we made the decision and this was the decision Australia needed to make in our national interest and that something I’m responsible for and I’m very keen to make sure now we move on and deliver that capability. That certainly will be my focus. So the PM has given a rough summary of his perspective on the Glasgow summit, largely repeating some of the points he made during his speech earlier in the week: In terms of where we have just been, over in Glasgow, those talks will continue. Australia was able to go there and outlined very clearly not just what our commitments were, because Australia always meets and beats our commitments. But when it comes to addressing the real threat of climate change. Not just in terms of emissions reduction but support for developing country, particularly in our part of the world our Pacific family and Southeast Asia, to deal with the adaptation challenges they have right now. Australia has been a leader in that area providing that support for resilience in countries and has also been an important part of Cop26, which is of course about reducing emissions but also about dealing with the impact right now. Our technology led approach was well received by all of those I spoke with and they understand, like we understand, that if we want to actually deal with this, you must drive the costs of low emission technologies down. They are realising and scalable so it is affordable not just in developed countries like Australia but realisable and affordable in countries like Indonesia and Vietnam and of course China and India. A tired looking prime minister is speaking from Dubai, and began by paying tribute to WA Police for their work in returning Cleo Smith home: The fact that that nightmare has come to an end and our worst fears were not realised, is just a huge relief. And a moment for great joy. This particular case, obviously, has captured the hearts of Australians as we felt such terrible sorrow for the family. I want to thank, particularly, all of the police and all of those who were involved in making sure that Cleo is safe. And we are so thankful, thank you so much for what you have done. I know you do it every day. I know that you feel a great sense of satisfaction in the work you have done to bring her home. But we know each and every day, they are out there doing the same thing. And trying to keep our kids safe and keep our people say. So thank you so much. And thank God that Cleo is home and that she is safe. We’re also expecting a press conference from the prime minister shortly. Should be interesting. Lost among the flurry of news earlier today was NSW premier Dominic Perrottet warning that Covid cases and hospitalisations may rise again, as the state again recorded another day with fewer than 200 cases. Perrottet told reporters that he did not intend to release his current modelling on case numbers, but asked people to remain vigilant. Let’s not rest on our laurels here. The reality is case numbers will increase, hospitalisations will increase, we need to learn to live alongside this pandemic - it’s not going away. Ultimately we’re in a very strong position. Ultimately governments get judged on their record and the reality is all about instilling confidence. If I believe it’s in the public interest to release certain information then I will release it, but ultimately it’s not about the government providing volumes of information every week from the health and economic teams, it’s about instilling confidence. Ok, lets talk Victorian MP Tim Smith. He earlier gave a very dramatic press conference where he announced he’d take time out to “reflect”, but denied his political career was over. Smith appeared to dig his heels in, after opposition leader Mathew Guy yesterday publicly said he had asked Smith to retire at the next election. Smith, though, was (unsurpsingly to some degree) not having it: Does one error mean a career is over forever? I’m not unwell, I’m an idiot. It was a terrible, terrible error, a massive error, the worst of my life. Smith repeatedly avoided the question of whether his leader had asked him to resign, saying “recollections may differ.” He vowed to not touch alcohol again while in “public life.” Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has announced an enticing deal to encourage people to get vaccinated: $10 vouchers for a pub feed. If only I was offered a schnitty for my vaccine. In any case, the state has hit 64.71% fully vaccinated, with authorities pushing to lift the vaccination rate. House prices may be on the up and up but the same can’t be said of the supply, at least for September. New figures out today from the Australian Bureau of Statistics show approvals for new dwellings fell a seasonally adjusted 4.3% in September, reversing some of August’s 7.6% spurt. “The decline in the total number of dwellings approved in September was driven by a large fall in approvals for private sector houses, which fell 16%. Private sector dwellings excluding houses rose by 18.1%,” Daniel Rossi, ABS’s Director of Construction Statistics, said: “The decline in private house approvals over recent months can be largely attributed to the end of federal and state stimulus measures. Despite the fall in September, the series remains 18.2% higher than the pre-pandemic level in September 2019.” Rossi said. South Australia posted the biggest decline with dwelling approvals off almost 23%, while NSW went the other way, with a 27% rise driven by new apartment approvals. For houses alone, though, NSW posted a 13.9% drop in new approvals. Australia’s housing market is now worth $9.1 trillion (with a ‘t’), with prices soaring more than a fifth over the past year, CoreLogic said earlier this week. Interestingly Reserve Bank Governor, Philip Lowe, said his board did not dwell (so to speak) on house prices during yesterday’s meeting. He also tried to calm expectations of a near-term rise in interest rates although he did bring forward marginally the likely timing of such a move to late 2023 from previous predictions of 2024. And so an extraordinary National Press Club address from ambassador Thebault comes to an end, but not before he is asked why the French government had sent experts to Australia to work through issues raised by the PM at a dinner in June. The question was raised so we made sure that we had the answer. That is exactly what happened for five years every time Australia had a question, we mobilised our best resources to answer it. He is then asked directly if, at the time, French authorities knew the Australian government was looking at alternative options: Not at all. Ambassador Thebault has addressed the leaking of private text messages from the French president, and typically didn’t hold back: You don’t behave like this on personal exchanges of leaders. Doing so also sends a very worrying signal for all heads of state. Beware, in Australia there will be leaks. And what you say in confidence to your partners will be eventually used and weaponised against you one day. At the same time, I will tell you, there is something interesting in these leaks. It completely demonstrates that until the last minute we did not know where things were heading to. It completely demonstrates that nothing has ever been told to us. It completely demonstrates that we were concerned about all the questions that we were ready to address and tried to address in order to make the program work as was required for us. So, the way it was done is a new low. The way it was done is not the direction of building confidence. Those leaks are not the actions we are looking for, but if it is Australia’s answer, it is sad. But once again, we don’t say this to Australians. If this is the Australian government answer, it is sad. But we will not consider that this is the way Australia likes to react and the way Australians behave. Ambassador Thebault is asked if it would help if Scott Morrison were to offer an apology, and he gives a wry answer: Eating one share of humble pie may sometimes be difficult. It’s up to everyone to make his own decision. Fundamentally, there is no shame for a leader to act in the best interests of its country. Even if the relation between the two countries is so important, ways, words and initiatives will be found. If it’s not, if short-term is better, you know, this is a sovereign decision also. And you can read Daniel Hurst’s report on the speech here: So, ambassador Thebault has wrapped up his address at the National Press Club, and I just wanted to share some more highlights. To summarise, these new developments are all the more concerning as the deteriorating strategic environment in the Indo-Pacific region makes it necessary to reduce uncertainty. France will always be a close and loyal friend of Australia. No artificial wedge, despite attempts, can be put between our people. If there is a problem today it is with certain aspects of the ‘Canberra bubble’ and its ‘secret city’ practices. He goes on: Following the breach of trust caused by the attitude of this Australian government, I was recalled to Paris for in-depth consultations. I return to Australia with two specific missions: To strongly defend the interests of all companies and individuals, Australian and French, who trusted the solemn promises which were made, once, and are now in difficult positions, in the concrete implementation of the decision to end the future submarine program. To help redefine the terms of our bilateral relationship moving forward, considering all the consequences of the major breakdown of trust with this Australian government. Anthony Albanese has held a doorstop at Plumpton in Melbourne’s western fringe. The Labor leader was brutal in trashing Scott Morrison’s honesty, picking up on comments by Malcolm Turnbull about his dealings with Morrison in government. Albanese said: Well, Malcolm Turnbull has called out Scott Morrison. One of the things about Scott Morrison is that those people who know him best, who’ve worked with him the closest, can attest to the flaws in his character, particularly when it comes to truthfulness. And we see that when after president [Emmanuel] Macron made the comments that he did about our prime minister, he did two things. Firstly, he tried to say that journalists were just taking selfies, something that wasn’t true in itself. And then he tried to say that it was a sledge on Australia and it was an insult to all Australians. Whereas, quite clearly, that wasn’t the case at all. It was very much a personal comment made about Scott Morrison. And on the text messages, Albanese said: But even the text message that was released by the prime minister’s office, one would assume, is a private text message from a private phone to a private phone. Even if it showed something of significance, you wouldn’t release a private text message between people. That’s not the way that you build relations between countries. That’s not diplomacy. That’s causing major problems. Just as the release of information to the United States is also of real concern. But what that text message says was when the Australian bureaucracy was in touch with the president’s office to organise a phone call, was essentially saying, ‘What is it about?’. And, of course, it could have been about a range of things, they could have changed their scope. It had been aware that there were some issues and France was attempting to deal with that. The prime minister can’t have it both ways. On the one hand, he says he couldn’t tell the French president, because that would undermine the potential relationships with the UK and the US. On the other hand, he implies that somehow he should have known. Both things can’t be true. The prime minister’s own statements contradict themselves within single press conferences. So I want to begin at the National Press Club, where the French ambassador to Australia, Jean-Pierre Thebault, is giving an extraordinary address, blasting the Australian government (and perhaps specifically the PM, without having mentioned him yet). Here are some choice quotes: On September 16, this Australian government abruptly announced the cancellation of the future submarine program. This decision was deliberately kept secret for months, even years. Even as the French president, the French minister for foreign affairs and defence, countless high-level working groups, as provided by the intergovernmental agreement, myself on the ground, were engaging regularly in good faith with our interlocutors. One should try to say we should have understood by ourselves that some ambiguous attitudes should have made us realise, in fact, we should have been able to read in coffee grounds. This is fiction. What is a hard fact is that still on the 3 August, French and Australian ministers of foreign affairs and defence had a dialogue, and they agreed a joint communique. It was available to the public and widely acclaimed for its ambition. It agreed the following sentence, the two countries underline the importance of the future submarine program. Do you agree on such a communique when there’s the slightest doubt on something so massive as the official backbone of your cooperation? Maybe on Mars, but not that I know on this planet. The deceit was intentional. Because there was far more at stake than providing submarines, because it was a common agreement on sovereignty, sealed with the transmission of highly classified datas, the way it was handled was plainly a stab in the back. But the way this Australian government decided to turn its back on our solemn and far-reaching partnership without ever frankly consulting with France, when there were countless opportunities, without having shared frankly and openly, or having looked for alternatives with France, is just out of this world. Good afternoon, and a quick thanks to Matilda Boseley for her excellent coverage as always. Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, there is still much going on so let’s dive in. With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Mostafa Rachwani who will bring you all the updates from the French ambassador to Australia’s press club speech, which is starting now. See you all tomorrow. There’s an interesting development from NSW estimates this morning, with the new NSW Nationals leader, Paul Toole, declaring he won’t support coal exploration in a region near the western edge of the Wollemi national park. I covered this issue in my previous guise at the Sydney Morning Herald, because the NSW government had listed the Hawkins and Rumker areas as part of its next set of regions to be opened up for coalmines. Toole’s declaration this morning looks like the first time he has clearly reversed a policy of his predecessor since John Barilaro decided to step down as Nationals leader and deputy premier about a month ago. There are about a dozen areas that the NSW government had set up as potential exploration sites as part of its strategic plan for coal. One of those is the historic town of Wollombi, which was also quickly identified as an unlikely place to open up a “(not very) greenfield” coalmine. Toole’s comment today will likely raise the prospects that public pressure could see the government backing off opening up other new mining areas. That strategic plan is anyway probably already out of date despite being released only last year. For one thing, it predicts global demand for thermal coal imports remaining near 500m tonnes annually by 2050 – a result that doesn’t square with most of Australia’s customers’ net zero emissions goals. My colleague Adam Morton, meanwhile, also reported overnight that Australia still has some 100 coal and gas projects in the planning pipeline – just probably not Hawkins and Rumker anymore. Want to see me stick a cue tip up my nose? Check out our video taking you step by step through the correct way to use an at-home rapid antigen test! Just in case you wanted that WA border news colour coded. McGowan confirms Victoria will remain an “extreme risk” area. McGowan says due to the high vaccination rate and low case numbers in NSW, WA will now slightly ease border controls, downgrading the state from “extreme risk” to “high risk”. But that still means only approved travellers from NSW will be allowed to enter WA. This now includes WA residents who have recently travelled to NSW and have a “legitimate right to return”. McGowan: Firstly, to be approved for travel from NSW into WA, travellers must meeting one of the following criteria: Certain senior government officials. Certain active military personnel. Members of the commonwealth parliament. A person carrying out functions under the law of the commonwealth. A person carrying out a limited range of specialist functions as posting given approval by the state emergency coordinator or an authorised officer. The final category includes those West Australians who may have travelled to NSW recently, living in WA and have a legitimate right to return, subject to relative relevant quarantine conditions and required evidence in addition to the exemption criteria. Approved travellers into WA from NSW must be fully vaccinated, provide proof of a negative Covid-19 test in the 72 hours prior to departure, complete 14 days of self-quarantine, undergo Covid-19 testing within 48 hours of arrival and on day 12. And they must use the G2G Now app whilst in quarantine. OK! And Mark McGowan has confirmed Western Australia has recorded its 18th day with no new Covid-19 cases. McGowan is mostly speaking about the Cleo Smith case at the moment. You can get all those updates on the live blog below. I’ll jump back in when we get some Covid-19 updates. WA premier Mark McGowan is speaking now. Both about Cleo Smith and the state’s health plan in relation to Covid-19 and vaccinations. If you want to stay up to date on all the Cleo updates you can follow Calla Wahlquist’s live blog below. The Australian privacy commissioner has ordered controversial facial recognition firm Clearview AI to cease collecting photos of Australians from the internet as part of its service. Clearview AI is a facial recognition service that claims to have built up enormous databases – reportedly containing more than 3bn labelled faces – through the controversial practice of scraping Facebook and other social media sites. Last year, it was revealed Clearview had offered trial services to police in Australia – specifically Queensland police, Victoria police and the Australian federal police. The Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) launched an investigation, and today found Clearview had interfered with Australians’ privacy through the collection of these images, and ordered the company to delete all images of Australians collected through the service in 90 days, and no longer collect any images of Australians in the future. The OAIC’s investigation found the company did not have any paid customers in Australia, but in the free trials used by the aforementioned police, officers successfully searched for suspects, victims and themselves in the Clearview database. Clearview has blocked Australians from signing up to the service since March 2020. Privacy commissioner Angelene Falk said: When Australians use social media or professional networking sites, they don’t expect their facial images to be collected without their consent by a commercial entity to create biometric templates for completely unrelated identification purposes. The indiscriminate scraping of people’s facial images, only a fraction of whom would ever be connected with law enforcement investigations, may adversely impact the personal freedoms of all Australians who perceive themselves to be under surveillance. Australian government officials have said the US technology to be acquired under Aukus allows the nuclear reactor to be sealed and put into the submarine for the life of the submarine – rather than having to be refuelled every decade. But Malcolm Turnbull said in Glasgow overnight: The idea that a nuclear reactor, with enough weapons grade uranium to make many, many bombs, can be treated like a power pack from Bunnings is incredible. I mean, it is just bullshit. I’m sorry. And everyone in the naval industry, particularly people in nuclear propulsion, know that. So this is absolute nonsense. I mean, are we seriously going to say that we’re going to have nuclear-powered submarines that we can neither build or maintain. Seriously? I mean, it’s crazy. Queensland’s deputy chief health officer Peter Aitken says the state will continue to enforce quarantine for returning international travellers from countries that aren’t deemed safe by the commonwealth. Only those countries that are considered “green” under the commonwealth safe travel zone system will be allowed to skip the two weeks of isolation when flying into Queensland, even if fully vaccinated. This is a significantly different approach to NSW and Victoria, the only states who have currently opened their international border. We are also expecting to hear from WA premier Mark McGowan with a health announcement at 11.30am (I assume that’s AEDT as McGowan often stands up around 8am Perth time). He will also no doubt speak about the rescue of Cleo Smith, the four-year-old that was found safe and well after an intense nearly three-week search. She was found in a home in Carnarvon around 1am. A man was taken into custody. If you want to stay up to date on all the Cleo updates you can follow Calla Wahlquist’s live blog below. No Covid-19 for Queensland again today by the way! A reminder that we are expecting to hear from Tim Smith again at 12pm AEDT when he fronts the press pack for the first time since the crash. New Zealand has reported 100 cases in the community, as the government announced it has signed a purchase agreement for 4.7m additional doses of the Pfizer vaccine. There are now 3,733 cases in the August Delta outbreak, with 3502 still active. Of Wednesday’s cases, 97 are in Auckland and three are in the neighbouring region Waikato. Forty-eight of the day’s cases have not been epidemiologically linked, bringing the total number yet to be linked to 441 in the past fortnight. There are 58 people in hospital, with three of those in intensive care. Roughly 85.5% of the population over 12 years old has had at least one dose of the vaccine, while 73.5% of the eligible population is fully inoculated. The Covid-19 response minister, Chris Hipkins, says the latest purchase agreement for the vaccine will be scheduled for delivery throughout the next year. This agreement will provide a continuous supply of the Pfizer vaccine next year for those who didn’t access the vaccine in 2021. But it also provides for us to extend eligibility to adolescents – 5-11 years – and of course, provides supplies for a booster program. The director general of health Dr Ashley Bloomfield said the government is now waiting on safety approval for the vaccine to be rolled out to 5 to 11-year-olds. In the meantime, of course, the best thing we can do to protect younger unvaccinated members in our communities is for everybody else who is eligible, to get vaccinated. We reported earlier that Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull had intensified his criticism of his successor over the handling of Aukus. Here’s more from what Turnbull told reporters on the sidelines of Cop26 in Glasgow: It’s quite clear that Emmanuel Macron is justified in complaining about Morrison’s conduct – Scott Morrison elaborately deceived the French ... It is just shameful and Morrison should apologise. Turnbull said if Morrison had wanted to act honestly, he would have sat down with the French and said, “we want to move to naval nuclear propulsion” instead of conventionally powered subs. He said France could have transitioned to providing Australia with nuclear-propelled submarines and “it actually would have been safer because they don’t use weapons-grade uranium”. The Americans would still be in the room because the combat system was being provided by the US. You could have had an honest discussion between people who behaved in a trusting fashion – wouldn’t that be great? Isn’t that the way leaders are meant to act? Now, if you’d done that, then you wouldn’t have this debacle that we have. Turnbull said the defence and foreign ministers of France and Australia met just two weeks before Aukus was unveiled, and agreed to a communique that underlined the importance of the future submarine program. This is shocking, shocking conduct. Scott Morrison can bluster as much as he likes, but he’s not fooling anyone … I’ll tell you what Scott Morrison has done. He has sacrificed Australian honour, Australian security and Australian sovereignty. Now, that is a shocking thing for an Australian prime minister to do. Turnbull also alleged that Morrison had “lied to me on many occasions”. Scott has always had a reputation for telling lies … when a prime minister behaves disingenuously or dissembles or is dishonest, it will reflect on his or her credibility, it will reflect on the credibility of their party and the government. But when you do that, as the leader of the nation, internationally, it reflects on us all. Now look, deceiving people is is bad wherever you do it, but when you do it at an international level, it has much greater ramifications. He said Australia had “always had a reputation as a trustworthy nation” – something that he described as “a national security asset”. But this issue [with Aukus] has become so sharply defined, that people will say, well, if Australia was prepared, you know, to throw France under the bus, what would they do to us? NSW Health has released the details of the four people infected with Covid-19 who died in the previous reporting period. Sadly, NSW Health is reporting the deaths of four people – two women and two men. One person was in their 50s, one person was in their 60s, one person was in their 70s, and one person was in their 80s. Two people were from western Sydney, one person was from south western Sydney, and one person was from Queanbeyan. Three people were not vaccinated and one person, a woman in her 80s with underlying health conditions, had received two doses of a Covid-19 vaccine. NSW Health expresses its sincere condolences to their loved ones. There have been 526 Covid-19 related deaths in NSW since 16 June 2021 and 582 in total since the start of the pandemic. Covid-19 news from the north of Victoria. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded 15 new Covid infections. The territory’s over 12 population is now 93.6% fully vaccinated. Five people remain in hospital, two in ICU and one requiring ventilation. And here is the photo! An update from the Victorian Ibac hearings. The Australian government has been criticised for prominently hosting a fossil fuel company at its pavilion at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. The condemnation came as the Morrison government confirmed it would not join about 90 countries in backing the official launch of a global pledge to reduce emissions of methane – a potent greenhouse gas leaked during gas and coal extraction and released by livestock – by 30% by 2030. The Australian pavilion in the Scottish Event Campus exhibition centre has been a hub of activity during the first two days of the summit. With numbers in the main plenary hall limited, Australians gathered there to watch Scott Morrison’s address to the conference on Monday. Space in the pavilion has been dedicated to Australian businesses, including Andrew Forrest’s Fortescue Future Industries, Sun Cable, Mineral Carbonation International and the oil and gas giant Santos. You can read the full report below: Federal treasurer and previously a close ally of Tim Smith, Josh Frydenberg, is speaking with Sky News now. He has declined to say if he believes Tim Smith should resign from parliament. Looks like we will be hearing more from Tim Smith today. Victorian Liberal MP Tim Smith says he is still considering his future despite his leader calling for him to quit politics following a drunken crash, reports Benita Kolovos from AAP. Smith returned a breath test reading of 0.131 – almost three times the legal blood alcohol limit – after he crashed into a car and a Hawthorn home on Saturday night, narrowly avoiding a child’s bedroom. His licence was immediately suspended and he is expected to be fined by police. Opposition leader Matthew Guy on Tuesday said he had told the 38-year-old not to contest the 2022 state election. But Smith told 3AW radio on Wednesday he is still “reflecting” on his future. This is the most embarrassing, stupid pathetic thing that I have ever done. I’m asking people to forgive me as a person... In terms of my role as a politician, I’m giving that due consideration at the moment and I accept that people are very, very angry with me, as they should be. Smith said he would continue speaking with his friends, family and local branch members before he makes a decision on his career, noting he has some time before preselection nominations close on November 12. Smith has also spoken to his GP about his alcohol consumption and has vowed not to drink again while in “public life”. But he maintains he doesn’t have a problem with alcohol and didn’t believe he was over the legal limit when he got behind the wheel. He said he had consumed “a few glasses of wine”. I hadn’t eaten very much all today, so as a consequence I blew much more than I had ever thought I consumed. Asked why he omitted the crash from a press release issued on Sunday, Mr Smith said he was in a state of “deep shock”. If Smith remains in parliament, Guy told reporters on Tuesday that he will remain a backbencher. I made it very clear to Tim that he wouldn’t find his way on to the front bench of any parliamentary Liberal Party that I lead. And I made it clear that I didn’t want him to nominate at the next election and that I didn’t believe he should nominate for the seat of Kew. Smith has been one of Guy’s closest political allies and was instrumental in his return to the leadership of the party following a successful spill against Michael O’Brien in September. Coalition MPs are split over the government’s revised religious discrimination bill, with the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, holding urgent meetings with MPs before parliament returns to try to resolve the issue. The push to introduce a bill in the final sitting fortnight this year comes almost three years after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, promised to introduce a new religious discrimination act after a review into religious freedom undertaken by Philip Ruddock in 2018. Cash, who took over the bill’s progress from Christian Porter when she became attorney general in March, is now consulting on a third iteration of the draft legislation in an attempt to overcome internal resistance and fulfil an election promise. You can read the full report below: A reminder that if you want to stay up to date on all the news surrounding Cleo Smith’s recovery this morning you can follow along on the dedicated live blog below. This blog will focus more on the political and Covid-19 news, including the (likely furious) upcoming speech from the French ambassador, so I mean, probably worth having a tab open for both. Students of Melbourne rejoyce, the State Library is back. Former finance minister Mathias Cormann, now the head of the OECD, has spoken to Radio National about why he helped repeal Australia’s carbon price in 2014 but is now calling for a global carbon price. Cormann: I’ve always been of the view that if we had a globally sufficiently comprehensive and consistently applied carbon price, that would be the most efficient way to get to net zero by 2050, but you’ve also got to live in the real world, but we are a long way away from achieving that sort of consensus... We should start a process similarly to the one we pursued on international tax reform to bring countries onto the same page so they can lift ambitions and effort without harming their competitiveness, causing trade distortions or shifting emissions to others parts of the world. Cormann insisted he hadn’t changed his mind, and accused critics of misrepresenting his earlier comments about the Australian carbon price being a “hoax”. Cormann argued that “efforts in individual jurisdictions will only help if they contribute to a net reduction to emissions” – but if a carbon price shifts jobs, economic activity and emissions to other parts of the world it will not do that. Asked about the EU’s proposed carbon adjustment tariffs, Cormann came quite close to giving them the tick of approval, saying they seek to “address precisely the same issue” he had raised, that if countries want to lift their targets without harming their local economies, they have to come up with mechanisms to prevent emissions going offshore. Cormann said he “fully understands” why the EU is considering tariffs, but added in an “ideal world” it wouldn’t be necessary with a globally consistent approach. Jumping back to Cop26 for a second, here is the former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull barely hiding his smile as he tears Morrison to shreds over the ongoing spat with the French president. Scott Morrison elaborately deceived the French. He doesn’t pretend he didn’t... It is a shameful episode, just shameful. And he should apologise. Tim Smith: In hindsight, maybe I should have said that, but I put out a statement apologising. I put out a statement resigning. I put out a statement acknowledging accepting my full responsibility. I’m sorry that the statement didn’t go far enough. I’m sorry that the statement, in your mind, didn’t seem to indicate the seriousness of the situation... In all honestly, I was in deep shock ... I put out a statement that I thought it was. Um, well, nothing that I said in that assignment was untruthful. I’m sorry if that [seemed] tricky, I didn’t mean to. I just put out the statement and to apologise again for my behaviour. Mitchell has grilled Tim Smith about the statement he released on Sunday morning resigning from the shadow cabinet, which excluded many important details, including the fact he crashed his car into a home and blew nearly three times the legal limit. The radio host suggested this was a deliberate attempt to downplay the incident. Smith: I’m not gonna do what others have done with regards to the variety of excuses that can be made. I’m here today I’m owning this. Manning up. Mitchell: Are you really owning it when you tell me that you only had a couple of glasses of wine? Because that’s clearly wrong. Were you really owning it when you released a statement which seemed to downplay everything? I mean, it didn’t mention crash! Smith: I would like to clarify a few things. I’ve seen a lot of commentary about that statement. I was deeply deeply distressed on Sunday morning I put out a statement where I immediately announced that I was resigning from the front bench. Immediately. I can’t have been any more upfront with regards to what occurred. Mitchell: Well, yes you could. You could have told us what the reading was. You could have told us that you clipped another car and went through a fence. You gave the impression in that statement you’d been stopped at a random breath test. Despite Victorian opposition leader Matthew Guy saying he wants Tim Smith to resign from his seat in Kew at the next election, the former shadow attorney general says he is still deciding what the future of his political career will look like. He says he will take several weeks to make his decision. Tim Smith says as he understands it Victoria police are not pursuing any additional charges against him. Neil Mitchell has begun questioning Tim Smith about exactly what he had drunk in the lead-up to the crash, and how much. Smith: I had been in a friend’s house for a couple of hours. Mitchell: What were you drinking? Smith: A few glasses of wine. Mitchell: How many? Smith: I had a couple ... Mitchell: You don’t get 0.13 by having a couple of glasses of wine over several hours. Smith: That’s what it was. I was clearly more intoxicated than I thought ... As I said, I had a few. Mitchell: A few isn’t 0.13. That’s a few bottles. Smith: I didn’t have a few bottles, I’m sorry. Mitchell: 0.13 is not just a few glasses. You accept that? Smith: Absolutely. I’m not shying away from that. Neil Mitchell: If not mental health issues, it just shows an extraordinary level of bad judgment. An extraordinary level of bad judgment ... Why should you be trusted in parliament if you’re stupid enough to sit down at 0.13? 0.13 is not “just over the limit”... Did you really think you’re under the limit? Tim Smith: I hadn’t eaten very much all day, so as a consequence, I believed ... I’m not offering you any excuses. Mitchell: Did you say, “I’ll take a risk here,” or did you really think you were under the limit. Smith: It was the worst decision of my life and all I can say is completely sorry. Mitchell: Did you suspect that you should not be driving ... or did you genuinely think I’m under the limit? Smith: I genuinely thought that I was. I obviously knew that I consumed alcohol, but I genuinely thought that I was. Neil Mitchell has asked Liberal MP Tim Smith if he is an alcoholic after the politician vowed never to drink again while in public life. Smith: I’m not an alcoholic but I certainly have consumed too much on too many occasions. And that’s precisely what I’ve been speaking to my GP about. Mitchell: Have you stopped to see that you could have killed a child? You could have killed others. You could have killed more than your career. You could have killed yourself? Smith: I haven’t stopped thinking about that the last couple of days. Victorian Liberal MP Tim Smith is now speaking for the first time after crashing his car while driving under the influence of alcohol. Neil Mitchell on 3AW has asked if Smith is “claiming mental health issues” caused the crash: No, I’m not claiming mental health issues. I’m claiming to have done something shameful and stupid. And I’m so so so sorry for the embarrassment and the harm that I have caused my family, my party, my leader. It was an appalling lack of judgment. I’m just so incredibly sorry for what I’ve done ... I certainly understand that people are quite rightly furious … I certainly spoke to my GP about not ever drinking again. Certainly while in public life – and I give you that undertaking. Scott Morrison has been accused of putting his personal political interests ahead of healing Australia’s diplomatic rift with France after the leaking of a text message from Emmanuel Macron to the prime minister. The release of a text received two days before the Aukus announcement – when the French president asked Morrison whether to expect good or bad news on the submarine project – was “highly unconventional behaviour between state leaders”, a leading foreign affairs analyst said. The Morrison government also pushed back at the US government on Tuesday, with the defence minister, Peter Dutton, saying Australia’s key security ally was “kept informed of our every move” in a “no-surprises strategy” in the lead-up to the deal between the two countries and the UK. You can read the full report below: The NSW numbers have also just been published, with the state reporting just 190 new Covid-19 cases overnight. Sadly, four people have died in the latest reporting period. Victoria has reported 941 new Covid-19 cases – the second day in a row with fewer than 1,000 infections. Sadly, eight people infected with Covid-19 have lost their lives. Carnarvon mayor Eddie Smith has just spoken to Perth radio station 6PR about Cleo Smith’s rescue: The phone started ringing at 4am, I still haven’t absorbed it. I just feel so happy for Ellie and Jake that they’ve got Cleo back … I’m a bit emotional as well and I think the whole town is going to be emotional as well, that what we’ve hoped and prayed for has happened ... I did [think they would find her] and most of our community remained positive, they didn’t change. We could see the effort that was going in to finding Cleo, the support, the power of positivity I think can’t be underestimated … it’s just wonderful. Smith said the Carnarvon community felt “elated, thankful”: I want to do a Bob Hawke and tell everybody to give everybody a day off, you’re a mug if you don’t. It’s just so exciting and, to our police and to everybody who didn’t give up, thank you so much. The lord mayor of Perth, Basil Zempilas, is speaking to Melbourne radio station 3AW about the rescue of Cleo Smith, and the relief the people of Western Australia are feeling: Look, it is the best possible news ... I think people had started to think that perhaps the outcome was not going to be great. But to wake up this morning to the news from deputy commissioner ... I’ve been doing breakfast radio for 20 years and, in that time, I’ve never woken up my wife ... It’s the first time in 20 years that I felt compelled to wake her up and tell her the news. We’ve got three young children. For the eight-year-old, like many eight-year-olds in our community or kids of around that age have been a bit disturbed by this. It has been wall to wall on the news, a lot of kids asking questions, and my daughter, for example, wanting to sleep with a light on because she just hasn’t felt safe. I’ve been waking up all the friends and family I can think of to tell them. You would think this national live blog would be enough but, honestly, it just feels really good to share this news. Victorian Liberal MP Tim Smith, who resigned from his position as shadow attorney general at the weekend after crashing his car while under the influence of alcohol, will speak publicly for the first time since the incident on Melbourne radio station 3AW. I’ll bring you all the updates here. NSW police commissioner Mick Fuller’s says his WA counterpart “broke down and cried” when he got the news that four-year-old Cleo Smith was found. Fuller tells 2GB radio: It’s unbelievable news. Absolutely. And I think whilst were all hoping and praying as the days went on, I think the chances of finding her alive was so slim ... I called [the WA commissioner] to give New South Wales police’s congratulations and he said to me Western Australian police never gave up on Cleo and it was just good old-fashioned police work that resulted in her being found alive ... He said when he got the call this morning, he broke down and cried, which I think you know, for a veteran in policing, you rarely see that. So I think it just speaks volumes in terms of, you know, the amount of effort they put into finding her and I think it’s just such an amazing story. Olivia Newton-John has been awarded one of Japan’s highest accolades for her decades-long musical career, reports Andrew Brown from AAP. The Australian singer has been conferred with the Japanese Order of the Rising Sun, in recognition of her contribution to music in Japan, as well as fostering relations between Japan and Australia. An official conferral ceremony will be held at the Japanese embassy in Canberra once Covid-19 travel restrictions are eased. The award is the third-highest honour bestowed by the Japanese government and is usually reserved for people who have made distinguished achievements. In a video, Newton-John said she was surprised: As an Australian, I feel very honoured. The singer has visited Japan more than 10 times, her first trip being in 1972, and has performed in locations around the country. She was the first foreign female singer to hold a memorial concert in Fukushima after the 2011 earthquake, tsunami and nuclear disaster. Japan’s ambassador to Australia Yamagami Shingo said Newton-John had a large legacy in the country: Not only have the famous tunes been major hits in Japan, they have had a huge impact on Japan’s pop music scene and its development. I’ll keep bringing you all the Cleo Smith updates throughout the morning, but just jumping back to the spat between Australia’s and France’s leaders for a second. French president Emmanuel Macron, in a now-infamous media doorstop with Australian journalists, accused the prime minister of misleading him over the deal with the US and UK. When asked whether Scott Morrison lied to him, Macron said: I don’t think, I know. Morrison has denied misleading the French government and insists concerns about the submarine project have been raised for some time. Communications between the two leaders were also leaked to the media, with the French president reportedly telling Morrison: I don’t like losing. Days before the announcement, Macron reportedly messaged Morrison, asking: Should I expect good or bad news for our joint submarine ambitions? Deutsche Presse-Agentur cited a source close to Macron as saying on Tuesday that publishing a personal text messages from one leader to another is an “inelegant and unacceptable method, to say it politely”. The source reportedly told DPA it was “not up to the standard of a head of government” and a “last desperate attempt” by Morrison to save his honour. You can read more about the rescue of missing four-year-old Cleo Smith below: Here is the full video that WA police released a short time ago: The federal government is urging Australians to be wary of online shopping scams in the lead-up to Christmas sales. The government says the Australian Cyber Security Centre received more than 11,000 reports of online shopping cybercrime last year. The assistant defence minister, Andrew Hastie, said Australians should “be alert to the Christmas grinches who are seeking to steal their money and personal information” via online shopping fraud. In a statement, he said: Just as Australians are picky about where they shop in the real world, they also need to choose their online stores wisely so they’re not exploited or targeted. Watch out for cybercriminals who use tricks like selling products that don’t exist, impersonating well-known brands but offering spectacular sales, or asking for personal and payment information they don’t need. If an online deal seems too good to be true – it probably is. Authorities are urging people to only buy from trusted sellers, always use secure payment methods like PayPal or a credit card at checkout, and never click on a link in an email or SMS to verify an order. More advice can be found at cyber.gov.au. My mistake! The prime minister has managed to put out a statement, saying the news that Cleo Smith has been reunited with her parents is “our prayers answered”: The prime minister, I believe, is still in the air, but here is the Labor leader’s reaction to the news of Cleo Smith being found alive and well: For those who haven’t been following the story, four-year-old Cleo Smith went missing nearly three weeks ago from the remote Blowholes campsite, 80km north of Carnarvon, during a camping trip with her parents. Yesterday acting police commissioner Col Blanch told ABC radio police were “getting closer and closer” to tracking down every person who was at the campsite on the night of her disappearance: And we’ve tracked down people that we didn’t know, we’ve found them and we have eliminated them, and that’s our focus at the moment – eliminate as many people as possible. He also said police were searching the dark web for signs of the missing girl. WA police have released a short statement. Deputy commissioner Col Blanch: It’s my privilege to announce that in the early hours of this morning, the Western Australian police force rescued Cleo Smith. Cleo is alive and well. A police team broke their way into a locked house in Carnarvon at about 1am. They found a little Cleo in one of those rooms. One of the officers picked her up into his arms and asked her what’s your name? She said “My name is Cleo.” Cleo was reunited with her parents a short time ago. This is the outcome we all hoped and prayed for. It is the outcome we’ve achieved because of some incredible police work and I want to thank Cleo’s parents, the Western Australian community, and all of the volunteers. And of course, I want to thank my colleagues in the Western Australian police force. I can confirm that we have a man from Carnarvon in custody, who is currently being questioned by detectives. We’ll have more to say on the rescue of clear as the day unfolds. But for now, welcome home Cleo. Missing WA four-year-old Cleo Smith has been found “alive and well” in a home in Carnarvon, and a man has been arrested. More details to come. Good morning, everyone, and welcome to hump day. Once again it’s Matilda Boseley here on deck, so grab a coffee and settle in because it’s bound to be a big one. Prime minister Scott Morrison and energy minister Angus Taylor are heading home from Cop26 after reaffirming to global leaders that Australia will play a role in helping other countries reduce emissions. Taylor said Australia was willing and able to share emissions-reducing technology to enable the world to reach the goal of net zero by 2050: Getting costs down to parity is essential to unlocking widespread, global deployment [of solar, batteries and hydrogen]. Ultra-low cost solar – generating electricity at $15 a megawatt-hour – would be one of the six priority technologies under the second of the government’s low emissions technology statements. But Morrison’s overseas trip likely wasn’t as focused on reducing emissions as he would have liked (never thought I would type that sentence), with the ongoing spat between France and Australia overshadowing his somewhat underwhelming climate pledges. It looks as though that’s only going to get worse today with French ambassador Jean-Pierre Thébault set to address the National Press Club in Canberra. Thébault and his US counterpart were recalled to Paris in September after Morrison revealed that Australia would work with the US and UK on a fleet of nuclear-powered submarines under the new Aukus partnership, and now he will outline how his nation plans to redefine its relationship with Australia in the wake of the dumping of a $90bn submarine deal. Buckle in, people. Thébault can be fiery and this one will definitely be worth a watch. OK, with that, let’s jump into the day.Confront previous inconvenience and own the narrative. It is a staple PR play. And how Tottenham pushed it on Tuesday as they trumpeted the arrival of Antonio Conte as their new head coach. The inconvenience lay in how Conte had turned them down on 4 June. At that point Spurs were 46 days into the search for a permanent successor to José Mourinho and, as we know, it would take 72 before they plumped for Nuno Espírito Santo – who had been out of work for the previous 37. Nuno always felt like an uneasy fit, an appointment that failed to quicken the pulses of the supporters and he departed on Monday having virtually stopped them. On 2 June, the Spurs chairman, Daniel Levy, had opened talks with Conte, who had left Internazionale seven days earlier. Very quickly, there was a confidence on the Spurs side that a deal could be struck – but then, within 48 hours, it was all off. There was a blame game, with Tottenham letting it be known they were concerned about Conte’s demands for a budget to reshape the squad – and one that did not factor in the sale of Harry Kane which, in fairness, Levy was not considering, either. The club also indicated they were worried as to whether Conte would commit to blooding young players, giving opportunities to players such as Oliver Skipp and Ryan Sessegnon. Nuno started Skipp in eight of his 10 Premier League games. Sessegnon has mainly been injured this season. How did Conte feel about the framing of events? He was not happy, to put it bluntly, even if there was an acknowledgment on his side of Spurs’ need to project a version that defended them. Conte knows as well as anybody how cynical this business can be. Which is why it was difficult not to smile when Conte was quoted on Spurs’ official channels explaining his decision to come this time. “Last summer our union did not happen because the end of my relationship with Inter was still too recent and emotionally too involved with the end of the season – so I felt that it wasn’t yet the right time to return to coaching. “But the contagious enthusiasm and determination of Daniel Levy in wanting to entrust me with this task had already hit the mark. Now that the opportunity has returned, I have chosen to take it with great conviction.” It is easy to wonder what has changed for Conte, assuming he still believes the Spurs squad needs surgery and it would not be performed cheaply. Emerson Royal, Cristian Romero and Bryan Gil were signed in July and August – representing steps in the right direction – but, on the down side, the group still looks thin in areas and the January transfer window is a distance away. It is never ideal for a manager to take over mid‑season, which is why Conte has not done so since 2007‑08, with Bari, and this Spurs team are at a horribly low ebb, with five defeats in the league already. The more pertinent question concerns what has changed for Levy and the answer lies in the toxicity of the mood around Tottenham’s stadium on Saturday during and after the 3-0 defeat against Manchester United. It has been a catalogue of disaster for Levy since December, taking in the slump under Mourinho, which led to his sacking six days before the Carabao Cup final; the rush to join the doomed European Super League; the exit strategy of Kane (albeit one that was thwarted); and the botched hire of Nuno. Levy has never had a tougher time in terms of his relationship with the fans and as he plotted his move after the United debacle he knew he needed something big. Something like, say, appointing the best out-of-work manager in the European game. He came to feel this was the only move to appease the masses and, with it, there have been concessions, the kind Levy has been reluctant to make in the past, to do with control over transfer business. Pressed into a corner, Levy has had to make certain promises to Conte. It is traditional at times such as these to talk about war chests but what Levy has said to Conte is that he will always back him for the right player. Which sounds promising or a little too open to interpretation, depending on your view. As ever, sales will be vital and much will hinge on the work of Fabio Paratici, whom Spurs announced on 12 June as their managing director of football, with effect from 1 July. Conte worked productively with Paratici at Juventus from 2011 to 2014, winning the Serie A title every season, and it is safe to assume the pair spoke in early June when Levy first moved for Conte. It was widely reported at the time that Paratici had given his word to Levy that he would join Spurs but perhaps he did not have the working knowledge of the club back then; the capacity to be able to reassure Conte. That has changed. Levy has spoken about how Spurs have been hit hard by the pandemic but as he has taken out loans to plug financial gaps – including those linked to the construction of the £1.2bn ground – the broader picture offers encouragement. According to Deloitte, the club’s most recent accounts show “matchday and commercial revenue grew to £94.5m (up 16%) and £160.5m (up 20%) respectively, demonstrating the revenue-generating potential that they have unlocked through the new stadium”. Full capacity crowds have made projections within the league’s profit and sustainability rules even better. With Levy, there has long been the sense that each managerial hire is a reaction to the previous departure, making it hard to discern a consistent blueprint or, to use the buzz phrase, a club DNA. He has bounced from Glenn Hoddle to David Pleat to Jacques Santini; from Juande Ramos to Harry Redknapp to André Villas-Boas; from Mauricio Pochettino to Mourinho. What Conte promises to bring, however, chimes with what Levy and every Spurs fan wants: quick, hard-running football; intelligent, well‑drilled patterns; the remorseless will to win. It would surely have been preferable for Levy to have secured Conte in June. The pair intend to retrieve the lost time.Prof Edward Holmes of the University of Sydney has won the prime minister’s prize for science, for his “transformative role in the scientific response to Covid-19”. Holmes, an expert on the evolution of viral diseases, publicly shared the genome sequence of the SARS-CoV-2 virus for the first time in January last year, publishing it on behalf of a consortium of Chinese scientists. For nearly three decades Holmes has studied how viruses evolve and jump between species. His research has focused on pathogens including HIV, Ebola and Zika, and his work on the emergence and origins of Covid-19 earned him recognition in 2020 as the New South Wales scientist of the year. Holmes described the recognition as a “truly humbling experience”. Among the other research achievements honoured in Wednesday’s awards were the development of biomaterials to repair wounds, decoding mysterious signals in the distant universe, and treatments to improve the survival of breast cancer patients. The prizes, in their 22nd year, are Australia’s most prestigious awards for achievements in scientific research, innovation and teaching. Prof Anthony Weiss, also of the University of Sydney, won the prime minister’s prize for innovation, for developing biomaterials that can accelerate and improve wound healing in human tissue. Both he and Holmes were awarded $250,000. Weiss was recognised for creating a synthetic version of tropoelastin, a protein building block that gives human tissue – including the skin, arteries and lungs – its elasticity. “Each of these little bricks is only 20 nanometers in size,” Weiss said. “We’ve learned how to assemble them into fibres and sheets and tubes.” The tropoelastin is used in injectables for localised tissue damage, or as implants in larger wounds, to help speed up tissue repair after injury. The biomaterial is produced at scale by specially programmed bacteria. “We just basically crack open the bacterial cells and out pops out our tropoelastin,” Weiss said. Weiss founded the firm Elastogen in 2008 to commercialise the research. The company was sold to one of the world’s biggest biopharmaceutical firms in 2018, in a deal totalling $334m – one of the largest transactions in Australia’s life science sector. Astronomer Dr Keith Bannister, of the CSIRO, was awarded the Malcolm McIntosh prize for physical scientist of the year. Bannister designed a way of pinpointing where fast radio bursts (FRBs) – short pulses of radio waves – originate from in galaxies billions of light years away. Bannister said it was gratifying to be recognised, emphasising that the work was a “huge effort” by a team of scientists. He compared detecting an FRB to “finding a needle in a haystack the size of 50 football fields”. “When we find one, within half a second we can actually reach inside the telescope and do a live-action replay [which helps locate it],” Bannister said. What exactly produces FRBs is still a mystery of modern astronomy, with some speculating the signals from deep space could be a sign of alien life. Bannister is sceptical of this explanation, but said the energy released by an FRB in one millisecond was equivalent to what the sun released in 70 years. He encouraged young people “to think about the Stem disciplines as a career, and also a way of being creative and a way of making a difference to the world”. Prof Sherene Loi, an oncologist and researcher at the Peter MacCallum Cancer Centre, took home the Frank Fenner prize for life scientist of the year. Loi’s research led to a biomarker test for breast cancer, which is now routinely used in pathology reporting in many countries. She also helped prove that immunotherapy can prolong survival in patients with triple negative breast cancer, the most aggressive type of breast cancer.Detroit Lions safety Tracy Walker III brought up the most unpleasant NFL numbers possible after a nasty 44-6 loss on Sunday: “We have to fix it now, because obviously, it ain’t going to fix itself, or we’ll be 0-17,” he said after the defeat to the Philadelphia Eagles. And there it was, for all the world to ponder: 0-17. No NFL team has gone 0-17, in large part because no NFL team has played 17 games in a regular season since 1930, when the late Frankford Yellow Jackets finished 4-13-1, and the New York Football Giants finished 13-4. But the NFL, always sniffing more money, expanded the regular season to 17 games from 16 this year, and the 0-8 Lions, who may not be the worst NFL team but are now the only winless NFL team, are getting close enough that 0-17 is coming up in conversation. “We’re not going to let them think like that,” Dan Campbell, their first-year coach, said Monday. When Campbell, the fiery former tight end and long-time NFL assistant who led the Miami Dolphins to five victories in 12 games as interim coach in 2015, took the Lions’ job in January, he drew some attention (and gasps) by promising, “When you knock us down, we’re going to get up, and on the way up, we’re going to bite a kneecap off.” The Lions have done little actual damage since, though they lost to Baltimore and Minnesota by two points each. The loss to the Ravens was particularly cruel because Justin Tucker beat Detroit with a NFL-record 66-yard field goal as time expired (the Vikings game wasn’t much better: the Lions lost that one on a last-second Greg Joseph kick). But at least the Lions put themselves in a position to win those games. The loss to the Eagles, who had been sputtering going into the game, was so thorough and demoralizing that 0-17 came up, evoking unpleasant memories. Only two NFL teams went 0-16 in 43 years: the Cleveland Browns in 2017, and, yep, the Detroit Lions in 2008. “For us to win, we’ve got to play damn near perfect,” said Campbell, the former Texas Aggie, “and that’s on us. We’re charged with that as coaches.” Lions quarterback Jared Goff, the former No 1 overall draft pick who helped the Los Angeles Rams to the Super Bowl just three years ago before a drop in production, said, grimly, “Until we change our habits and until we change who we are, nothing will change.” Any run to an 0-for-the-season attracts rubberneckers, but the Lions are especially compelling because (a) it’s not too long since their last winless season, and (b) they are a big-market team that has been owned by the Ford family, the automakers, for nearly 60 years. They have won exactly one playoff game in that timespan. Indeed, the Lions’ Wikipedia history page has been edited to include the following: “In the current millennia (sic), the Detroit Lions record of franchise mediocrity has been solidified through the continuing incompetent ownership of the Ford family.” This has been a superb college football season in the state, with Michigan State rallying to beat Michigan on Saturday in a battle of unbeaten top-10 rivals. Even with the Lions facing an opponent some people thought they could beat, the paid attendance at Ford Field a day later 85 miles away was 47,192, nearly 18,000 short of capacity. “Winning solves a lot of issues, as you all know,” Campbell said. But the Lions have not won much for decades. They have lost all eight of their playoff games since 1991, when they fell apart in the second half against Washington in the NFC championship game. That was as close as the Lions have come to the Super Bowl. In fact, the Lions are one of just four NFL teams that have never played in a Super Bowl. And Jacksonville, Cleveland and Houston – the three others – have been around far less time than the Lions, who were established in 1928 as the Portsmouth (Ohio) Spartans. The Lions won the 1935 NFL championship and three more in their glory days between 1952 and 1957, but those were football’s dark ages. Consider that a person born on 29 December 1957, the date when Detroit won their most recent NFL title, will turn 64 next month. Campbell is the 21st Lions’ head coach since that day. He arrived with lower expectations than his immediate non-interim predecessor, Matt Patricia, a Bill Belichick disciple whose Lions won 13 of 43 games. Patricia hightailed it back to New England. The Lions are young, and Campbell has kept his expectations in check. Still, as he said during a news conference Monday: “Look. We’re in the middle of a lot of adversity now. We knew it was going to come. But I don’t think any of us thought it was going to be 0-8.” They won’t lose this weekend, because they have a bye, and Campbell is planning to use the time to do a little more “self-scouting,” as coaches like to call it, to look at more tape and identify the problems. A lack of effort apparently is not one of them. “It’s a lack of focus, details, fundamentals – and sometimes, a lack of attitude, if you will,” Campbell said, referring to his team’s tendency to take a while to reach a full boil. A Detroit Tigers’ cap pulled low on his head, Campbell was blunt but calm. When he was told what Walker had said about possibly going 0-17, Campbell pointed out that the Lions still have nine games left, including a Thanksgiving Day home game against the struggling Chicago Bears. The New York Jets lost their first 13 games last year to stoke a lot of 0-16 chatter until, to the dismay of their fans, they won two games in a row to surpass Jacksonville, who won their opener and then lost their last 15 games. The Jaguars used the No 1 pick on Trevor Lawrence. The Lions already have a No 1 pick at quarterback, plus three draft picks acquired in the trade that sent their talented quarterback Matt Stafford to the Rams, who are 7-1. A turnaround may take a while, maybe even into 2022, but Campbell said one is coming. “I know we’re not the team that played yesterday,” he said Monday, even though the Lions were that very team.Seven charities working to provide food, water, blankets and other essential aid to refugees in northern France have warned that they might have to stop their work because celebrity-backed funder Choose Love is ending its financial support. The charities provide a lifeline to refugees who are hoping to seek sanctuary in the UK, often attempting Channel crossings by small boats. The deteriorating weather as winter approaches makes living conditions for the estimated 2,000 migrants in Calais, who are destitute and often forced to sleep outside, more precarious. In a statement the charities said: “We may no longer be able to continue our work after December. If we were to leave Calais there would be dangerous gaps left in the provision of basic warmth, shelter and food.” Choose Love has raised £35m, works in 22 countries to support refugees and has supported 300 projects. It is backed by celebrities from the worlds of music, fashion and acting including Chris Martin and Coldplay, Harry Styles, Dua Lipa, Olivia Colman and Stella McCartney. The charities affected include Calais Food Collective, Refugee Info Bus and Refugee Women’s Centre. Between them, the seven aid groups provide food people can cook themselves, prepared meals, water, firewood, dry clothing and footwear, blankets, tarpaulins, phone charging points and information services. Choose Love started in the summer of 2015 in response to the worsening situation for refugees in Europe, when a group of volunteers planned to take a van full of donations and raise £1,000 for refugees in Calais. It became almost overnight the largest aid operation in northern France. In a statement issued on Instagram on Tuesday 2 November Choose Love announced that they would no longer be funding many of the smaller NGOs working on the frontline with refugees in Calais and Dunkirk. They will, however, continue to support two charities working with unaccompanied minors in the area – Safe Passage and ECPAT. Choose Love said: “This year we find ourselves in a place where we have had to make some difficult decisions and we have news which we are delivering with heavy hearts.” It said it had initiated a strategic review and that many factors, including the pandemic, were behind the decision to withdraw funds. The seven charities which will no longer receive funds from Choose Love say that between them they are losing hundreds of thousands of pounds and that for some of them their entire income will be affected. A spokesperson for Refugee Info Bus said: “Funding from Choose Love supported our vital services and filled a major gap left by governments and large NGOs. Their withdrawal is a serious blow which will have real consequences in Calais. A working phone is a lifeline here. Our teams are established and accepted within the communities in Calais but the funding situation poses a real risk. Last week Info Bus helped more than 500 people charge their phones and access the internet. The dire humanitarian situation in Calais continues and with the harsh winter approaching we are urgently seeking alternative funds.” A spokesperson for Calais Food Collective said: “We will be greatly affected by the withdrawal of support from Choose Love. It is vitally important that our essential services are not scaled back – a permanent water supply for those who have no other water source, food and cooking equipment are invaluable to those in a state of near permanent precarity.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “People should claim asylum in the first safe country they reach. It is dangerous to encourage these Channel crossings, which are illegal, unnecessary and facilitated by violent criminal gangs profiting from misery. We are working with the French to stop boats leaving their beaches and crack down on the criminals driving these crossings.”From the signing of the United Nations framework convention on climate change in 1992, to the first Conference of the Parties in 1995, to this week’s Cop26, we have heard many words from world leaders, but have not seen anywhere enough action. To undo the damage caused by this lack of commitment, the world needs to sign up to some big things. For starters, that means a rapid end to the era of fossil fuels, with an immediate halt to all new fossil fuel projects. And it means ambitious emission-cutting plans from every country to halve global emissions by 2030, with rich countries moving fastest. In 1992, all countries not only agreed to the UN framework’s objective to “protect the climate system for the benefit of present and future generations of humankind, on the basis of equity”, but also that developed countries “take the lead” as they bore the heaviest responsibility for historic emissions. Based on equity, richer countries should live up to the commitment to move fastest to meet the 1.5C goal, and the phasing out of fossil fuels should be accompanied by support for workers, Indigenous peoples and all affected communities. A fossil fuel phase-out would deliver energy independence and a more secure economic future, creating millions of stable, well-paid jobs in green, hi-tech renewable energy. Just witness the crisis caused by the recent hike in wholesale gas prices to see where dependence on fossil fuels takes us. The biggest historical polluters need to show solidarity with people and countries on the frontline of the climate crisis. That’s the fair approach. So we need to see $100bn (£73bn) a year (and rising) going from rich countries to less developed countries to allow them to adapt, develop green energy systems and transition away from fossil fuels – benefiting everyone on the planet. And more money should be made available on top of that to compensate for the damage already being caused by climate impacts in those less developed countries. Some governments and industries are aiming to use Cop26 to create a new global market in carbon offsets. Most of the “rulebook” for how the Paris agreement is implemented has now been agreed, but one of the key outstanding areas is article 6. It covers a single page but is deeply contentious. What those nine paragraphs actually mean is due to be agreed in Glasgow. Some governments and industries want article 6 to be interpreted as a mandate for new markets in carbon offsets, endorsed by the UN. Carbon credits could, for example, be generated by planting trees or buying up existing forests, as a way to “offset” a dirty power project on the other side of the world or further oil development, such as Total in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. But offsetting doesn’t stop carbon entering the atmosphere and warming our world, it just keeps it off the ledgers of the governments and companies responsible. According to the Institute for Applied Ecology, about eight out of 10 offsetting projects rich countries relied on to meet their climate targets under the Kyoto protocol were deemed unlikely to have delivered any climate benefit. Offsetting has been tried and it has failed – to pursue this as a solution now is nothing more than greenwashing and would blow a huge hole in the Paris agreement. The world needs to make immediate, dramatic and consistent emissions reductions now – not push the global south, in particular, further to the brink with offset schemes. They have led to land-grabbing, biodiversity destruction and human rights abuses. To protect nature, and people’s futures, governments must work in partnership with local Indigenous peoples to manage the land justly. Carbon markets should not, therefore, become a distraction at Cop26. Instead, governments need to focus on making firm rules for companies to reduce emissions directly from their activities, focus on justly ending the fossil fuel era and explore how to best embrace the energy transition in a transparent, authentic way. We need real climate action now, not greenwashing scams. However things turn out in Glasgow, we need to be able to look back on this period in history and know we did everything we could, even if our leaders failed us. And to the big polluters: we will not be giving up on our hope of a greener, safer, fairer, healthier planet. Jennifer Morgan is executive director of Greenpeace International“Nuno Espírito Santo won the manager of the month award for August, but just 52 days later, he was sacked,” writes Derek Robertson. “Is this a Premier League record or has someone else had an even more precipitous fall from grace?” Such is the thirst for change in some club boardrooms, Nuno’s rapid descent from August’s best Premier League manager to unemployment can be beaten. Let’s start at Sheffield Wednesday in 2000, where on 1 February Danny Wilson received the Premier League manager of the month award. Just 49 days later, on 21 March, he was cast out in the cold having won only one in six. On 6 February 2013 Reading’s Brian McDermott was named manager of the month for January. “We’ve given ourselves a real chance of league survival,” beamed McDermott. Four straight defeats and 33 days later, McDermott was given his marching orders. Predictably, Reading went on to be relegated. We really ought to take a look at Chelsea, though. The winds of change blow fiercely in SW6. Claudio Ranieri was sacked 59 days after winning the March award in 2004, so quick but not quick enough. Success at this time of year would appear to be deadly for Chelsea managers. Rafa Benítez won the April award in 2013 and was let go on 28 May after winning the Europa League, though he was only ever an interim manager, as Blues fans were so fond of reminding him. Five years earlier, Avram Grant was handed the April 2008 award on 9 May and was tossed out of Stamford Bridge a mere 16 days later (25 May) after the Blues finished second, two points behind Manchester United. Surely, no one can beat that? No, but the same club can equal it. Carlo Ancelotti was named manager of the month for April on 6 May 2011, with the Premier League panel being impressed after Chelsea’s “three consecutive home wins over Birmingham, West Ham and Tottenham” gave them “momentum into their pivotal match with the league leaders” Manchester United. They lost 2-1 and after a draw with Newcastle and a defeat at Everton, the champions finished second to United. Ancelotti was sent packing on 22 May, 16 days later. Had the Premier League not handed Ancelotti the award as early in the month as they did, then the Italian could have won this Knowledge segment instead of sharing the honour with Grant. Four years later, history repeated itself for poor Carlo. He was sent packing by second-placed Real Madrid on 25 May, having received April’s La Liga manager of the month award on 7 May (a gap of only 18 days). Brits abroad scoring in Europe “On 30 September Chris Smalling and Tammy Abraham both scored for Roma in a European tie v Zorya Luhansk. How many times has more than one English (or even British) player scored for a European/non-British club in a European competition?” asks Kenn Rushworth. Such was a certain reluctance of British players to regularly pursue careers in Europe until recently, the answer is not that often, Kenn, but Dirk Maas has plucked out a couple of examples. “Jonathan Woodgate and David Beckham scored for Real Madrid against Rosenborg in a Champions League 2005-06 group stage match,” writes Dirk, who deserves a pat on the back for managing to mention Woodgate and Real Madrid in a positive light. “And Mark Pembridge and Brian Deane contributed to a comfortable 6-0 victory for Benfica over Beitar Jerusalem in a second qualification round of the Champions League in 1998-99. At that time Benfica served as a British enclave during Graeme Souness’s reign, with players such as Scott Minto, Deane, Dean Saunders, Pembridge, Michael Thomas, Steve Harkness and Gary Charles passing through.” Perfect homes “In the 1929-30 season, Brentford won all 21 home games,” writes David Daniels. “Has any other club achieved this feat, either domestically or abroad?” Yes, they have and here’s Gary Cumberland with the rundown. “Brentford are actually the sixth club to do it, although they did it with a lot more home games in their season. The other unbeaten home teams were: 1891-92 Sunderland (won all 13 home games) 1893-94 Liverpool (14 home games) 1894-95 Bury (15 home games) 1899-00 Sheffield Wednesday (as The Wednesday) (17 home games) 1902-03 Birmingham City (as Small Heath) (17 home games) 1929-30 Brentford (21 home games) “One interesting note is that even though they went 100% at home, Brentford (and Birmingham in 1903) didn’t even win their leagues! In fact, Brentford were a whopping seven points behind Plymouth Argyle, back when a win was worth only two points.” Knowledge archive “I am interested in learning the origins of the expression that a defence was at ‘sixes and sevens’ in dealing with an attack,” wrote Eric Willis in October 2005. “Can you help?” Off to www.wordorigins.org to answer this one, Eric, which stated: “‘At sixes and sevens’ is a very old catchphrase and relates to gambling. It first appears c.1374 in Chaucer’s Troylus. The original phrasing was ‘set upon six and seven’. It referred to betting one’s entire fortune on one throw of the dice [this, it transpires, being a game called ‘hazard’, more commonly known as craps]. It connoted carelessness, and over time the phrase came to mean confusion, disorder, and disagreement.” Apparently a plural form, ‘to leave at sixes and sevens’, was developed in the 1800s; it was still based on the same gambling metaphor, but the idiom was now used to signify a kind of confusion or neglect, rather that pure risk taking. Can you help? “Last Saturday Newcastle lost 3-0, Middlesbrough lost 2-0, Hull lost 1-0, Sunderland lost 5-1 and Hartlepool lost 5-0,” begins Christopher Lutton. “Has the north-east ever had a worse footballing day?” “My youngest son plays U-18 football and the coaches set up on either side of pitch and coach from there throughout the game,” writes Andrew Walker Thornton. “Is there any examples in the professional game of opposing dugouts on opposite sides of the pitch.” “Ibrahima Konaté has played at Old Trafford twice in his career so far. The first time he lost 5-0 to Manchester United playing for Leipzig in the Champions League, and the second time he won 5-0 playing for Liverpool in the Premier League. Has any player experienced similarly contrasting scores in consecutive visits to a ground/club?” asks Boris Cule. “Out of all the managers who won the Premier League, who suffered the biggest loss during the season they won it?” asks Masai Graham. “In 1998 AIK won the Swedish Allsvenska despite scoring the least amount of goals of all the teams. Has this happened before or since in the top flight of any country?” asks Jesper Enhörning. • Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.The premise of The Premise (Disney+) is vague enough to require an explanation from its creator, BJ Novak, before it begins. This to-camera introduction gives it an old-fashioned feel – which is jarring, because it sets itself up as a very modern show. The trailer calls it “an anthology of now”, although that only muddies the waters. Essentially, it is a short comedy-drama series. Each episode has a discrete cast and a discrete story that takes a modern concern and forms it into a plot. It feels like an exercise in creative writing – an ambitious idea more than the successful execution of an ambitious idea. And, on the basis of the opening double bill, it doesn’t quite land. The first episode, Social Justice Sex Tape – how’s that for a hot-button title? – combines pornography, cancel culture, institutional racism and police brutality into an absurd legal comedy farce. Ben Platt stars as Ethan, a “woke bro” type who lives in a gentrifying area, goes on marches, donates money to charity and vociferously tweets support for various anti-racism causes. While masturbating to a sex tape he made with an ex-girlfriend, he realises that he has captured evidence in the background that exonerates an innocent black man, Darren Williams, who is in prison awaiting trial. Ever the ally, Ethan takes the tape to the lawyers defending Darren and agrees to let them show it in court, to prove that the police who arrested him are lying. If there is any sense of realism to start with, it is rapidly tossed aside, showing the video in full, graphic detail in the lawyers’ office and in court, without sparing anyone’s blushes by blurring or cropping out inessential parts. Here, the episode starts to founder and grab at straws, in trying to find the premise. One solid line of inquiry is the futility, or not, of online sloganeering; among the few moments that elicited a laugh was the state lawyer trawling through Ethan’s Twitter history, pointing out that he called for the police to be abolished in one tweet and for more law enforcement at a Tame Impala concert in another. But this is a cheap joke. Other themes are thrown up with little thought about where they will land. Ethan’s credibility as a witness is corroded with various accusations that his sex tape is a deep fake, that he is a crisis actor or an “incel”, or perhaps all of the above. The tape becomes about Ethan, his unique sexual style and whether or not he expected his life to be torn apart for coming forward with what he saw as evidence. It becomes more muddled as the farce stacks up. Is it about cancel culture or social justice? Privacy or activism? It seems coy about going too far while pushing a silly story to a chaotic conclusion. The second episode, Moment of Silence, is of more questionable taste. Jon Bernthal plays the grieving father of a five-year-old girl killed during a school shooting. He pursues a job doing PR for a prominent gun lobby, here called the NGL. Again, any notion of realism is thrown out as soon as the what-if-this-happened twist becomes clear. The organisation is thrilled with the coup of getting him on staff and asks him to observe a minute’s silence for the anniversary of the shooting, which will be broadcast to the country. It will, they promise, have a big impact. What could possibly go wrong? The episode is a slow build towards a bleak resolution and is as sombre and grim as the first episode was ridiculous. Social Justice Sex Tape took an idea and had fun with it, but there is clearly no fun to be had in this. Instead, it settles for a self-satisfied told-you-so. It is unpleasant viewing for all sorts of reasons; it left me feeling grubby, rather than educated or provoked. Novak is an accomplished writer and actor, best known for the US version of The Office, but The Premise seems to take novel ideas and flatten them out. There are five episodes, with the final three examining trolling, celebrity worship and redemption, tied to the development of a butt plug. There is clearly ambition behind the first two episodes, but the later premises sound much more appealing – and like a far happier match between subject matter and tone.Either Eddie Jones has walked under a whole row of ladders or his England selection plans are falling victim to some other mystery curse. How else to account for the latest injury flurry which has removed a raft of backline options from contention before this weekend’s game with Tonga, a fixture earmarked as a springboard to another potentially exciting new Twickenham era? In theory this was meant to be among the more upbeat weeks of Jones’s tenure, with some promising youngsters being expertly blended into a team with a licence to sparkle like a Bonfire Night firework show. Instead, having jettisoned plenty of familiar faces for players such as Marcus Smith, Freddie Steward, Raffi Quirke and Louis Lynagh, several of the fresh-faced pretenders are struggling to make it out of the treatment room. The aforementioned quartet plus Saracens’ in-form Max Malins are all now either doubtful or non-starters for England’s opening autumn Test, undermining Jones’s efforts to assemble a go-faster three-quarter line before the Wallabies and the Springboks come to town. With Quirke, Malins and Lynagh definitely out because of injuries which originated at their clubs and Smith and Steward as yet unable to train fully this week, the “new England” could end up looking remarkably like the old one. If Smith cannot start, in particular, several rainforests-worth of previews will need recasting. The primary aim from this fixture, from England’s perspective, was to see how effectively the Harlequin could dovetail with Owen Farrell at 10 and 12. As it transpires, with Quirke also sidelined, the old firm of Farrell and Ben Youngs could be back, albeit with Northampton’s uncapped Alex Mitchell on the bench. A penny for the thoughts of George Ford and Dan Robson, both of whom might have been suited to this fixture. In certain respects, though, Jones deserves limited sympathy, his indecision still apparently final. Already he is in the position of having to talk up Jamie George after brutally jettisoning the Saracens hooker only last month. Now George has been retained in his matchday squad ahead of Leicester’s Nic Dolly, who was originally picked in front of him. If George is currently wondering which way is up, he is not alone. There would be even less logic if George now starts and Newcastle’s Jamie Blamire, another original pick, sits on the bench. And what about Sam Simmonds, good enough to make the summer Lions tour but also now sent back to his club before the Tonga game along with Newcastle’s Callum Chick and Leicester’s George Martin? Rumours persist, meanwhile, that Courtney Lawes will wear 6 and Tom Curry operate at 8 at certain times this autumn. If so, and the in-form Alex Dombrandt is “only” warming the bench against the Tongans, when will the Harlequins No 8 ever be wholly trusted? Round and round it continues to swirl. Is it actually more experimentation that England need or more far-sighted judgment, a better balance and greater stability? It is all very well Jones deciding Billy Vunipola may not make the 2023 World Cup, when he will be almost 31, but where does that leave Manu Tuilagi and Youngs who will be 32 and 34 respectively? Ma’a Nonu was 33 when he carved up the 2015 World Cup final but what if Tuilagi cannot regain full throttle this autumn? It is remarkable to think, either way, that Jones has chosen 20 different centre pairings in his 66 Tests in charge and started his optimum pair together in just five of them. Between them Tuilagi and Henry Slade have pretty much everything a coach could wish for: power, a gainline-breaking threat, a sweet left boot and a nice outside break. Think back to the spectacular 32-20 win over Ireland in Dublin in the 2019 Six Nations, the 40-16 obliteration of Australia in the World Cup quarter-final in Oita and even when England stormed to a dramatic 31-0 lead versus Scotland in that dramatic 38-38 Calcutta Cup draw at Twickenham in 2019. The common denominator, every time, was a Tuilagi-Slade midfield combo. So if Smith’s “minor leg injury” forces him either to the bench or out of the 23 entirely, the silver lining could see Farrell lining up in his best position on his 100th Test appearance and everyone else finally being able to gauge whether England’s issues stemmed more from how they were previously being told to play than the personnel involved. With Adam Radwan and Jonny May on the wings there should still be oodles of pace and opportunity could also yet knock for George Furbank. Fitness permitting, naturally.Facial recognition firm Clearview AI has been ordered to cease collecting photos of Australians from the internet, after it was revealed police in some states had trialled the technology. On Wednesday, the information and privacy commissioner determined Clearview AI had breached the privacy of Australians by collecting images of them online, and ordered the company to delete all images of people in Australia within 90 days and not collect any more. “When Australians use social media or professional networking sites, they don’t expect their facial images to be collected without their consent by a commercial entity to create biometric templates for completely unrelated identification purposes,” commissioner Angelene Falk said. “The indiscriminate scraping of people’s facial images, only a fraction of whom would ever be connected with law enforcement investigations, may adversely impact the personal freedoms of all Australians who perceive themselves to be under surveillance.” But Clearview AI has stood its ground, saying it operates legitimately in Australia and intends to appeal the decision. Clearview AI is a facial recognition service that claims to have built up enormous databases – containing more than 3bn labelled faces – through the controversial practice of scraping photos from Facebook and other social media sites. Last year, it was revealed the US-based company had offered trial services to police in Australia – specifically Queensland police, Victoria police and the Australian federal police. Reports suggested more than 2,000 law enforcement agencies across the globe had been using Clearview’s services in early 2020. In response to the scandal, the Office of the Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC) launched an investigation in cooperation with the UK’s information commissioner office in July 2020. Clearview AI stands ground Mark Love, a lawyer for BAL Lawyers acting for Clearview AI, said the company had gone to “considerable lengths” to cooperate, and claimed “the commissioner has not correctly understood how Clearview AI conducts it business”. He said Clearview AI intends to appeal to the Administrative Appeals Tribunal. “Clearview AI operates legitimately according to the laws of its places of business,” he said. “Not only has the commissioner’s decision missed the mark on the manner of Clearview AI’s manner of operation, the commissioner lacks jurisdiction.” The Australian founder and CEO of Clearview AI, Hoan Ton-That, said he respects the effort the commissioner put into evaluating the technology he built but said he is “disheartened by the misinterpretation of its value to society”. In its response to the OAIC, Clearview AI argued its images were collected from the internet without requiring a password or other security clearance. The company also said the images held by Clearview AI were published in the US, not Australia, so Australian privacy law should not apply. The OAIC report noted Clearview AI has not offered services to Australian organisations since March 2020, but the commissioner said that didn’t go far enough and all images of people in Australia must be removed. Police forces in Australia have downplayed their use of the service, and the OAIC’s investigation found Clearview did not have any paid customers in Australia. However, the OAIC report found officers in Australia had successfully searched for suspects, victims and themselves in the Clearview databases. The OAIC is still finalising a report on the AFP’s trial of the technology and whether it complied with the federal privacy code for government agencies. The ABC reported last year through documents obtained under freedom of information law that at least one officer tested the software using photos of herself and another member of staff, while the Australian Centre to Counter Child Exploitation conducted searches for five “persons of interest”. The UK’s ICO is separately considering its next steps and any formal regulatory action under the UK’s data protection laws. It is the second ruling the OAIC has made against facial recognition technology this year, after a similar finding was made against convenience store giant 7-Eleven last month over the collection of facial images of people filling out customer surveys across 700 stores, in a bid to weed out fake responses. Facebook this week also announced a move away from the use of facial recognition technology on its platform, citing concerns over privacy and transparency around the use of the technology.Amid black and white Ansel Adams-style cinematography, two Amish sisters spy on a topless man bathing in a Yosemite river. Suddenly, a peaceful choral soundtrack gives way to bone-shaking guitar: Inside, the debut single by Scottish grunge band Stiltskin. Thus began one of the strangest cultural wrinkles of the 1990s: when Levi’s became a jeans company that could also score UK chart hits. Inside was built around an addictive riff that still sounds fresh, and the advert, entitled Creek, shot it to the top of the UK charts. Over the next few years, the likes of Babylon Zoo, Smoke City, Mr Oizo and Norman Cook’s pre-Fatboy Slim project Freak Power would also score major success off the back of a placement in Levi’s witty, often sexually provocative adverts. Before Stiltskin, previous Levi’s ads had made renewed hits out of Muddy Waters’ Mannish Boy, the Clash’s Should I Stay or Should I Go and Marvin Gaye’s I Heard It Through the Grapevine (the latter in 1985’s classic, Nick Kamen-in-his-boxers “Laundrette” ad). The brand used classic blues, rock and soul to embody the brand’s sense of vintage authenticity. Inside, though, was the first time the company had used a new artist as their soundtrack. “When you’re selling the same basic product in the world of fashion, you have to change something,” explains Sir John Hegarty, the creative director at London-based creative agency Bartle Bogle Hegarty (BBH), who ran the 80s and 90s Levi’s campaigns. “You can’t change the clothes. So we used the communication as a way of saying: we’re discovering music, we’re ahead of fashion.” “My house was being repossessed because I couldn’t pay the mortgage,” says Stiltskin singer (and later Genesis vocalist) Ray Wilson, recalling his audition for the band in January 1994. “I signed on the dole and drove down to London in this old Volkswagen van that was falling apart. Weeks after, we were No 1.” Released 20 days after Kurt Cobain’s suicide, the song landed in a musical landscape overrun with grunge bands emulating the 90s Seattle sound. Smashing Pumpkins frontman Billy Corgan, convinced Inside ripped off their sound, greeted a Munich crowd later that year with a wry, “Hi, we’re Stiltskin!” The band never had another hit, something Wilson chalks up to “too much success too quickly. You can’t go up from there – it’s not the best way to start a band’s career. We came together within weeks, so we didn’t have a relationship. We ended up hating each other.” That anger bled into the band’s performances. “We did MTV’s Most Wanted and we were told there was something in the region of 20 million viewers,” he continues. “Me and [guitarist and songwriter] Peter were at each other. He kicked me in the face. On one hand MTV were pissed off, but that little clip of Peter kicking me and the microphone flying out of my hand – they used that for 12 months on their trailers.” Having your track selected by Levi’s was enough to at least guarantee a chart hit, albeit not longevity – but even fleeting success was a temptation. “The music industry went from: ‘I don’t want to touch advertising’, to completely swinging round to: ‘Please can we have some of our music in your ad’,” recalls Hegarty. “It was that winning-the-lottery phone call,” says Fatboy Slim, AKA Norman Cook, who, in 1995, was playing keyboards in acid-jazz troupe Freak Power. “We were slogging around clubs playing gigs and frankly, we weren’t setting the world alight. We needed something to kick us up a division.” Turn On, Tune In, Cop Out had reached No 29 when it was first released, but went Top 5 after being re-released and selected to feature in the 1995 Levi’s ad Taxi. The commercial showed Filipino-American fashion designer Zaldy, now better known for making RuPaul’s outfits on Drag Race, taking a New York taxi in drag, and shocking the cab driver by shaving her chin mid-drive. Airing at a time when there was little in the way of LGBTQ+ representation in advertising, it was almost banned by the Advertising Standards Authority, who finally agreed it could be shown after 8pm. “The main client [at Levi’s] at the time was like, ‘Oh my god, we can’t do this’,” remembers Hegarty. “The people underneath him had to go and convince him it was going to be great.” “There was one cut I really liked where the whole track stops when the shaver came on, which also sounded kind of like a vibrator,” says Cook. “I was very proud of the fact it had this slightly risque subject matter [for the time].” Most people who grew up in the 90s will cite Babylon Zoo’s 1995 industrial-glam hit Spaceman as the Levi’s ad song they remember best. Although, as Hegarty reveals, the collaboration almost didn’t happen. “[Vocalist Jas Mann] didn’t want to do it and his manager said, ‘Are you fucking stupid? This is going to make you’.” It would go on to become the fastest-selling British single since the Beatles’ Can’t Buy Me Love, despite widespread disappointment that the pitched-up snippet in the ad wasn’t representative of the overall track. “Millions of pop kids rushed down Woolies and bought the single – only to get it home to discover to their horror that it was ‘good’ (like in the advert) for about 10 seconds,” Steven Wells wrote in the NME. “Then became rubbish. Very rubbish.” Still, the Levi’s cachet continued to rise through the 1990s, and BBH commissioned well-known names to helm their commercials. In 1997, Roman Coppola directed the Brady Bunch-inspired commercial Daytrippers, soundtracked by US indie band Lilys’ psych-pop track, A Nanny in Manhattan. The song reached No 16 in the UK – their only major chart success. Vocalist Kurt Heasley remembers he felt pressured to follow up with music people could “instantly grasp by the second chorus. We’re this weird, rare, odd thing and people were like, ‘More meat! More potato!’ We’re more like truffle oil on chips.” Also in 1997, Michel Gondry, who would later direct Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind and more, was hired to film the raunchy spot Mermaids. For Smoke City’s Brazilian-British vocalist Nina Miranda, Gondry’s sensual advert, which featured a pod of mermaids attempting to relieve a man of his Levi 501s in the ocean, conjured a sense of escapism. “Levi’s ads were weird little messages in a bottle from an exotic place somewhere else,” she says. Miranda had written the track in 1993, long before Levi’s came calling: “I was really depressed and living in London. I used to sit in my room, putting ideas to tape. A DJ friend said: ‘I’m going to make a song just for you’. I put it on, without having heard it before, and I sang what I felt which was this incredible trip into water.” Underwater Love became an underground hit and sparked a bidding war – but once signed to Zumba Records, Smoke City were frustrated to find the label wouldn’t promote their debut album, Flying Away, after the Levi’s ad was confirmed, because they considered the ad such an effective marketing tool on its own. “We were saying, ‘please promote the album’, because already people were saying we were one-hit wonders,” Miranda remembers, though she believes the commercial was still a blessing rather than a curse. “That song went all over the world. It opened a lot of doors and people still remember it.” BBH’s final Levi’s ad of the 90s would be their most successful of the decade. It featured a headbanging, fluffy yellow puppet called Flat Eric. Soundtracked by Flat Beat, French DJ-producer Mr Oizo’s influential bass anthem, it was a concept Hegarty had to pitch three times in order to get over the finish line. The single sold millions of copies, spent two weeks at No 1 in March 1999, and spawned think pieces that pondered Flat Eric’s position at the intersection of consumerism and popular culture. But Flat Beat would be the last song to become a major hit after appearing on a Levi’s ad and BBH turned away from using original artists in the 2000s. That 90s run is a feat Hegarty thinks could never happen again. “The way advertising works today, it doesn’t have quite the confidence – or if I can use that word ‘swagger’ – as it had back then,” he says. “People have lost confidence in those big brand statements about what we are, who we are, how we behave.” “I suppose the modern equivalent would be to have a TikTok hit,” says Cook, who recently pondered joining the social network with his manager and label. “We went to TikTok and asked, ‘We know how to get records on the radio, but how do we get them here?’ And they said, ‘They just grow ergonomically or organically.’ It’s not an algorithm that can be influenced.” The difference, Hegarty says, is the way that the world is fragmented today through social media. “There’s always a relationship between music and clothing – the trouble is you’ve not got anyone going out there making a big statement about it and leading the market,” he says. “Someone always says to me, ‘How do you predict fashion?’ You can’t predict fashion. What you can do is write interesting, challenging, distinctive little stories and that way, you might have an influence.”There weren’t many silver linings for Scott Morrison in his extraordinary skirmish with Emmanuel Macron, but one may be that it has distracted public attention from the prime minister’s threadbare performance at the Glasgow climate summit. As Morrison and other leaders flew home from the ongoing talks on Tuesday, observers were tallying up what the prime minister had committed to do at a meeting billed as the best, last chance to deal with the climate crisis. It didn’t take long. Attention then turned to a more significant list: what the Australian government had not committed to doing. At the top was something we have known for a while: it made no commitment to cut greenhouse gas emissions rapidly, as scientific advice says is necessary. This was the central point of the Glasgow summit – to ramp up action this decade, as was agreed under the ratchet mechanism of the Paris agreement. Countries are expected to lift their short-term commitments over time on the way to carbon neutrality. The rule of thumb is that global emissions need to be cut roughly in half this decade. That means substantial action from all major emitters, particularly the wealthy. New commitments offered haven’t even come close to that, but they have increased over the past year. The G7 developed nations and the European Union are all promising at least a 40% emissions cut by 2030 compared with (give or take) their highest polluting year. India, the world’s third-biggest emitter, this week promised that half its electricity would be renewable by then. Even China, which drew strong and understandable condemnation from Joe Biden for president Xi Jinping’s non-appearance in Glasgow, offered a meagre increase on its 2030 pledges the week before the summit. Australia didn’t manage that. Morrison went to Glasgow armed with the same short-term emissions reduction target (a 26-28% cut compared with 2005) set under Tony Abbott six years ago. The prime minister was in the awkward position of having to tell the summit in his speech that the country would probably make a 35% emissions cut by 2030 – official government projections said so – but that he would not commit to doing it. Morrison announced some new climate financing to help the least developed and most vulnerable, as wealthy nations have promised. The prime minister described it – and it was reported in some media – as a $2bn commitment. In reality there was only $500m additional funding spread over five years, making the new pledge $100m a year towards an annual global goal of US$100bn. It was significantly less than what many comparable countries have offered. Morrison said Australia would continue to bypass the global Green Climate Fund and fund projects in the Indo-Pacific directly. Beyond that, there were two set-piece pledges by national leaders that drew attention. Australia signed up to one and rejected the other. The “yes” was to a declaration that global deforestation would be halted and reversed by 2030. Officials were slow to confirm Australia supported the initiative. Once they had, the assistant forestry minister, Jonno Duniam, was quick to say it would not require the country to stop native forest logging. The declaration’s main goal is to build support for protecting ecosystems in developing countries where vast areas are being felled for agriculture. The “no’’ was to a global pledge to cut emissions of methane – a short-lived but incredibly potent greenhouse gas – by 30% by 2030. More than 80 countries signed up. Those who didn’t included China, India and Russia. Meeting the methane goal would have required significant action to limit emissions from coalmines and gas fields – something the Morrison government has indicated it isn’t prepared to do. Instead, it muddied the waters, falsely claiming it would have required farmers to shoot their cattle. Unsurprisingly, given its well-documented lack of ambition, Australia is not part of the high ambition coalition, which aims to limit global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels – a goal that is supposed to be at the heart of the climate negotiations process. It did sign up to the Glasgow breakthrough agenda, a collection of five goals launched by the British prime minister, Boris Johnson. These goals are technology focused – the Morrison government’s preferred territory – and vaguely defined, but a couple are worth noting. One is that clean power will be the “most affordable and reliable option for all countries” by 2030. The important word here is “clean”, which the Morrison government usually defines as including gas, a fossil fuel. Another is that zero emissions vehicles will become the “new normal” and “accessible, affordable and sustainable” in all regions in 2030. This is clearly at odds with the Coalition’s politically motivated “end the weekend” attack on electric vehicles before the 2019 election, but the government has been gradually inching away from that statement ever since (though not enough to give EV technology the support it receives in other countries). A key point about the “breakthrough” goals is that none are binding, or specific enough to demand new policies. No one has to do anything. Sound familiar? As the emissions reduction minister Angus Taylor put it on Tuesday, they “align strongly with Australia’s approach”.Average UK house prices defied expectations and continued to climb last month despite the phasing out of the government’s stamp duty holiday at the end of September. The continued increases mean that the price of an average home in the UK has risen above £250,000 for the first time on the building society Nationwide’s index. Other house price indices have already recorded UK averages above a quarter of a million pounds. Official figures from the Office for National Statistics based on mortgage completions put the average price at £264,000 in August, while the Halifax building society suggested the milestone was passed in October 2020. Nationwide said house prices increased by 0.7% in October this year from a month earlier, meaning the price of the average property has gone up by more than £30,000 since the coronavirus pandemic began in March 2020. Meanwhile, year-on-year property price inflation remained at the high level of 9.9% last month, only just below the 10% level recorded in September. The threshold for paying stamp duty was lowered from £500,000 to £250,000 in July, before the tax break came to an end in September. “Demand for homes has remained strong despite the expiry of the stamp duty holiday at the end of September,” said Robert Gardner, Nationwide’s chief economist. “Combined with a lack of homes on the market, this helps to explain why price growth has remained robust.” There had been expectations that demand for house purchases would slow after the threshold for paying stamp duty was lowered from £500,000 to £250,000 in July, and the tax break then came to an end in September. However, it is unclear whether house prices will continue to rise in the coming months and Gardner called the outlook for the housing market “extremely uncertain”. Further property price inflation is dependent on a range of factors, including interest rates, consumer confidence and employment levels after the end of government pandemic support measures including the furlough scheme. “If the labour market remains resilient, conditions may stay fairly buoyant in the coming months – especially as the market continues to have momentum and there is scope for ongoing shifts in housing preferences as a result of the pandemic to continue to support activity,” Gardner said, adding that interest rate rises could cool the market. The Bank of England will reveal its latest interest rate decision on Thursday. Financial markets are betting on a rate rise, as a result of rising inflation, although most City economists expect rates to remain at record lows for the moment. Any rate rises over the coming months are forecast to be gradual and are not expected to have a strong impact on UK borrowers.Few regions on Earth are more central to hopes of reining in global temperature increases than the Middle East. Financed by the west’s insatiable demand for fossil fuels, cities filled with air-conditioned skyscrapers and shopping malls have risen from the desert, and it’s not surprising that Gulf monarchies made rich and powerful by oil have paid little heed to thoughts of an economic transition to renewables, even though the region is warming at twice the rate of the rest of the world. But, asks our diplomatic editor Patrick Wintour, could the long-term view be about to change? The Cop26 climate conference got under way in Glasgow this week, amid a flurry of announcements and expectation. Follow the Guardian’s extensive coverage here. It’s been a tough year for Queen Elizabeth. The 95-year-old British monarch lost her husband Prince Philip in April and her absence from Cop26 on doctor’s orders has focused attention on how the royal family will adapt if she has to withdraw further from public life. Caroline Davies reports on the subtle transition going on behind the scenes at the Palace. Also, as a Franco-British row over fishing rights flared up this week, Simon Tisdall explains why the dispute may be more about politics than pollock on both sides. When the Swedish pop group Abba made their final, bickering public appearance on British TV in 1982, few could have foreseen what a global phenomenon the band would subsequently become. Now, almost 40 years later, Benny, Björn, Agnetha and Frida are back with a new album and an “immersive live experience” to boot. Alexis Petridis gets the inside track on one of pop’s most sensational reformations. Get the Guardian Weekly magazine delivered to your doorA battle is being fought in Washington over the Biden administration’s nuclear weapons policy, amid fears by arms control advocates that the president will renege on campaign promises to rein in the US arsenal. The battlegrounds are a nuclear posture review (NPR) due early next year and a defence budget expected about the same time. At stake is a chance to put the brakes on an arms race between the US, Russia and China – or the risk of that race accelerating. Despite Biden’s pledge during the campaign – and in his interim national security guidance issued in March – that his administration would reduce “our reliance and excessive expenditure on nuclear weapons”, hawks at the Pentagon have won the early skirmishes. Biden is also under pressure from some allies, nervous about Biden’s past support for limiting the use of nuclear weapons to the “sole purpose” of deterring, and retaliating against, a nuclear attack on the US or its allies. The current US posture is broader, leaving open a nuclear response to “significant non-nuclear strategic attacks”. Britain and France also retain a certain amount of ambiguity about when they would use their weapons, and are concerned a US change to “sole purpose” would oblige them ultimately to narrow their options. Paris has taken the lead in conveying those anxieties, and Emmanuel Macron raised nuclear posture issues with Biden when the two met in Rome on Friday. The big struggle, however, is on the home front, where arms control advocates are on the defensive. The administration’s first defence budget in February included $43bn for an array of nuclear modernisation schemes, including controversial programmes introduced by Donald Trump, like a new sea-launched cruise missile. The total cost of modernisation could be over $1.5tn. In September, one of Biden’s political appointees at the Pentagon, Leonor Tomero, who questioned the need for such a vast and growing nuclear weapons budget, was forced out in a bureaucratic power struggle after just nine months in the post. Her job had been to oversee the drafting of the NPR, which sets out what nuclear weapons the US should have and under what conditions they could be used. The official reason for Tomero’s departure was that her job as deputy assistant secretary for nuclear and missile defense policy had disappeared as part of efforts to streamline the Pentagon bureaucracy. “This transition of her duties is the result of a reorganization decision designed to more appropriately align the policy’s shop structure with policy objectives,” John Kirby, the Pentagon spokesman, said. “The nuclear posture review continues and is being handled by a large group of experts from across the department under the purview of the under secretary for policy.” But several congressional sources said that her departure came after pressure from a Republican hardliner, Senator Deb Fischer of Nebraska, a staunch supporter of the nuclear weapons establishment, who threatened to hold up confirmations of senior Biden nominees if Tomero was not removed. Senator Fischer’s office did not respond to a request for comment. A Pentagon spokesman said: “I don’t have any information to provide on this, but generally we cannot comment on personal discussions between department leadership and members of Congress.” “It seems like the minute she got there she was under attack from people who were working behind the scenes, with congressional Republicans, to put pressure on senior Pentagon officials to get rid of Leonor,” said Jeffrey Lewis, an expert in nuclear non-proliferation and geopolitics at the Middlebury Institute of International Studies at Monterey. “This is all about making progressive views on nuclear weapons unacceptable.” Senator Edward Markey, a Democrat, has written to Biden demanding to know why Tomero had been removed in the midst of drafting the NPR, demanding to know if “ideology played any role”. Arms control advocates complain the Democrats have not been as ruthless as Republicans in pursuit of their policies. A Trump appointee, Drew Walter, a former senior Republican staffer on the House armed services committee, has been allowed to “burrow in” as deputy assistant secretary for nuclear matters, converting from a political appointee to a career official. Tomero was Walter’s Democratic counterpart when they were in Congress, but the Biden administration failed to protect her once she moved to the Pentagon. Nickolas Roth, the director of the nuclear security programme at the Stimson Center thinktank, said: “I am concerned that the removal of Leonor from her position will have a chilling effect throughout the Biden administration, on those who might be willing to propose anything other than the status quo for US nuclear weapons policy.” The deputy national security adviser, Jonathan Finer, played down concerns that conservatives in the Pentagon would be able to shape the NPR. “This is going to be the president’s posture review and the president’s policy,” Finer insisted at a Ploughshares Fund event last month. “He has asked the Pentagon, as has been the tradition in the past, to take the lead on drafting the posture review … but by the time we get to the end, it will be the president’s document.” With that in mind, Democrats have been reminding Biden that every dollar spent on weapons programmes inherited from his predecessors is a dollar less spent on the social aspirations of the administration. “The administration must harness this opportunity to rethink the status quo and not just rubber-stamp the Pentagon and defense industry’s interest in continuing unnecessary weapons,” Senator Jeff Merkley told the Guardian. “Business as usual risks fuelling an unnecessary arms race and squanders billions of dollars that could go towards improving Americans’ health, education and housing costs or better investments in national security.” The White House has sought to placate Democrats by agreeing to an independent review of the feasibility of extending the life of the current Minuteman III intercontinental ballistic missile, compared with replacing with it a new weapon, the Ground Based Strategic Deterrent (GBSD). The review is expected to deliver its conclusions next year, although as the review panel has been selected by the Pentagon, it is not expected to upset plans to go ahead with the $100bn GBSD. China’s nuclear weapons development, including the recent reported testing of a nuclear-capable hypersonic glider launched from orbit, has increased the political pressure on Biden to abandon his arms control pledges, although the Chinese arsenal is still dwarfed by the US total of 3,750 warheads. Emma Belcher, the president of the Ploughshares Fund, an arms control advocacy organisation, argued that China’s rise as a nuclear weapons power only underlines the urgency of arms control. “The best way to control the situation and head off an arms race with China is through diplomacy and restraint,” Belcher said. “We’ve seen this movie before. It’s expensive and dangerous. So what we’re hoping we’ll see from the NPR is for diplomacy to be put first, and an off ramp from a new kind of cold war.”Angela Merkel’s marathon tenure as Germany’s leader may have officially crossed the finishing line with September’s federal elections, but her final lap of honour could take some time. Depending on the pace of coalition talks between the politicians hoping to fill her shoes, she may yet give one more of her annual TV addresses in a caretaker capacity this Christmas. Still, as a new generation of German leaders rises to the fore and Merkel recedes into the background, the contours of her legacy are becoming easier to distinguish. There are quantifiable historic firsts: 16 years in office make her the joint longest-serving chancellor of the postwar era, equalling the record of her former mentor Helmut Kohl. She’s the first German chancellor to have the wisdom to step down of her own will, at the end of a full term. She’s the first female German head of government, the first with a scientist’s training, and the first to have grown up in a socialist command economy. She may go down in history as a once-in-a-century political adaptor, connecting two differently hardwired systems kept apart by the Berlin Wall. Yet it’s also possible that Merkel may not be remembered as a pioneer, but as the last example of an idea that feels increasingly old-fashioned in an age where more and more political tribes are built around personal identity: leadership as an exercise in ego suppression, holding high office as tantamount to covering the very traits that make you unique. Hungarian-American author Kati Marton is especially fascinated by this aspect of Merkel’s tenure: the intense privacy of a woman who rose to power in an era of oversharing. “After several decades, Germans are not tired of her image, her voice, her looming persona – because Merkel does not loom,” Marton writes in her biography, in response to the German leader’s enduringly high popularity ratings. “Despite knowing little about their chancellor’s private life, other than that she comes across as leading a life not so different from their own, Germans thrice reelected her, each time by a comfortable margin.” From Marton’s US perspective, the contrast is especially glaring: while Donald Trump’s stint in the White House became a reality TV show, broadcast in real time through tweets and continual leaks, Merkel’s chancellory is famously gossip proof. Marton writes that her obsession with privacy “verges on paranoia”. The world was privy to Trump’s every idle thought via Twitter; Merkel, however, keeps no journal, does not use email, and “texts only briefly and when necessary”. Her long-standing, mostly female set of advisers is not only intensely loyal but almost invisible to the media’s eye. Those who have been unwise enough to blab found themselves banished from her inner circle: one political ally, Marton writes, was never allowed back into Merkel’s confidence after releasing a four-word email with the following explosive content: “Thanks for the suggestion, AM.” Few Germans are even aware that their chancellor has a sister and a brother, because they lead ordinary lives doing ordinary jobs and never speak to the press. Her first husband, Ulrich Merkel, whose surname she kept after their divorce in 1982, once gave a reluctant on-the-spot interview in which he praised his ex for her stance during the refugee crisis of 2015. Perhaps after Merkel has left office proper there will be a biography that will lift the veil on her private motivations; Marton’s diligently compiled but often overtly reverential chronological overview is not it. In spite of numerous interviews with close advisers, touted as “circumventing the chancellor’s extraordinary need for control”, there are few revelations here that cast a new light on her leadership. Marton notes how Merkel was the daughter of a Protestant pastor and the former head of a party with the word “Christian” in its name. She believes her “private faith, and the Bible, would steady her sometimes rocky path”, as well as provide a connection with the first US president she met in office, George W Bush. She may well be right, but this book doesn’t present any evidence to back up that claim, nor does it explore how Merkel’s specifically East German Lutheran brand of Christianity may have influenced her. Marton believes Merkel to be a feminist, even if the chancellor herself only used the term to describe herself for the first time last month (in a panel discussion with the the novelist Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie). But as with her East German background, the chancellor’s sex was never converted into a policy priority. In fact, little of Germany’s progress on gender equality over the last 16 years can be directly put down to Merkel’s leadership: she initially opposed her labour minister Ursula von der Leyen’s proposal for legally mandated gender quotas for senior management positions. At times, there is a slightly comical sense that the qualities Merkel’s biographer finds most intriguing are also those that most elude her: Marton, who also grew up east of the Iron Curtain and went on to become an ABC News foreign correspondent and marry the influential late US diplomat Richard Holbrooke, cannot help but slide her own story into the footnotes. Not quite the lesson one would have expected a writer to draw from studying a politician who managed to command authority by leaning out rather than in. In one aside, Marton mentions that she once met Merkel at a lunch party hosted by the film director Volker Schlöndorff in September 2001, long before she started her biography. The writer Susan Sontag was also in attendance, she reveals, though sadly her memory of what words passed between the two women is sketchy. The pair were “a study in contrasts”, apparently: “Sontag, expansive; Merkel, the active listener.” Perhaps while we wait for Merkel’s inner circle to go public and help produce the first truly illuminating biography of her tenure, we need storytellers to fill in the gaps. A chamber play on love, life and the way we live now featuring Merkel and Sontag: now that would be revelatory. • The Chancellor: The Remarkable Odyssey of Angela Merkel is published by HarperCollins (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.This year, there is one game world I have enjoyed exploring more than any other. We’re so spoiled for visually rich open environments these days, it takes something special to keep players immersed, to keep them wandering about looking at stuff, just for the sake of it. Deathloop is a shining example. Developer Arkane is known for its highly refined and individual approach to game art, thanks to the astonishing Dishonored titles, set in a steam-punk dystopia of rats, robotic guards and ornate classical architecture. This time around, the team created a strange Groundhog Day-like adventure set on an island populated by mad scientists and spoiled billionaires, all looking to gain immortality by living the same day over and over again, thanks to a localised space-time phenomenon. The island of Blackreef, where the whole game takes place, provides a fascinating example of how Arkane works. At first, the team built a timeline to explain the variety of natural and human-made features in each region. The location itself is a remote, wintery outpost, heavily inspired by the Faroe Islands, with craggy cliffs and windswept grasslands. On top of this are the monolithic concrete buildings constructed by a group of military researchers who arrived in the 1930s to investigate the island’s weird phenomena. And then, decades later came Aeon, a cabal of rich tech bros, looking for a new playground. “It was kind of like if Elon Musk had said, ‘let’s go to the Bermuda Triangle and study it’!” explains art director Seb Mitton. “They came with all this money and realised they could create these strange events. They said ‘we’re going to start this loop and we’re going to live forever.’” So in the island’s architecture, you see different layers co-existing: the island’s flora, the military buildings, with bunkers and towering antenna (inspired by abandoned sites in northern Europe, Japan and Russia, such as Chenobyl), and in addition, a hedonistic society, re-purposing and re-decorating everything they see. For this element, Mitton and his team were heavily inspired by the end of the 1960s. “It was all about freedom of mind,” he said. “If you think about hippies, people really wanted change at that time, people wanted to live differently, but you had the cold war as well; there was a lot of violence. We found inspiration in the era of the Vietnam war – that helped us build the Aeon programme: the visionaries and their guests – what are their goals in life? For some it’s drinking all day, it’s partying, for others it’s about killing people. But there are no consequences because there is no tomorrow, so, even though there’s a lot of violence, it’s very lighthearted.” The 60s influence is clear in the game’s interiors – the buildings throughout are filled with brash, multicoloured furnishings, weird art and gigantic Saul Bass-style posters. However, Mitton’s team worked hard to avoid kitsch excesses – they didn’t want it to become Austin Powers: the game. “At the same time, we looked at contemporary materials and there were a lot of rugs, a lot of rounded plastics – it was very different to what we did in the Dishonored games, where it was a lot of straight lines. There’s a big contrast between the outside where everything is cold and hard, and the interiors, where everything is colourful. At Arkane, we love creating contrast because it plays with the player’s emotions. We also developed different layers depending on each of the visionaries’ background: some build laboratories, but Frank has a casino – for him it’s a party. So we took these different themes inspired by the 60s and we developed them differently to reflect the characters.” Another big influence on the interior architecture was Frank Lloyd Wright, whose approach suited the experience Arkane wanted to provide. As he explains, “He made these huge offices and in our game that’s very useful – we couldn’t make very small interiors because we want a lot of mobility. Also, he was one of the first architects to work with diffused light – so you’d look up and think you were seeing the ceiling but actually it was the light behind it. It was such a different approach to office design. For the parties, we looked at how he lit interiors to make inside light look like outside light, we looked at all his work with lines and wooden curves. As soon as you go in Joanna’s house at the very beginning of the game, you see the 1960s has taken hold: these big rooms, huge lamps, feature fireplaces – that’s 60s interior design.” Mitton reels off the cinematic influences on the look of the game. It feels like Kubrick is in there, as well as Roger Vadim, but he also cites Jacques Tati’s futuristic classic Playtime, and Tarantino’s Jackie Brown. Importantly though, the townscapes in Deathloop are designed to be play spaces, to encourage joyful exploration. Here, the team was inspired by Italian towns such as Positano, which tumble down steep cliffs towards the sea and look climbable. “You see it on Google Earth or Street View – and you think ‘I could jump from this roof to that one, that would be great’. We call our districts mini open worlds because they’re not linear, you can go everywhere, there are very few buildings closed off – some that are closed during the day might be open in the evening. We play a lot with physics and water levels, so some places unlock when tides go out. It’s really important to make sure players don’t get burned out. When people play Dishonored, even today they’ll still find different passageways.” For the strange costumes worn by the game’s non-player characters, Mitton looked at late-60s fashion. It was an era in which people were moving away from tailored clothes, toward expressive fashion with lots of new fabrics and printing technologies. “With swinging London,” he says. “People really took hold of their look, they joined fashion gangs. We looked at Twiggy, she really brought forward that whole ready-to-wear, off-the-rack look. People would choose clothing and assemble their own style. We’re still Arkane, though, so we always look at the lines, we make sure everything reflects the light beautifully, we looked at new shaders for the different fabrics …” The decision to have all the characters wear masks was partly technological (it’s still difficult to portray authentic emotions on the face of a game character), but it was also about the idea of using fashion, design and art to express emotion. Aeon is living like an endless party, so it made sense to express this in the decoration of the streets and buildings – such as the coloured powders used in Hindu festivals, or the paint-throwing in the Cascamorras festivals of Andalucia, or of course, the vast street murals of the hippy era. “I mean sometimes they’d paint entire building facades,” says Mitton. “There are pubs in London that were entirely painted, even the roof tiles, and these were exterior projections of their emotions: this is our party, our place. For the people of Aeon, why not just live an exalted crazy life?!” I think that’s why the world of Deathloop is so arresting and explorable – it isn’t just a pastiche of historical architecture and design. Everything has a place in the fiction of the world, and everything expresses an underlying theme or idea. As Mitton puts it, “we looked at the Beatles and Rolling Stones, but we tried to understand what was cool about those haircuts, and what was just too goofy.” He pauses for a second before adding. “That took us a really long time.”A Labor MP gave a staffer more than $33,000 to pay the party memberships of people within her faction, according to evidence provided to the Victorian anti-corruption commission. But the MP, Marlene Kairouz, whose evidence is considered critical to the investigation into the alleged misuse of public funds by paying staff to do factional activity – including branch stacking – will not be subject to a public examination by the Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission (Ibac). Branch stacking is not illegal but it is a breach of party rules, as is the payment of other people’s party memberships. Chris Carr SC, counsel assisting the commission, told the hearing on Wednesday that Ibac investigators had obtained bank records showing transfers between Kairouz and Kirsten Psaila, her electorate office manager. Psaila worked for Kairouz from 2008 when she was elected. In 2015, Kairouz transferred Psaila $14,700, Carr said, followed by $18,300 the next year. Both transfers were made during “renewal season”, Carr said, around the time membership fees were due. Psaila agreed during her evidence on Wednesday that following both transfers she withdrew the cash to pay for memberships. She said that Kairouz also paid for memberships in 2017, but that she had provided her cash, rather than a bank transfer, that year. Carr told the commission that Kairouz would be the next witness, but that because Ibac had received “credible” information a public examination could unreasonably damage her reputation, safety or wellbeing she would be examined in private. There were four “stringent” criteria within the Ibac Act that must be satisfied to allow public hearings, Carr said, and the emergence of evidence that suggested Kairouz would be unreasonably damaged meant that her “critical” answers to matters of “significant public interest” had to be given in private. Kairouz stood down as a minister after an Age-60 minutes investigation last year aired allegations of her involvement in branch stacking. She has denied all wrongdoing. She took leave from parliament in September following the sudden death of her sister. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Carr asked Psaila about the details of the work she did on behalf of Kairouz and the moderate faction, including the bulk collection and filling out of ballot papers on behalf of members so as to control their votes in party elections. She gave evidence of “captains” within the faction, who were responsible for doing this on behalf of dozens of members, and also took responsibility for renewing their memberships every year. Carr said Ibac had uncovered evidence of systemic forgeries of party member signatures occurring across the electorate offices of two MPs, including the office of Kairouz, but Psaila said she did not know who was responsible for this. After extensive questioning from Carr and the commissioner, Robert Redlich QC, Psaila – who herself had been accused but denied forging a document on behalf of a member in the mid-2000s – conceded that it had crossed her mind such forgeries could be occurring. The reason for forging signatures, Carr said, was that it would dramatically speed up the laborious process of obtaining ballot papers on behalf of members, taking it to them to sign, before numbering each ballot (from one to about 120 in some instances) and sending it back to ALP head office. Psaila said she was idealistic as a Labor staffer, had ambitions to become an MP herself, and had been brought up in a Labor family. She said she was introduced to factional politics by George Seitz, who she agreed was a “notorious branch stacker”. Seitz organised the preselection of Kairouz, and she also became responsible for some of his members after he retired, Psaila said. Carr described Psaila as a small cog in a much larger machine, and suggested to her that those who used this machine to become MPs would not have a strong moral compass. “I can only comment for Marlene,” Psaila said. “She’s a stand-up MP in the local community and she does what she can for the area.” Carr responded: “That may be so, but she’s administered a part of this corrosive and corruption factional machinery, hasn’t she?” “They all have,” Psaila replied. Earlier in Wednesday’s hearing, Redlich raised concerns he had about evidence provided on Monday by Christine Kelly, an electorate officer for Kairouz. Kelly had claimed she had no knowledge of or interest in the 2018 ALP national conference election, despite Ibac hearing evidence on Wednesday that Kelly was standing as a delegate during that election. At one stage in Psaila’s evidence, Redlich also warned her not to fall into the same “trap” as Kelly, of moving from a position of knowing nothing at all about anybody doing any factional work in the office, to admitting significantly more knowledge after several hours of questioning. Public hearings are scheduled to resume on Monday.Australia has been accused of “greenwashing” its aid to the Pacific, with the government claiming that major projects are significantly focused on climate adaptation when they have little or no link to climate change or the environment. The accusations, in a new report by Greenpeace Australia Pacific, come after Scott Morrison announced an additional $500m for international climate finance for projects in the Indo-Pacific on the first day of the Cop26 summit in Glasgow. But analysis by Greenpeace found that fewer than one-quarter of all aid projects in 2018 and 2019 that the Australian government labelled “significantly focused” on climate adaptation made any mention of climate change or environmental concerns. “We’ve seen the Morrison government over the last few years be really loud and proud about its climate aid to the Pacific,” said Alex Edney-Browne, the investigations officer at Greenpeace Australia Pacific, and report author. “But climate aid in the Pacific has been greenwashed. The Australian government really needs to drastically improve the transparency and the accuracy of its reporting, otherwise there’s no guarantee that this aid is actually going to improve the climate resiliency in the Pacific.” In 2018, Australia spent US$255.07m on aid that was “significantly focused” on climate adaptation, compared to US$26.94m on projects that were “principally focused” on it, such as sea walls, cyclone-proofed infrastructure and mangrove planting initiatives. However, the Greenpeace report found that in 2018 only 23% of the “significantly focused” projects mentioned anything to do with climate change in reports on the projects. One of the most striking examples found by Edney-Browne was a governance facility in Papua New Guinea, which over 2018 and 2019 received more than US$80m in Australian aid. “This was about political administration, improving political participation, decreasing corruption in Papua New Guinea, so no obvious link there to climate change,” she said. “I even read a 113-page evaluation of the project that Dfat [the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade] commissioned and not a single mention of climate adaptation in that whole report.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The findings tally with those contained in a report from Terence Wood, a research fellow at the Development Policy Centre at the Crawford School of Public Policy, published earlier this year. “If you’re a donor such as Australia, with your aid budget not going up but at the same time all these announcements about increased climate finance are being made … your easiest way out of a difficult bind might be to be … lenient in how you classify some of your projects,” Wood said. “If you’re suitably creative as a donor, you can convince yourself at least that almost anything is associated with climate change adaptation or mitigation. You build a school and you build it a couple of hundred metres inland, and you might tell yourself, the fact we built this school inland means we’re helping this country adapt to climate change.” But the tendency to do this was concerning and could get in the way of meaningful action on climate projects, he said, and undermined Australia’s reputation in the region. “Australia really could be earning a reputation for itself in the Pacific as a decent friend for the region, who gave its aid with the needs of the region in mind, and when it starts doing dubious things with its climate finance or making promises that look like they’re larger than they are, that’s probably going to undermine Australia’s reputation and its ability to come across as a good friend in the Pacific … That on top of the fact that Australia isn’t cutting its emissions in a meaningful way nearly as rapidly as it needs to be.” Edney-Browne agreed, saying it left Pacific countries in a bind. “We’ve got to remember Pacific countries are absolute climate champions and sovereign countries, and really great leaders in the climate movement, but they’re still developing countries that are still very vulnerable to climate change, they’ve really suffered the effects of Covid-19, so that power that Australia wields over them through aid and aid dependency is significant.” A Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade spokesperson said: “Australia delivers its climate finance primarily through integrating climate considerations across the aid program and calculates climate finance on a project-by-project basis. “Australia only counts the portion of the investment that goes towards climate adaptation or mitigation, for example, Australia works with the Government of Kiribati to integrate climate change into its support for the education sector: to climate-proof its school facilities by raising classroom floors, strengthening roofs and constructing protective seawalls, and to include climate change and disaster risk modules in the national curriculum, train teachers in climate change, and provide vocational training skills with a climate focus. “For this investment in Kiribati, climate change is a significant but secondary objective and only a conservative 30 per cent of expenditure is counted towards Australia’s climate finance.”Good morning. Joe Biden suffered a bitter political blow early on Wednesday as the Democrats suffered a shock defeat in the election for governor of Virginia. The Democratic candidate, Terry McAuliffe, had campaigned with Biden and Barack Obama but it was not enough to prevent the Republican Glenn Youngkin pulling off an upset. The Associated Press called the race for Youngkin in the early hours of Wednesday. The Republican took an early lead after polls closed that he maintained throughout the evening, while McAuliffe lagged in key counties that Biden swept in 2020. Clenching his fists then clapping his hands, Youngkin addressed jubilant supporters in Chantilly just after 1am. “All righty, Virginia, we won this thing!” he exclaimed. “How much fun!” The battle in Virginia has been seen as a litmus test of Biden’s presidency. It coincided with his agenda stalling in Congress and his approval rating sinking to 42%. Youngkin did not utter the name “Trump” in his acceptance speech. He also did not mention the former president by name in any speeches on the campaign trail although he did accept Donald Trump’s endorsement. Education was one of the key campaign issues with Youngkin accused of stoking culture wars. Eric Adams wins New York mayor’s race The former police officer Eric Adams will be the next mayor of New York City, after the Democrat defeated Curtis Sliwa in Tuesday’s election. Adams was on course to easily beat Sliwa, the founder of the Guardian Angels, with a lead of 66% to 29% after more than half of projected votes were counted. Adams will take charge of the largest city in the US in January, when he will be faced with overseeing recovery from the coronavirus pandemic, which has killed more than 34,500 New Yorkers. Adams, 61, becomes only the second Black person to be elected New York mayor, after David Dinkins, who led the city from 1990 to 1993. Adams, who defeated several progressive candidates in the Democratic primary, has pledged to cut government inefficiency and made public safety a central part of his campaign. After winning a contentious primary, Adams was always favorite to defeat Sliwa, a Republican, in a city where Democrats outnumber Republicans seven to one. The centrist politician has been a disappointing choice for many progressives who hoped to see radical reforms in the criminal justice system. Ahmaud Arbery: trial of accused murderers is test for racial justice ‘in the heart of white supremacy’ On Tuesday, after 11 days of jury selection, a panel of 65 jurors was chosen from a pool of hundreds in the murder trial of three white men accused in the killing Ahmaud Arbery, the 25-year-old Black man shot dead last year while out for a jog. Barring any unforeseen delays, including last-minute motions defense attorneys have suggested they will file, a final jury of 12 and four alternates will be seated this week, with opening arguments to follow, probably on Thursday. The trial of the three men, who have pleaded not guilty, occurs six months after the conviction of Derek Chauvin, the white former police officer who murdered George Floyd in Minneapolis after pinning his neck to the ground for nine minutes and 29 seconds. That trial was undoubtedly a landmark moment for police reform advocates around the country, but, say many observers, the case of Ahmaud Arbery is a sterner test for the state of racial justice in the US. Who is standing trial for Arbery’s murder? Gregory McMichael, 67, his 35-year-old son, Travis McMichael, and their neighbor William “Roddie” Bryan, 52 are accused of his murder. What happened? A scuffle occurred as the McMichaels, both carrying firearms, attempted to corner Arbery, who was unarmed. Travis McMichael then opened fire three times. They said they suspected Arbery of involvement in a series of burglaries in the neighborhood. In other news … A photograph of a smiling and waving Cleo Smith in her hospital bed has been released by Western Australia police after the four-year-old was rescued more than two weeks after she vanished from a remote campsite. A 36-year-old man has been taken into custody following Cleo’s discovery. Voters in Minneapolis have rejected the idea of replacing their police department with a new department of public safety, more than a year after the murder of George Floyd by a white police officer launched a national movement to defund or abolish police. Joe Biden launched a stinging attack on China on Tuesday for the failure of the country’s president, Xi Jinping, to show up to the Cop26 UN climate summit, and failing to show leadership on the climate crisis. The US president said it was a “big mistake” that Xi had chosen not to attend the summit. Semi-animated Netflix documentary short reveals the secret story of the Jewish soldiers who watched over prisoners of war on US soil. Known as PO Box 1142, it housed such notables as the spymaster Reinhard Gehlen and rocket scientist Wernher von Braun. Don’t miss this: Salma Hayek on being bullied by Harvey Weinstein and and becoming a superhero at 55 Hayek could have easily opted for the cosy, cosseted life of a mega-rich housewife after marrying a multimillionaire. Yet, despite possessing a walk-in closet presumably as big as an average house, Hayek is not your average gazillionaire’s wife. By the time she met François-Henri Pinault, she was 39 and a famous actor with an Oscar nomination, for 2002’s Frida. Plenty of actors before her had married wealthy men and then disappeared behind the fortress wall. But Hayek, 55, was never going to do that. “I love what I do,” she says when I ask what motivates her to work. Or this: why Americans are quitting their jobs in record numbers Josie, 19, landed her first “adult” job as an IT support worker last November, just a few months after graduating from high school. This August amid the rise of the Delta variant, she decided to quit – becoming one of the 4.3 million American workers to voluntarily leave their jobs during that month alone. Between January and August of this year, at least 30 million Americans quit their jobs. Whether you call it the “Great Resignation” or a “nationwide reassessment of work”, the labor market shake-up of the pandemic could have unexpected aftershocks for years to come. Climate check: Radioactive material and pesticides among new contaminants found in US tap water Water utilities and regulators in the US have identified 56 new contaminants in drinking water over the past two years, a list that includes dangerous substances linked to a range of health problems such as cancer, reproductive disruption, liver disease and much more. The revelation is part of an analysis of the nation’s water utilities’ contamination records by the Environmental Working Group, a clean water advocate that has now updated its database for the first time since 2019. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth (formerly Green Light) to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: Italian couple find burglar is endangered brown bear An Italian woman, who investigated what she thought was a burglar on her balcony, has described a petrifying encounter with a rare brown bear. The Marsican bear had climbed on to her bedroom balcony in northern Italy, just days after a bear was spotted bathing in the fountain of a neighbouring village. Annalisa Castagna and her husband, Claudio Parravano initially thought there was a burglar after hearing noises shortly after midnight. “I practically screamed in the face of the bear,” Castagna wrote in a Facebook post, adding that she could “count all its teeth”. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comHere is a film about gambling from writer-director Paul Schrader and producer Martin Scorsese that begins with a closeup of the queen of spades – I’m betting it’s a sly reference to the Thorold Dickinson classic of the same title, about the game Faro, in which that card is such a terrible omen of ill fortune. Schrader has created another drama about obsessive masculinity, fragile hope and potent despair competing for dominance in the heart of a man roaming a nocturnal world of sin – naturally it’s impossible not to see the echo of Schrader’s screenplay for the 1976 classic Taxi Driver. What did Travis Bickle actually do in Vietnam? (Or is the whole point that we don’t know?) And what if instead of a young girl Travis was trying to redeem it was a young man, a younger version of himself? In various small-scale casinos across the US – not in the Vegas league – a professional gambler discreetly plies his trade: this is William “Tell” Tillich, played by Oscar Isaac, his seductive sleepy-eyed address to the camera making him look tired, gaunt and even lizardly. William counts cards at blackjack: that is, by memorising every card played, he can calculate the moment at which to bet big, but knows enough to keep his winnings modest to avoid getting barred. In any case he is more interested in poker. William has learned fierce personal discipline, card skills and toxic self-hate in military prison. In every budget motel he stays, William takes all the pictures down and wraps the furnishings in sackcloth to make his room like a cell, or something worse than that. During a hotel poker tournament, William wanders into a commercial convention on ex-military security techniques and comes across a certain young man: Cirk (Tye Sheridan). Cirk makes William an offer: to help him kill someone of their mutual acquaintance. William counter-offers: Cirk can come on the road with him and learn the world of gambling. Does William want to mentor Cirk – teach him to channel this rage and hurt into the casinos’ soulless but harmless world the way he has done? But William doesn’t seem to be teaching Cirk anything concrete about card games: is this just a cover so he can co-opt Cirk’s murderous plan? Schrader’s movie is great at showing the airless, affectless world of the casino itself, as well as the grim setup of the poker tournaments in the opening rounds, with contestants squashed together in something as unglamorous as a bingo hall. Robert Altman’s gambling movie California Split from 1974 showed something similar, and William and Cirk are a bit like a less intimate version of the tragicomic buddy pairing of George Segal and Elliott Gould in that film, or perhaps more like Philip Baker Hall and John C Reilly’s master-pupil gambling relationship in Paul Thomas Anderson’s Hard Eight in 1996. Cirk has come into William’s life at the exact moment that something good is happening to him, if only he could see it. Gambler turned talent spotter La Linda, played by Tiffany Haddish, asks William if he would be interested in turning pro for various high-roller backers of her acquaintance: but actually she has feelings for this coolly reserved tough guy, and the always-likable Haddish nicely conveys her hurt feelings when William maladroitly tells her how much their “friendship” means to him. Schrader has carpentered a strong and vehement film, hypnotically watchable and squalid with nightmarish flashbacks and a typically apocalyptic ending that grows plausibly enough out of what has gone before. There’s a horrible, queasy urgency to this high-stakes game. • The Card Counter is released on 5 November in cinemas.Last November, the WEAR-TV news station in northern Florida aired a segment on Dr Benjamin Marble, a local doctor who created a free telehealth website offering consultations for Covid-19. Marble, the reporter said, had made it so “patients don’t have to pay a cent” for coronavirus treatment and believed his site could replace Obamacare. To the average viewer, the segment on the ABC affiliate, which is owned by Sinclair Broadcasting, was a local news report touting a local service. What the report didn’t mention, however, is that Marble is a member of America’s Frontline Doctors, a rightwing political group that gained notoriety in summer 2020 after some of its members appeared in a viral video touting unproven Covid-19 treatments as miracle cures. AFD’s founder, Dr Simone Gold, has headlined anti-vaccine rallies and is facing charges for storming the Capitol during the 6 January riot. Also visible in a photo included in the WEAR-TV clip was Dr Stella Immanuel, an AFD member who has claimed masks don’t help curb the spread of Covid-19 and repeatedly said some real world illnesses were caused by people having sex in their dreams with demons and witches. Marble’s telehealth page links to anti-vaccine information and websites promoting unproven Covid-19 treatments such as the anti-parasite drug ivermectin. Since the start of the pandemic, local newspapers, broadcast television and radio stations across the United States have been among the most popular sources for information about Covid-19. Many anti-vaccine activists as well as doctors and groups promoting unproven Covid-19 treatments have turned to those same channels to spread their message. Prominent spreaders of medical disinformation, including Dr Joseph Mercola, who misinformation researchers have identified as one of the most prolific online promoters of anti-vaccine falsehoods, and members of the Children’s Health Defense organization – anti-vaccine activist Robert F Kennedy Jr’s group – have appeared on local radio shows or published editorials in local newspapers promoting conspiracy theories about vaccine safety. Although local outlets lack the audience size of national broadcasters or newspapers, researchers say they can provide a veneer of legitimacy to fringe groups, amplifying their message. Americans have a greater degree of trust in Covid-19 information from local outlets compared with news media in general, a 2020 Pew research study found. And even a brief segment or article on local news can have a second life on social media platforms, where anti-vax groups and advocates of dubious Covid-19 treatments widely promote their content. “You have somebody grab something off an obscure website that looks like a newspaper, post it on Facebook and pretty soon the Facebook algorithm takes over,” said Penny Abernathy, a professor at Northwestern University’s Medill School and author of several books on the news industry. Anti-vaxxers burrow into local media The US has a varied and vast local news landscape that includes broadcast stations, print and digital newspapers, each with their own vulnerabilities to spreading anti-vaccine narratives. Some local news outlets have spread Covid-19 misinformation out of what appears to be a lack of resources or expertise in covering health and science issues, researchers say. In the past 15 years, more than half of the journalists working in local US media lost their jobs and more than one-fourth of American newspapers shut down. During the pandemic alone, more than 90 local newsrooms were forced to close down. That has meant many local outlets are operating with skeleton staff. The loss of newsrooms’ subject matter experts is especially notable in coverage of areas such as health and science, which require a high degree of scientific literacy and specific expertise to accurately explain complicated studies and research. “You hear stories all the time of major state outlets that once had 400 in a newsroom and now are down to 50,” Abernathy said. “There used to be three people responsible for covering health and now there’s just one person who’s responsible for covering, if you’re lucky, not only health but a range of other things.” The format of local news, with its staunch adherence to the appearance of neutrality, can also create openings for misinformation. In some instances, anti-vaccine activists have been given equal time as opposing voices during televised coverage of vaccinations – as was the case in a local NBC News San Diego report last November that gave airtime to an avowed anti-vax organization for a segment on “Mixed Reactions About Covid-19 Vaccine.” The result was a false equivalence between the two sides, presenting anti-vaccine activists as a contrarian viewpoint, rather than debunking their medical misinformation. NBC News San Diego did not respond to a request for comment. “It’s an old tradition in journalism to get both sides of the story and unfortunately that tradition has carried a little too far into the science coverage domain,” said Rick Weiss, the director of SciLine, an organization that connects reporters with scientists and is based out of the non-profit American Association for the Advancement of Science. “But when there’s just overwhelming evidence that something is true and other things are not true, that’s not the time to give equal coverage.” Politically motivated media moves in Other local news media have made a concerted effort to promote anti-vaccine narratives or help spread information about unproven treatments. Conservative radio hosts and rightwing websites targeting local news consumers have repeatedly promoted anti-vaccine views to their audiences. Many of these radio shows air on multiple stations and are available online through platforms such as the iHeartRadio network. Radio host Joshua Lane has hosted fawning interviews with multiple anti-vaccine activists in recent months, including Robert F Kennedy Jr and other members of his organization. Lane’s show airs on five AM and FM stations across several states, including ABC News Radio affiliate station KMET in Los Angeles. Lane has called Kennedy Jr’s anti-vaccine organization an “excellent organization doing some very good work”. Lane did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comment. Meanwhile, a series of local news sites such as Washington state’s Clark County Today, the Atlanta Business Journal and California’s the Desert Review have published content from prominent anti-vaccine groups or advocates for unproven Covid-19 treatments. Although they have innocuous names that mimic traditional local news outlets, their content often promotes anti-vaccine views or furthers Covid-19 conspiracy theories. Researchers have come to call these types of organizations “pink slime” outlets and they have become a growing part of the media landscape in recent years. “The problem that occurs with this is that they don’t have the same journalistic standards – many of them have a decided political agenda to them,” Abernathy said. In one post from early October, Clark County Today, which was founded by David Madore, a wealthy Republican donor who has bankrolled local candidates in Washington state, republished an article from the anti-vaccine Children’s Health Defense in full. Another article on the site covers local support for a physician’s assistant whom the state medical commission suspended in October for advocating for ivermectin, but does not mention allegations that he attempted to bully local hospital staff into prescribing the drug and spread medical misinformation that resulted in the suspension. In a lengthy response, Clark County Today’s editor, Ken Vance, told the Guardian that the site’s coverage of the pandemic was informed by the “one-sided” approach from “mainstream news media, social media and even Big Tech”. He added the site does not try to shape readers’ personal decisions around vaccinations, and has published “endless information about vaccinations, treatment and other Covid-related issues, allowing elected officials, government leaders and medical health providers to inform the community”. But, he added, “those sources continually refuse to even address issues such as adverse effects to vaccinations, alternative treatments for Covid and even preventative measures that can be taken to boost one’s immune system.” But health experts argue that promoting unproven treatments or framing the efficacy of vaccination as a debate is a way for anti-vaccine advocates to further their cause. Anti-vaxxers also rely on out of context anecdotes and demonstrably false arguments, one doctor told the Guardian, in their attempts to contest well-documented research and medical science. The Desert Review, whose publisher has shared pro-Trump conspiracy theories on Facebook, has published a series of pro-ivermectin articles from an author who writes under a pseudonym and makes allegations of a pharmaceutical conspiracy against the drug. They are frequently shared in social media groups promoting the drug, and listed as the most popular articles on the site. In October, the site posted a celebratory message on Facebook touting that one of its ivermectin articles had been viewed hundreds of thousands of times. The Desert Review and WEAR-TV news did not respond to requests for comment. • This article was amended on 3 November 2021. The group founded by Robert F Kennedy Jr is called the Children’s Health Defense, not the Children’s Defense Fund, which is an entirely separate organisation focused on child poverty.Pamela Paul must be one of the last subscribers to the branch of Netflix that allows its users to see films via the stone-age practice of receiving DVDs in the post. I know this because, two days after we talk, she sends me a blurry photograph of her last hire – The Anniversary Party, a 2001 comedy starring Gwyneth Paltrow, Jennifer Jason Leigh and Alan Cumming – along with a Q&amp;A she did for the New York Times, about the art of what she calls “sliding backward on tech”. Its basic point is summarised in one of Paul’s characteristic bits of aphoristic wisdom: “In general, when I hear the phrase ‘There’s an app for that’, my first question is: ‘Does there need to be?’” Paul, 50, is the editor of the New York Times Book Review. She does not use any streaming services. As late as 2019, she bought – read this slowly – portable CD players for two of her children. As a matter of principle, she refuses to own or use anything resembling a tablet, except her phone. “I don’t want a tablet,” she says, her face adopting an expression of mild disgust. “People have tried to give me a tablet; I want nothing to do with that tablet. I would probably have to be paid a salary of, like, $250,000 a year to use a Kindle or an iPad to read on. It would be that unpleasant.” This is not quite the expression of luddite fundamentalism it might seem. Paul’s professional life is just as tech-heavy as most other people’s. She says her working hours are “a cascade of Zooms”, while her fairly prolific tweeting is not suggestive of someone who lives in a cave. But she does maintain a personal existence partly rooted in the pre-internet age. Moreover, she is old enough – like me – to recall clearly what life was like in those far-off times, and to feel a nagging sense of loss about what the online world has rendered useless and irrelevant. This is the context for her latest book, 100 Things We’ve Lost to the Internet. Its form seems to fit an era of short attention spans, breaking up its author’s writing into short essays with headings such as “Solitude”, “Ignoring people”, “Leaving a message” and “A parent’s undivided attention”. At its best, the book reads like it mixes journalism with sociology and anthropology. To its credit, it also manages the rare feat of exploring what technology has done to us without succumbing to doom and panic. We talk for an hour on a video call and one thing quickly becomes clear: Paul is the kind of freewheeling conversationalist who was always going to feel a little adrift in a world of one-line texts, emojis and the disappearance of the long, digressive phone conversation. “There are a lot of terrible things to say about the internet,” she says. “What I wanted to focus on was not so much all of those doomsday scenarios, although they exist, but to look at all of these forces and say: ‘What does this mean for what we do in our daily lives – from the moment we wake up to the iPhone alarm to the moment when we’re trying to fall asleep at night and we can’t because we’re like: ‘Oh my God, there’s this newsletter that arrives at 11pm, let me just see what it says’? What does it actually mean down here at the level of how we live?” *** Paul has been an author for nearly 20 years, specialising in what she calls “the intersection of consumer culture and real life”. Her first book, published in 2002, was about what she called “starter marriages” – the trend for many people’s first experience of matrimony to be short and childless – and how this was partly traceable to the massive wedding industry. Three years later came a prescient work titled Pornified, which focused on one of the internet’s most pernicious aspects; it was subtitled “How pornography is transforming our lives, our relationships and our families”. Parenting Inc, from 2008, was about the consumerisation of raising kids. By way of offering an antidote of some kind, her 2019 book How To Raise a Reader – written with her NYT colleague Maria Russo – was a straightforward guide to pulling children away from screens and encouraging the declining habit of getting immersed in books. 100 Things draws on themes that have run through a lot of her work. It applies an appealing humour and light touch, and tells a vivid story: how, in little more than 20 years, we have shed ingrained social and behavioural habits, as well as some of the most basic ways we once thought of ourselves and our relationships with others. If they are minded to read it, anyone under 40 will presumably understand the book as the evocation of a strange, slow, endlessly inconvenient reality that now feels almost exotic. For anyone older, it will deliver a sense of loss – and of being old enough to remember times that seem almost hilariously distant. One of Paul’s talents is the ability to see big change in lots of small ones. She writes about the end of talking to strangers on aeroplanes; the increasingly lost human habit of staring out of windows; and why no one bothers to remember phone numbers any more. In one particularly ingenious entry, she explains the demise of the full stop (or, in American English, the “period”). If you have ever wondered why putting such once-crucial punctation in emails, phone messages or tweets now feels so awkward, here is the answer: “The period can feel so emphatic as to sound sarcastic, the internet’s version of ‘puh-leeze’ and ‘no, thank you’ and ‘srsly’ rolled into one tiny dot.” It can easily come across as passive-aggressive. Exclamation marks, moreover, “now convey warmth and sincerity”; failing to use them runs the risk of making the person you are messaging feel uncertain and anxious. Such small transformations, Paul explains, arrive without warning and magnify a sense of everything being in flux. For fear of becoming social outcasts, most people feel they have little option but to try frantically to keep up. On the day we speak, Mark Zuckerberg has just announced the rebranding of Facebook’s holding company as Meta and premiered the virtual reality hellscape the company is calling the metaverse. “We are all desperately trying to stay on top of things,” says Paul. “Right now, we’re going to have to be on top of the metaverse or we’ll have to opt out of it altogether. But we’re constantly moving forward: ‘Should I do this thing? How come I don’t know about that app? I haven’t adopted it.’ “What we never do is take a step back and say: ‘Wait a minute – what did we use to do here? How did this use to work?’ And what’s crazy is we’ve become so quickly habituated. We’ve adopted all these new habits and completely forgotten how we used to get around – literally, how we used to get around. How did we do it when we didn’t have GPS? Oh yeah, we used to have those huge fold-out maps that you could never fold back properly. But we’ve forgotten that. No one uses those any more. And no one knows how to get anywhere without a device.” Recently, she read a century-old book by the US novelist Edith Wharton, A Motor-Flight Through France, which was written partly as an exploration of how much human existence had been changed by the invention of the car. “That was occasion enough to write an entirely new travelogue about a country she’d written about before – because suddenly you were no longer beholden to trains and so you could go down different routes and you didn’t have to rely on a schedule. And now, you just think about the tininess of that change, really, relative to the ways in which everything has altered in the last 20 years. That was considered to be a monumental shift. But it’s nothing compared with what we’ve been through in the last 20 years.” A key part of the internet’s behavioural and psychological revolution is the subject of the book’s opening entry: boredom, the decline of which has radically altered childhood (as any parent will know). “Only a few short decades ago, during the lost age of underparenting, grownups thought a certain amount of boredom was appropriate, even to be encouraged, because it forced kids to exercise their imagination and ingenuity,” Paul writes. “A little ennui would make a person less bored in the long run.” “Boredom serves a function,” she says now. “It’s boring, obviously, and we don’t like that, but, when you have no input coming in, you generate output. That’s how you become resourceful. But now you constantly have access to information, entertainment, distraction – all of this stuff coming in, coming in and coming in. And it doesn’t allow you the empty space to create something, or to just process something. “I spent so much time in the back seat of my parents’ car bored out of my skull. There was nothing to do. Then your brain wanders and you think about things. Now, every kid in the car has their own device and they’re listening to their own music or their own audiobook or their own podcasts, or they’re playing a video game or they’re swiping through social media, or they’re taking a million and one pictures of themselves and snapping them up to Snapchat. I don’t know why. How many times can you look at people’s faces?” In a roundabout way, this brings us to something that the book explores a lot: the sense that most of us live in front of a constant audience, with few benefits to show for it. “I feel like what’s happened is that everyone is living the emotional lives of famous people, constantly needing to react to this world that is so much larger than the actual human world that they otherwise would be inhabiting. And I think that is really emotionally and psychologically hard to handle, in the same way that it’s hard to handle for a celebrity. They’re lucky that they get to be rich and probably beautiful on top of that and have lots of privileges. But most of us, frankly, don’t.” *** Paul’s book is not quite the endless lament our conversation suggests. Some of its entries are full of ambivalence: being able to “Google the hell out of someone” in advance of a blind date might rob the occasion of its mystery, but it is surely all to the good; the modern impossibility of getting lost might sometimes mean that we don’t “succumb to chance and make our own discoveries”, but it has its upsides. There is also material about things surely no one will miss: chequebooks, old-school encyclopedias, the Filofax (note to younger readers: ask your parents). Nonetheless, her most poignant, thought-provoking points are about things we should not throw overboard with the enthusiasm that the tech industry wants us to – and, by implication, about the necessity of what she calls “microrebellions”. Besides her CD players and rented DVDs, there is another obvious example. “Well, look here,” she says. She pulls her computer to her left and my screen is filled with the image of thousands of books. She thinks for a moment. “Do you know what the way I think about all this is? I am highly technological in my day job, because I have to be. And then, in my personal life, rather than the default being opt-in, my default is opting out. I will only adopt something if I really think it’s going to improve my life in some substantial way.” Here, perhaps, is a modern paradox. We embrace the internet because it seems to hugely increase our autonomy, but the online world soon gives us the sense that, when it comes to what it offers us, we have no meaningful choices at all. The only thing to do is to drop the old, embrace the new and live with the consequences. “We have the option to say: I don’t want that product,” says Paul. “I don’t actually have to pay by [the mobile payment service] Venmo. I don’t need PayPal. I don’t have to get my books from an online retailer. There are other ways of doing these things. It’s a choice. Buying or not buying a pair of jeans or a new skin cream – those are all options, too. And yet, for some reason, with technology, we forget that we have control.” 100 Things We’ve Lost to the Internet by Pamela Paul (Random House USA, £14.99) is out now. To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThe California condor is the largest flying bird in North America, with a 10ft wingspan that enables it to soar up to 15,000ft – nearly half the height of a commercial airplane. Now the birds can claim another superlative feat: scientists have discovered that females can reproduce without a male partner, in a rare phenomenon known as parthenogenesis. Oliver Ryder, the director of conservation genetics for the San Diego Zoo Wildlife Alliance, has called the recent findings a “eureka moment”. “Many scientists have experiences like this when they see the world in a way they haven’t seen before,” says Ryder, who co-wrote a paper detailing the discovery, released in late October. “I was really pleased to figure out something that was such a conundrum.” Condors have been imperiled for a century. As Europeans settled the west, they often shot, poisoned and captured the condors, collected their eggs, and reduced their food supply of antelope, elk and other large wild animals. Their population declined steadily until only 22 remained in 1982, but a state-led recovery program has since successfully bred the animals back from the brink. The journey that led to discovering the condor’s asexual reproduction also began in the 1980s, when the San Diego Zoo was tasked with developing a test to determine the sex of the few remaining wild condors, which were eventually all brought into the care of two captive breeding locations. Ryder says the zoo continued to use DNA testing to determine the familial relationships between the condors, to avoid inbreeding closely related individuals. More recently, scientists decided to undertake a complete genetic analysis of the population, which had grown to more than 900 birds. They used condor samples collected over the course of the program’s 30-plus-year history, including blood, eggshell membrane, tissue from deceased birds and feathers. When the scientists completed their investigation, there were two glaring cases that indicated something was amiss. Both involved chicks that came from an egg without genetic material from the male who shared the enclosure and was presumed to be the father. The results were confirmed by multiple samples, so scientists were confident it wasn’t a mistake. Ryder remembers the conversation with his colleague about the strange cases. He got goosebumps as he realized that the condors had reproduced through parthenogenesis – a form of reproduction in which an egg can develop into an embryo without being fertilized by a sperm. Parthenogenesis is derived from the Greek words for “virgin birth” and several insect species including aphids, bees and ants are known to reproduce through the process, although the phenomenon is rare in birds. Ryder says it’s not yet known how unusual this kind of reproduction is in the natural world, because detailed genetic analysis of large populations hasn’t been conducted. “Think about it: the cases where we do know about it, it’s overwhelmingly where animals are managed in a way where females don’t have access to males. It was only because we had these detailed genetic profiles of the condor which were developed in response to the need for managing generic diversity that we discovered this.” The idea that these are “virgin births” is incorrect, he says: the females who reproduced this way had previously had many chicks through sexual reproduction. And birds don’t give birth; they lay eggs that hatch. Ryder thinks this phenomenon is probably going on in more species than people know. There are reports of snakes in the wild producing offspring through parthenogenesis. He says it’s a “rare but possibly impactful part of reproduction”. The condor is still considered a threatened species, and it remains unclear what solo reproduction will mean in terms of helping with conservation efforts. Condors can live into their 50s, but both of the male chicks born of asexual reproduction were relatively small and died before becoming sexually mature, at 1.9 and 7.9 years old. Ryder hopes to use the same genetic tools to peer into past populations – California condor specimens from the 1800s and 1900s are commonplace in museums in the state and scientists could use them to assess how common parthenogenesis was in previous generations. He adds that the condor is a remarkable species that has survived from the Pleistocene era. Right now, the condor’s population growth is limited by poisoning from lead bullets, when the scavengers eat animals shot by hunters. “It’s been critically endangered and there’s a lot of public support for recovery,” Ryder says. Meanwhile, the bird,which has risen like the phoenix from near death, is rewriting scientific understanding. “This is really wondrous and amazing,” says Ryder: in the midst of an extinction crisis, scientists are still making big discoveries. “This is an unrecognized part of their natural history.”The trailer for Pixar’s upcoming film Lightyear debuted last week, and met an unexpectedly muted response from film fans. It promises to be a fun, child-friendly animated space adventure with Chris Evans leading the voice cast, which should have delighted the faithful. But it centres on a character called Buzz Lightyear, derived from its Toy Story series, and appears to be yet another case of a film studio giving an unnecessary backstory to a character who arrived onscreen fully formed. For decades, fans and critics complained about Hollywood’s endless sequels, which eventually run out of steam by either ratcheting up the action to ludicrous heights or losing sight of what made their heroes interesting in the first place. Instead, to keep those same franchises alive, studios responded by pivoting to reboots, prequels and origin stories. These initially seemed more fruitful – a fun flashback origin opens Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade, with River Phoenix’s young Indy gaining all his character tics in a single eventful afternoon – but now we have an endless parade of such flashbacks masquerading as standalone films. Han Solo, Cruella de Vil, the wizard of The Wizard Of Oz, Freddy Krueger, Jason Voorhees: they’ve all had unnecessary origin stories. And all of their films share the same basic problem as the sequels: studio executives only seem to feel safe when they’re greenlighting films based on popular existing franchises, and that is self-defeating. The problem is not that Hollywood is out of ideas or original characters; we have a more diverse and daring crop of film-makers than at any time in film history. The issue is timid studios that prefer endless rehashes of the same characters because no one ever got fired for saying yes to a sequel or prequel. If your star gets too established and expensive, make an origin story and replace Johnny Depp with the younger, cheaper Timothée Chalamet, such as in the new Wonka film. If there’s a time when you can’t quite decide where to go with your Batman or Spider-Man series, write an origin story for their villains, and spin off Joker and Venom. Those two films also appealed to an older audience than the franchises that birthed them, but origin stories can go the other way too: the forthcoming Minions: The Rise of Gru takes a younger, cutesier approach to the protagonist of Despicable Me, presumably hoping that the latest crop of preschoolers will discover that franchise. And as with Joker and Venom, any notable villain is now fair game for their own origin-story prequel, taking a sympathetic view of their passage to the dark side: consider Maleficent, Cruella or the entire Star Wars prequel trilogy. The origin-story prequel has become a popular – with studios – way of reinvigorating dead or aged-out characters over and over. They’re not all bad, but the drama of prequels is inherently limited. We know that the hero of Solo: A Star Wars Story will survive his adventure; we also know he’ll make friends with a Wookiee and get a ship called the Millennium Falcon. But worse than that, none of this backstory adds much to his character. Han Solo arrived onscreen perfectly formed. We didn’t know what the Kessel run was; we just knew that the guy who did it in “less than 12 parsecs” was the coolest man alive. Learning that Darth Vader was once a sad little blond boy, or that Hannibal Lecter was scarred by the second world war only detracted from their effectiveness. It’s a rare prequel that adds useful context to an indelible character without stealing their mystique: The Godfather Part II is, if anything, the exception that proves the rule. The best we can hope for is a prequel with a clever twist: 2009’s Star Trek film created a parallel timeline to the original TV series, allowing it to go off in a new direction without being locked into what had gone before. The Marvel Cinematic Universe’s overarching narrative has allowed that studio to launch new heroes and reboot elements of its story through time travel or multi-verse stuff without resorting to many outright origin stories or reboots – so far. At least Lightyear, technically, is not a prequel, even if it has all the hallmarks of one. It’s the story of the fictional character that inspired the Buzz Lightyear toy we know. This is the Toy Story universe’s equivalent of Buck Rogers or Flash Gordon, someone Buzz’s owner Andy would have watched on TV. That could offer some laughs and potentially a fun contrast to the studio’s all-conquering toys – but it’s still just another variation on a character we are familiar with, and catchphrases we’ve heard before. Pixar is far from the worst offender in this respect – Lightyear will follow recent original stories Luca, Soul and Onward – but this is essentially a fifth Toy Story feature, not counting short films, from a studio with greater potential for original storytelling than any other on Earth. Where are the great new characters and stories going to come from if we keep dipping into past triumphs for every film with a budget over $5m? If we only recycle the characters we already know we like, pop culture will finally eat itself. Helen O’Hara is a film journalist, broadcaster and author of Women Vs Hollywood: The Fall and Rise of Women in FilmImagine that right now the postman is reading your mail and making a note of your most private thoughts and preferences. He notices that you lean slightly to the right and read the Wall Street Journal. He begins hawking your intimate information all over town and sells it to a newspaper further to the right of the WSJ. He observes you reading that new, more rightwing publication and then starts hawking again, and this time he sells your private information to someone more rightwing: a publication like, say, Breitbart. Year after year, the postman continues selling to everyone, and one day you start receiving a far-right extremist magazine intent on destroying democratic institutions. By selling your information, the postman becomes rich, exceedingly rich – the richest person in your community. You confront him to say that you don’t consent to being a product to be sold to the highest bidder, and find out he is reading the mail of half the people on the planet. You want to change postal carriers and communicate privately with your friends and family, but there is only one service linking you to the outside world. When experts talk about social media, you’ll hear a lot about abstract and fuzzy concepts such as the algorithm, transparency and privacy, but they all boil down to whether you want to be a commodity and have no control over who you are sold to. If you are tired of being held digital hostage, then there are three possible fixes. First, we can encourage old-fashioned competition. Currently, social media companies are squashing competitors by not letting you take your content to a rival platform if you want to leave. New legislation must compel them to allow “interoperability”: a fancy word that means you can move between platforms and take your followers and posts and photos with you. Many of us would leave Facebook for a new platform that does not read our messages, sell our information, throw away mail from family and friends with different political views, nor introduce us to dangerous extremists. Some might be fine with a robust political debate format, but others may prefer family-oriented discussions, and we should be allowed to choose in the open market. Second, even if new legislation enabled interoperability, problems such as hate speech and disinformation amplified by company algorithms would remain. The current discussion focuses excessively on content removal, and it might be more helpful to think instead about how social media algorithms elevate extremist positions and foster polarization. The algorithm is simply a code written by an engineer to ensure that you see posts that grab our attention, and nothing grabs our attention like violence, abuse and hatred. Section 230 of the US Communications Decency Act stipulates companies can’t be held liable for content, but immunity for algorithms fomenting extremism is increasingly being challenged in courts. In the second circuit case of Force v Facebook, the parents of Taylor Force, a young American who was stabbed in Israel in 2016 by a Hamas supporter who had been radicalized online, sued Facebook for supplying their son’s killer with ever-more extremist content and introducing him to a network of supporters of terrorism. Judge Katzmann wrote in his dissent that Section 230 protects content but “does not protect Facebook’s friend‐ and content-suggestion algorithms”. Third, we should amend Section 230 to permit civil suits against companies that elevate terrorist content and allow government agencies like the Federal Communications Commission and Federal Election Commission to examine the algorithms used by companies. We have a legitimate interest in looking inside the black box – the black box, after all, is nothing but the postman getting away with abusing his power and access. New legislation must expose companies to lawsuits when they are grossly negligent by industry standards and do not remove posts that could cause imminent harm. In short, the US needs to rein in the power of some of the largest tech companies on the planet in order to protect populations and democratic institutions. Germany did just this in 2017 with NetzDG, a law requiring platforms to remove content that is manifestly illegal under German criminal law. German democracy did not lurch into censorship and oppression and is indeed thriving. The UK’s parliament is currently considering an Online Safety Bill to rein in terrorist and child sexual abuse content and allow its regulator, Ofcom, to review the algorithms of social media companies. It is high time the Congress and Biden administration placed reasonable democratic constraints on online advocacy of violence and extremism. The choice is clear: we can either protect our democracy from extremism or lose it. In the real world, your postal carrier is prevented by law from reading your mail and selling your information to recruiters who wish to spam you with violent extremist material. Those same protections must be extended to Facebook and other companies. Richard Ashby Wilson is associate dean for faculty development &amp; intellectual life and distinguished professor of law and anthropology at the University of Connecticut School of LawFor almost 50 years, the bloodstained white handkerchief held aloft by Father Edward Daly as he tried to save the life of a fatally wounded teenager on Bloody Sunday has been kept safe, first by the boy’s family and more recently at a local museum. On Wednesday, the handkerchief was back in the hands of Kay Duddy, whose brother Jackie was one of 13 unarmed people shot dead by British troops in a civil rights protest in the Northern Ireland city. A 14th man later died of his injuries. Duddy, 75, was at Derry’s Playhouse to promote a new play that will premiere on 30 January, the 50th anniversary of Bloody Sunday. The White Handkerchief, telling the stories of those who died, will also be streamed to a global audience. “The hanky was returned to us with Jackie’s clothes after he died. I carried it many years with me after my daddy passed away,” she said. “Then one day a young thug tried to snatch my handbag, and all I could think of was the hanky being lost forever. So I passed it over to the Museum of Free Derry for safekeeping.” The play was “an elegy, a lament for lives lost” incorporating music and lyrics, which help “deliver a sense of melancholy and tragedy”, said Liam Campbell, its author. At its heart was a love story, he added. “The lens through which the events unfold is William McKinney, who was engaged to be married, he had his whole life in front of him. “But it’s a celebration of all those whose lives were lost. We meet them early in the play as they gather for the march, and we sense the jovial atmosphere. What’s missing is any sense of dread.” The production features a local cast. Director Kieran Griffiths formed a music theatre company at the Derry Playhouse to provide conservatoire-level training to 12 local people in their teens and twenties. All will be part of The White Handkerchief’s ensemble, with four taking principal roles. The play will be staged at the Guildhall, the original destination of the 1973 civil rights march. “They were turned away, to their demise. So it’s very fitting that we’ll be performing in that very building,” said Griffiths. About 15,000 people took part in the civil rights march through the Bogside area of Derry at the height of the Troubles. They were protesting over a new law allowing people to be imprisoned without trial. Army barricades blocked the marchers’ intended route, and soldiers from the Parachute Regiment moved in to make arrests. Protesters threw stones and rubble, and the soldiers opened fire, using live rounds. The Saville inquiry, which spent 12 years investigating the events of Bloody Sunday, concluded in 2010 that none of the dead posed a threat. David Cameron, then prime minister, said the killings were “unjustified and unjustifiable”. No soldiers have faced trial. “Jackie was 17 years old, he just went for the craic. He was 100% innocent when he was shot,” said Duddy. “The person that shot Jackie knows he shot him. It’s up to him now to hold his hands up. That’s my dream. I’ve been carrying this around for the last 50 years and I’m getting tired now. “There’s been too much suffering on all sides. So hopefully, maybe just maybe, whoever it was will wake up one day and say I can’t carry this any longer. Jackie’s been buried for the last 50 years but I would like to lay him to rest.”Children as young as seven were held for hours in a Beijing school before being sent to centralised quarantine for two weeks after a staff member tested positive for Covid-19. The incident, which drew alarm from parents and observers, came amid a rush of extreme measures imposed on the city over about 40 cases of the Delta variant, part of a national outbreak affecting at least 16 of China’s 31 provinces. Tighter curbs are expected after the National Health Commission reported a near three-month high on Tuesday, with 93 new local symptomatic cases, up from 54 a day earlier. The Huajiadi Experimental primary school in Chaoyang district was quickly sealed off on Monday afternoon after it emerged a teacher had been diagnosed with coronavirus, local media reported. Parents were called to the school but spent hours gathered outside the gate waiting for information on their children caught inside by the lockdown. According to reports, school authorities said the children were all being tested and some would have to remain there overnight. Footage posted on Weibo purports to show children lining up in front of healthworkers wearing PPE, at an oval in the dark. Shortly before midnight, the school’s principal emerged and told parents to go home and pack clothes for their children and to bring them the following morning. They were told at least some children would be sent to centralised quarantine facilities for 14 days, and one parent could accompany them. “Parents are really anxious,” said one person online. “It is most frightening when the virus is spreading in densely populated places such as schools, hospitals, military, and prisons. I hope that the children will be safe.” Authorities also closed 16 other schools in Chaoyang because staff members went to a vaccination site for booster shots at the same time as the teacher who later tested positive. The school closures are among a host of recent measures adding to frustrations among residents. Half of Beijing airport’s scheduled flights have been cancelled and authorities have urged people not to leave the city, or to delay returning if they are away. Elsewhere, cities have been put into lockdown or subjected to mass testing. Shanghai Disneyland was closed for two days and all guests inside tested before they were let out on Sunday. Authorities have also urged people to stockpile necessities. One Beijing resident described on social media being told to go into quarantine after spending a few minutes in a hotel lobby where a positive case had been identified that day. “I was first asked to get tested, then told I should stay home until the results are out, then told I had to go into centralised quarantine for 14 days, at which I was horrified and said so,” the resident described on Twitter. “The guy from the [district government] took pity, and he managed to convince the CDC [Centre for Disease Control] that I could home quarantine.” “I’ve never personally known this many people get quarantined since I came back to Beijing last year. They’re really going into overdrive this time.” It followed other reports of people who had been stranded outside the city by glitches with China’s health apps, which designate statuses based on infections, vaccinations and travel history to control movement. On Tuesday, the Beijing city government apologised to people affected by the errors, local media reported. While there remains broad support for China’s attempts to keepthe rate of infections lower than other countries, there is growing frustration with the government’s persistence in eliminating every outbreak as the rest of the world is beginning to open up. “What is the point of endless pursuit of the zero-Covid strategy? The vaccine has also been given to 80%. Is there no confidence in domestic vaccines? We should make the coronavirus part of life.”A police officer made degrading and sexist insults about two murdered women as he shared pictures from the scene where they were found with a colleague photographing their bodies and also sharing the images via WhatsApp. The two Metropolitan police officers pleaded guilty on Tuesday after sharing photographs from the crime scene they were supposed to be guarding in a London park, where two sisters, Nicole Smallman, 27, and Bibaa Henry, 46, were found stabbed to death. PC Deniz Jaffer, 48, and PC Jamie Lewis, 33, admitted misconduct in public office at the Old Bailey, with the judge, Mark Lucraft QC, warning that they were “extremely likely” to be jailed. Jaffer left the post he had been assigned to in June 2020 at Fryent Country Park in Wembley, north-west London, and went into bushes where the women had been left by their satanist-obsessed killer. The officer took out a mobile phone and took pictures of the bodies. He sent four images to Lewis, who edited one of the photos and superimposed his face on to it with the two murdered women visible in the background. Lewis took other photos from the crime scene, which did not show the victims, and shared them with a group of more than 40 officers via WhatsApp who called themselves the “A-team”. The Independent Office for Police Conduct said Lewis had “used degrading and sexist language to describe the victims”. A spokesperson confirmed the remarks were directed at the murder victims and it was fair to characterise the remarks as insulting. Henry, a senior social worker, and Smallman, a photographer, had been celebrating the elder sister’s birthday in the park. After the celebration ended, they stayed behind and were attacked. They were reported missing the next day and a search by family and friends led to the partner of one of the sisters finding their bodies. The family of the murdered women were last week backed by the police watchdog in their claims the Met had let them down when the force failed to search for the two sisters after they went missing. The scandal, first revealed by the Guardian, has further blighted the Met’s reputation and the guilty pleas meant more detail about the officers’s actions were finally revealed. On Tuesday, the women’s mother, Mina Smallman, said the Met was “beyond hope” and called for its leaders to “get the rot out once and for all”. She accused the Met commissioner, Cressida Dick, of a “shoddy way of behaving”. She said: “She has not contacted us to say ‘I am really sorry’. She has not spoken into this story at all. And it’s shameful that the IOPC [Independent Office for Police Conduct] had to tell the Met they should apologise to us in their failings for the missing persons [investigation]. Too little, too late. Too little, too late. “When I was in a senior position, if my organisation or department failed, it was on me. I had to take the can for it. Well, it’s now time for them to take the can for it. They are beyond hope.” The Guardian understands that Jaffer was a mentor for new recruits. The Met say he resigned in August and that he and Lewis will face a fast-track process to sack them. Jaffer, of Hornchurch in east London, and Lewis, from Colchester in Essex, were based with the Met’s North East Area Command. The judge told the men he viewed their offences as grave enough to merit lengthy imprisonment: “These matters are extremely serious and you should be under no illusions when you return for sentence it is extremely likely you will receive custodial sentences, custodial sentences of some length for your conduct.” The indictment says the offences took place between 7 June, the day the bodies were found, and 23 June 2020. In a statement after the guilty pleas, the Crown Prosecution Service said: “PC Lewis edited one of the pictures by superimposing his own face on to the photograph with the victims in the background. He sent the resulting image to PC Jaffer, who then forwarded it unsolicited to a female officer also present at the scene. “PC Jaffer showed one of the photos of the victims to a male officer as they left the park. PC Lewis also shared photographs he had taken at the crime scene, which did not show the victims, with a WhatsApp group of 40-plus police officers called the A Team. “PC Jaffer, meanwhile, sent photographs of the victims to three friends via WhatsApp.” Dick said: “I deeply regret that at a time when they were grieving the loss of their loved ones who were taken in such awful circumstances, they faced additional distress caused by the actions of two police officers. What former PC Jaffer and PC Lewis chose to do that day was utterly unprofessional, disrespectful and deeply insensitive.” The officers will be sentenced at a later date and were granted bail. Danyal Hussein, who was 18 at the time, from Blackheath in south London, has been convicted of the murder of both sisters and jailed for life. The IOPC said that three officers who received the images but did not report them had a case to answer for misconduct. • This article was amended on 3 November 2021 to add a picture of Deniz Jaffer and Jamie Lewis as the main image.The Limb Family Foundation aims to create opportunities for individuals and communities to achieve happiness and fulfilment in their lives. The Foundation’s focus areas are the Environment, Fostering Creativity and Addressing Inequality. It seeks out projects that have significant potential for impact and that consider the system of other groups also working in its area. The Foundation will be wound up in 2022. This decision directly reflects the urgency that Directors feel towards mitigating climate change and protecting the environment for future generations. Through the wind-up, the Foundation has intentionally focused its resources towards environmental projects. Since 2019, the Foundation’s funding has allowed Guardian Australia to undertake forensic, deep Environmental Investigations that go beyond what’s possible in the everyday news cycleMeat processors in Great Britain are having to export carcasses destined for domestic consumption to the EU for butchering because of the shortage of skilled workers in the industry. Beef producers are exporting carcasses to Ireland for butchering and packing, says Nick Allen, the chief executive of the British Meat Processors Association, before the products are brought back to Great Britain to be sold in supermarkets. Meanwhile, pork processors are looking into shipping pig carcasses to the Netherlands to be butchered, as first reported by the Financial Times. This is despite the government announcing a post-Brexit immigration policy U-turn last month that would temporarily extend the seasonal worker visa scheme to include pork butchers. The move was aimed at preventing a widespread cull of healthy pigs on farms because of a lack of capacity at abattoirs and meat processing plants. However, 10,000 of the animals have been killed so far, according to the National Pig Association, and the cull continues. After last month’s visa change, 800 pork butchers are to be allowed to enter the country for six months. Yet farmers and meat processors are still waiting for the workers to arrive and do not expect any of them before the end of November at the earliest. One problem for pork producers is that any meat exported to the EU for butchering would not be allowed to be labelled as British pork when reimported to the UK for sale. “It’s a sign of how desperate things are getting,” Allen said. “On the beef side, the Irish have access to plenty of workers. They have been granting visa licences to do what we have been asking to do and bring in butchers from abroad. They have got the plants and they are approved for the supermarkets.” The move to export meat for processing will cost an additional £1,500 for each lorryload of carcasses, including fees for transport, as well as customs requirements introduced since Brexit, such as an export health certificate for each consignment. Currently meat is checked in the EU when it is exported from Great Britain but not when arriving in the UK because the introduction of post-Brexit import controls on food and animals products has been delayed twice by the government and will now begin in July 2022. “It’s not too bad at the moment because there are no checks coming into this country but once they start to do the checks it might not be such a good idea as a long-term solution, depending on how the customs work,” Allen said. Meat processors have been reporting widespread shortages across the industry for some time, and caution that a six-month temporary visa may be too short to improve the situation. “We have been saying we are between 10,000 and 12,000 short of these type of workers, 800 doesn’t go very far, it has been made very clear it is only for six months and they go again,” Allen said. “We are looking at 18 months or longer to train these people.” Recent government initiatives have not made a difference yet for pig farmers struggling to house and feed large pigs that should have gone to slaughter already, said Zoe Davies, the chief executive of the National Pig Association. “We are in limbo,” Davies said. “Some processors are saying they won’t come until mid-December, and then they are worried they won’t come as it is just before Christmas. “Butchers are the most meaningful thing we can have. If we get them on the floor we will start moving more pigs.” Davies added that pork producers are concerned that the minimum salary requirement for temporary butchers has been set at £25,600, while the firms bringing workers would also be required to pay for their flights to the UK and accommodation in the country.Azeem Rafiq has been presented with the chance to share his experiences of racism at Yorkshire when the digital, culture, media and sport (DCMS) select committee addresses the crisis that has engulfed the club later this month. Rafiq, 30, has been invited to give evidence in parliament as part of a session on 16 November that is also expected to see Roger Hutton, the Yorkshire chair, Mark Arthur, the chief executive, and Martyn Moxon, the director of cricket at the club, questioned by MPs. The issue has come to a head in recent days after some details of Yorkshire’s report were made public by ESPNCricinfo. These include the allegation that a senior player repeatedly used the word “Paki”, something described as being “in the spirit of friendly banter” in the club’s summary of their investigation’s findings. This prompted a raft of MPs to voice their disquiet, with Sajid Javid, the health secretary, tweeting that “heads should roll” at Yorkshire and Julian Knight, chair of the DCMS committee, adding: “I struggle to think of any reason why the board should remain in post.” Rafiq is currently involved in a long-running employment tribunal case with the club over his departure in 2018, while the England and Wales Cricket Board has launched its own investigation into the matter after receiving an unredacted copy of the report last week. The allegations first came to light in August 2020 when, in a piece looking back on his career with wisden.com, Rafiq said he admitted he wished he had done more to push back on the dressing room culture at the time. Subsequent interviews, in which the former England Under-19s captain expanded on his experiences, prompted Yorkshire to hire the law firm Squire Patton Boggs to look into the matter. Over the next 12 months they spoke to 26 witnesses, with a summary of the findings released in September and upholding seven of Rafiq’s 43 claims. These included the admission that the club had failed to properly escalate Rafiq’s allegations when he first raised them with Arthur, Moxon and Hanif Malik, a nonexecutive director who also serves as chair of Yorkshire Cricket’s equality and diversity committee, back in 2018. However, last week Yorkshire announced that after an internal review of their report – something which to date remains unpublished – no actions have been taken against any current employees. This, and the subsequent revelations, prompted the DCMS committee to act and now offer Rafiq the opportunity to expand on his allegations. Covered by parliamentary privilege, the session could see previously undisclosed names made public. With the summary of the Yorkshire report finding three separate instances of racist language being used by former players before 2010, and a former coach having used racist language prior to 2012, it could be revelatory. By the same token, the session will also provide Hutton, Arthur and Moxon with an opportunity to present their side of events, having thus far remained publicly silent on the issue since the club’s investigation was first launched in September 2020. Anchor Butter was the first sponsor to end their relationship with Yorkshire on Monday, having previously sponsored the first team’s shirts in the Royal London Cup, while Emerald and Tetley are understood to be reviewing their partnerships.When detective Cameron Blaine broke his way into the room of the small house on the outskirts of the Western Australian town of Carnarvon, he was pretty certain the four-year-old girl inside was the one he had been searching for. But he needed to be sure. “I asked her what her name was. One of the guys jumped in front of me and picked her up and I just wanted to be absolutely sure … I wanted to be sure it was her,” Blaine said. “I said: ‘What is your name?’ She didn’t answer, I asked three times and then she looked at me and said: ‘My name is Cleo.’ And that was it.” That was how one of the biggest and most dramatic searches in Western Australian police history ended on Wednesday morning. It was a hunt that engaged a nation and garnered widespread international attention. The search for little Cleo Smith had begun 18 days before – just hours after police say she was taken in the dead of the night from the family tent she was sleeping in at the Blowholes campsite, a 10-hour drive north of Perth. During the next fortnight, an army of officers sifted through rubbish along 600km of highway, scoured unforgiving bushland, and combed through homes, industrial estates and CCTV footage. The search area – a 1,000km radius from the campsite – was enormous. Trackers were brought in and drones were deployed, as well as specialist aircraft to search the vast areas. But in the end, Cleo was found in her home town of Carnarvon, less than 100km away from the family tent from which she disappeared on 16 October. For Cleo’s mother, Ellie Smith, and stepfather Jake Gliddon – who had used televised addresses to beg and plead for their little girl to come home – the agonising wait was over. At a press conference held in Carnarvon on Wednesday afternoon, Blaine told how he broke the news to the couple after some of the “shock and elation” of finding Cleo had passed. “We had always hoped for that outcome but were not prepared for it. It was absolutely fantastic,” he said. “To see her sitting there in the way that she was, it was incredible. “I turned around and walked out of the house. Not long after that, we got into the car … we called Cleo’s parents and said, we’ve got someone here that wants to speak to you. It was a wonderful feeling.” Blaine said things developed so quickly he didn’t have time to fully prepare Ellie and Jake, but Cleo was reunited with her parents in hospital in the early hours of Wednesday morning. Once reunited with her family, the four-year-old exclaimed: “Mum”. There were “big hugs, kisses and lots of tears,” Blaine said. Earlier, Smith had posted on Instagram about her daughter’s discovery with the caption “our family is whole again”. “Can I say after seeing her a couple of times this morning, she’s a little Energizer bunny,” Blaine said. “How she has that much energy, I wish I did, I am about ready to go to sleep. [She’s] a very sweet, energetic girl, very trusting and very open with us. It was certainly an honour to see that reunion and have a part in it.” Needle in a haystack Exactly what led to the breakthrough that has been hailed as one of the greatest moments in WA’s policing history has not been explained in detail. Police had offered a $1m reward for information, but deputy police commissioner Col Blanch said there was no key piece that broke open the investigation so that reward won’t be claimed. “It’s a collation of a lot of different things but what I can say is humans, good people, put information together. And that’s what I really want to put it down to,” he said. “There were lots of things – there were car movements, there were phone movements, there were antecedents of people. “The jigsaw fit the puzzle but it took really good intelligence analysts and detectives and specialists to look at all of that information, put it together, and go, you know what? That doesn’t seem right to me … and we’re gonna act on it.” Blanch said a 36-year-old man taken into custody by police for questioning was not known to the family and was the only suspect in the case. He said the final moments of his force’s long search played out long before dawn on Wednesday, just 7km from Cleo’s own home. He said detectives broke down in tears at the news and that the footage of body cameras worn by the four officers – who smashed their way into the house – capturing Cleo quietly giving her name is burned into his memory for ever. “This is the outcome we all hoped and prayed for,” Blanch said. “Literally this was a needle in a data haystack, and our very, very good officers and investigators and analysis in that taskforce found that needle late last night, and as a result executed that search warrant … just incredible.” Blanch also criticised social media users who pointed the finger at Cleo’s family without basis during the investigation. He said the breakthrough should send a strong message to people not to jump to conclusions on these cases. Dr Paola Magni, a forensic scientist at Murdoch University, said finding a child alive so quickly was a rare outcome. “We have, in the history of criminology, many cases about abduction and kids have been found 15 years later as adults. In this case, the two weeks is such a good outcome,” Magni said. She said police would have used a mixture of traditional policing, digital evidence and profiling analysis. Community gets behind search While police admit that a car spotted at 3am turning toward Carnarvon off the road that leads from the campsite was a crucial piece of the puzzle, lead investigator Det Supt Rod Wilde said it was hard police grind that solved this case. “It was a lot of hard work, it wasn’t any one particular thing. It was just the process that we go through in a major investigation, dotting those i’s and crossing those t’s,” Wilde said. He said taskforce Rodia received more than 1,000 calls from the community, but the final piece of intelligence that led to the house raid where Cleo was found was only discovered on Tuesday. “People worked basically without sleep from the first occurrence when this happened. They have been working here tirelessly, never gave up hope and got the result that we are all so grateful for.” The WA premier, Mark McGowan, said he was sent a photograph of a smiling Cleo in a hospital bed just after she was found. “It is remarkable, exciting, uplifting news that was a surprise I’m sure to all of us but some great police work by some great people,” McGowan said. McGowan said he initially missed the early morning call because he was asleep but woke at 3am and spoke to the commissioner. “I was talking to the commissioner and he was so excited, he was almost emotional about finding little Cleo.” On Wednesday afternoon the police commissioner, Chris Dawson, touched down in Carnarvon, held up a picture of Cleo and declared it a wonderful day. The picture was taken earlier on Wednesday when Cleo was in hospital where she had been taken for medical tests. She was later discharged. “It is a really special day for Western Australia,” Dawson said. “I’m just the proudest police commissioner I think in the world at the moment.” Later still on Wednesday, Cleo’s mother updated a Facebook post – made on 17 October, 24 hours after Cleo went missing – that called for people to help to find her little girl. Ellie Smith wrote: “FINAL EDIT – HOME WITH HER FAMILY.”A photograph of a smiling and waving Cleo Smith eating an ice treat in her hospital bed has been released by Western Australia police after the four-year-old was rescued from a Carnarvon house more than two weeks after she vanished from a remote campsite. WA police on Wednesday afternoon said a 36-year-old man taken into custody following Cleo’s discovery was yet to be charged but they expected that to occur “probably” later in the day. Investigators have said the man had no connection to Cleo’s family and he only became a suspect in the alleged abduction on Tuesday night. In a press conference outside the Carnarvon police station on Wednesday afternoon, the commissioner, Chris Dawson, held up the picture of Cleo declaring “it is a wonderful day”. The picture was taken earlier on Wednesday when Cleo was in hospital where she had been taken for medical tests. She had since been discharged and was back with her parents. Police also released footage from an officer’s body camera showing the moment Cleo was carried out of the Carnarvon house. “It is a really special day for Western Australia,” Dawson said. “I’m just the proudest police commissioner I think in the world at the moment.” Det Sgt Cameron Blaine, who was one of the four officers who raided the house in Carnarvon and was the one to ask Cleo what her name was, described the four-year-old as “very trusting and open” with officers. He also said she was energetic. “She’s a little Energizer bunny,” he said. “How she has that much energy. I wish I did. We all wanted to take turns holding her.” Blaine said Wednesday morning was “the best moment” of his career. He described the moment Cleo was reunited with her family and said the four-year-old exclaimed “mum”. There were “big hugs, kisses and lots of tears”, Blaine said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Det Supt Rod Wilde, who led the investigation, said Wednesday morning’s news came as an “absolute surprise” to Cleo’s parents and “they were ecstatic”. Cleo’s mother, Ellie Smith, posted on Instagram about 6am local time about her daughter’s discovery with the caption “our family is whole again”. Dawson said chocolates and flowers had been left at the police station throughout Wednesday. The WA police minister, Paul Papalia, said: “If you feel the need to thank God today, thank God for the West Australian police force. Cleo’s rescue wasn’t the result of an accidental sighting or a suspicious event, it was the result of hard police grind from the moment this incident began.” The prime minister, Scott Morrison, said Cleo’s disappearance had “captured the hearts of Australians” and “I just thank God that Cleo is home and that she is safe”. “The fact that that nightmare has come to an end and our worst fears were not realised is just a huge relief and a moment for great joy,” Morrison said during a press conference in Dubai on Wednesday. The West Australian premier, Mark McGowan, said Cleo’s discovery was a surprise. “It often is a tragic outcome [in such cases] but this is great news and uplifting for the entire country,” McGowan said. Police officers found Cleo about 1am local time on Wednesday morning alone in a room at a house in Carnarvon, a town roughly 900km north of Perth on WA’s north-west coast, and just 75km from where her family was camping when she disappeared from their tent in the early hours of 16 October. Investigators said they received information on Tuesday that, together with previous findings, led them to the Carnarvon address where Cleo was found. Deputy police commissioner Col Blanch, speaking to the ABC on Wednesday evening, said police had prior “information on our records” about the 36-year-old. Police earlier said they did not expect anyone to claim the $1m reward for information about Cleo’s whereabouts that had been offered by the WA government – the equal largest reward ever offered by the state. Cleo’s family live in Carnarvon and the house she was found in on Wednesday morning was just a seven-minute drive from her family’s home.Britney Spears’s father has requested the “immediate termination” of the conservatorship he presided over that has controlled his daughter’s life for more than 13 years. In new court documents, a lawyer for Jamie Spears stated: “Britney’s recent testimony and requests to take personal control of her estate and affairs have made clear that continuing the conservatorship is contrary to her desires.” The statement continued: “Jamie sees no reason why the conservatorship should continue for any amount of time and asserts he has no interest in the conservatorship continuing.” In June, the pop star gave explosive testimony to a Los Angeles court in which she alleged she had been held against her will in a psychiatric institution and denied agency over her reproductive rights and in her romantic relationships. Since then, Spears has gained her own legal representation for the first time in the history of her conservatorship. Her lawyer has agitated for the end of the arrangement, and for those responsible in its management to face justice for “conservatorship abuse”. Initially, Jamie Spears said there were “no grounds whatsoever” to remove him as conservator. He has since supported his daughter’s desire for the role to end. In September, judge Brenda Penny suspended him from overseeing the conservatorship. Spears said she was “on cloud nine” after his removal. Jamie Spears’s latest application comes in the wake of him acquiring new legal representation. His former lawyer, Vivian Thoreen, stepped aside in October. His new attorney, Alex Weingarten, stated that Jamie’s request was unconditional – not subject to “a demand for releases or compensation” – and that he had “nothing to hide regarding his administration of Britney’s estate”. The filing urged transparency on the matter of Spears’s conservatorship, which has attracted the support of human rights organisations and US politicians, and exposed how such arrangements might be open to exploitation. It stated: “Jamie believes that every aspect of the conservatorship should be made available for public examination – not the targeted leaks and misinformation that have resulted in such tabloid fodder.” The next hearing in Spears’s case, due on 9 November, will determine the future of her conservatorship. Last month, Spears said she was “very happy” that the end was almost here, but admitted she was “scared to do anything because I’m afraid I’ll make a mistake”. Britney has not responded directly to her father’s latest application. In a now-deleted Instagram post, she wrote that her life had been a “family business before … it’s no longer that any more !!!!”One of the world’s leading track and field coaches is to be investigated by the US Center for SafeSport after multiple complaints of sexual misconduct were made against him, the Guardian can reveal. Rana Reider has earned a glittering reputation in the sport after guiding several Olympic and world champions to glory, including the Tokyo 2020 Olympic 200m gold medallist Andre de Grasse and the world triple jump champion Christian Taylor. He also trains numerous other elite athletes, including Britain’s Adam Gemili and Daryll Neita, from his Florida-based Tumbleweed Track Club. However, the 51-year-old American’s behaviour off the track is to be scrutinised by the US Center for SafeSport organisation, a powerful and independent body that handles investigations and complaints into abuse and misconduct in Olympic sports. The Guardian has also learned that the allegations against Reider have led to UK Athletics (UKA) warning Gemili and Neita to cease contact with their coach – or else their membership into the World Class Programme, including lottery funding, will be suspended. A similar message has been conveyed to other British athletes who were considering moving to the US to train under Reider. Contacted by the Guardian on Tuesday, Reider denied knowledge of the SafeSport investigation and said he had not been told of UK Athletics’ instruction to Gemili and Neita. “You can call my lawyer because this is news to me,” he said. Reider’s lawyer, Ryan Stevens, said the allegations against his client were “unvetted” and “unproven”. He told the Guardian: “SafeSport hasn’t issued a notice of allegations to Rana. The suspicious timing and motives attached to these unproven attacks on Rana’s reputation need to be fully investigated and vetted, and they haven’t been.” It is understood the warning to Gemili and Neita came about after UKA took advice from its standards, ethics and rules committee. Both athletes were then sent a letter, which told them that UKA does not feel it is appropriate for them to continue to be associated with Reider at present. UKA told the Guardian: “As part of UK Athletics’ commitment to ensuring appropriate conduct is consistent across all areas without any exceptions, we completed additional due diligence where issues have been raised about the support personnel of UK athletes. “Following information from the US Center for SafeSport that multiple complaints of sexual misconduct have been made against coach Rana Reider and that an investigation in the US is imminent, UK Athletics has informed UK athletes currently being coached by him to cease all association until the conclusion of this process.” Gemili, the first British man to run below 10 seconds for 100m and 20sec for 200m, has worked with Reider since 2017. Since then the popular 28-year-old has inspired Britain’s relay team to world championship 4x100m relay gold and silver medals in 2017 and 2019. The 25-year-old Neita had a breakthrough year in 2021, running under 11sec for 100m for the first time, reaching the Olympic final and winning 4x100m relay bronze at Tokyo. On its website the US Center for SafeSport says that its mission is “dedicated solely to ending sexual, physical, and emotional abuse on behalf of athletes everywhere” – and that it is “authorised by Congress to help abuse prevention, education, and accountability take root in every sport, on every court”. In July the centre issued an indefinite ban on the coach Alberto Salazar for sexual misconduct and emotional misconduct violations. Reider, who is regarded as a brilliant technical sprint coach, joined UKA after London 2012 following a long US collegiate career to initially oversee the sprints, sprint hurdles, horizontal jumps and relay programmes. He worked with a group of athletes that included Harry Aikines-Aryeetey, Dwain Chambers and Richard Kilty before leaving in 2014. After departing UKA he criticised some British athletes, saying: “Maybe they get comfortable. Maybe they get the funding. Maybe they’re big fish in a small pond and that’s the way they like it.” SafeSport has been contacted for comment. Support independent Guardian journalism • Make a contribution from just £1 • Become a digital subscriber and get something in return for your moneyAnita Asante did not get into football for its politics and the platform it provides. Like most, Aston Villa’s centre-half just loved the game. But when it comes to mixing sport and politics, surely few can match the former England international. Asante studied politics and English at Brunel University about 15 years ago and continues to follow developments closely. “Anything socio-political, I’ll try to do research and gain more knowledge,” the 36-year-old says. “Especially with things that I disagree with, I want to understand and arm myself with the right material. “I’ve always been a believer that politics is all around us, it impacts us in our daily lives and if I have an opportunity to speak positively on things that impact me or people around me or society, then there’s no harm in that.” Asante has developed into a footballing activist organically. She is outspoken on everything from racism, sexism and LGBTQ+ rights, having first talked publicly last year about her relationship with the journalist and former hockey player Beth Fisher, to the development of the women’s game. “People might say I’m an activist but I just believe that I found my voice,” she says. “As a younger player I maybe didn’t have the confidence to speak up, but I had the views. And I didn’t feel that I had the platform or the opportunity, but now I do. I’ve been around people that have expressed their views and I’ve seen the impact it has. I want to do that for others. It’s just speaking up for others who might not have a voice in the game or outside of it. I just want to always strive for progress.” Asante, who won 70 England caps, has come a long way from playing football in the cage on her north-west London council estate. Her pushy PE teacher, Ms Harding, set up a girls’ team to cater for the multi-disciplined but football-obsessed youngster, who went on to Arsenal’s academy. “I was playing every day, in my estate, in my cage,” Asante says. “That’s where my learning happened. That’s where my innate skill was developed.” Today girls come through a more structured and invested-in system and the technical level is being driven up but Asante does not feel her journey was inferior. “I got to experience playing with boys and men older than me,” she says. “To spend hours on the ball with them in a way that girls and women don’t get to do in their own professional environment. It’s a different kind of learning and vibe. “My learning came from getting kicked and beat up against cage walls against boys and that tested me, that challenged me and that made me want to always prove myself. I wanted them to respect me, I wanted them to make me feel part of their group.” After 10 years at Arsenal, Asante joined Chelsea before moving to the US and playing there for four clubs. She then spent five years in Sweden and rejoined Chelsea before signing for Villa for the club’s maiden WSL season in 2020. “The US definitely developed me in terms of mentality,” she says. “Before that point, it was like: what is being a professional? What does that look like? What does that require? What were the expectations? I didn’t really know. I knew my environment, and I considered my environment a high-performance environment at the time, because we were successful; Arsenal, we were doing things that other clubs weren’t able to do. But then I got to America and I realised: ‘Oh my God, there’s a load more to this.’ “Sweden impacted me both on and off the pitch. There have been environments in the past where you could be 18 or 16, essentially an adult, but you’re still sort of communicated with like you’re a child or you’re in a structured institution. In Sweden everyone always felt equal and level. I also liked the social activist side of things there, the way the clubs always had a drive to be part of the community and brought that into the consciousness of the team. That sort of inspired my own personal social activism. I felt like yes, I am more than just a footballer, I can do more.” Asante has had to adapt the way she plays and thinks about the game at Villa, for the first time swapping clubs used to battling for titles to one that last season was battling the drop. “I won’t lie, it’s been a challenge,” she says. “It’s difficult, probably more from a mental and emotional standpoint, because I’ve been used to being at top clubs that compete at a different level. But I’ve learned a lot about myself. It’s made me adapt my game as well. “I’ve always considered myself a ball-playing defender … I haven’t always been able to do that within this team, last season in particular, but it’s made me realise how much more you have to think about the game as a whole, in terms of game management, taking more pragmatic decisions to just be robust and secure as a defender and not take as many risks. In free-scoring teams you might, as a defender, take those risks because you know you have world-class forwards and players that will go and do creative things and score goals.” With a new manager, Carla Ward, and signings who have helped get the right blend of youth and experience, Villa have two wins from five games, having managed only three last season. “One of our main ambitions is to get mid-table; sixth or seventh would be great,” says Asante. “We have to have realistic expectations of where the club is at in terms of overall experience in this division and in creating the identity that will help the team to be sustainable and keep growing long term but I think that’s a realistic target. Anything beyond that would be a bonus.” Get to know the players in England’s top-flight better with our WSL player in focus series. Read all our interviews here.Ministers have launched a three-week TV advertising blitz to recruit care workers, as a new mandatory Covid vaccination law takes effect that some operators warn could force out a quarter of their staff. The campaign will run from Wednesday on ITV, Channel 4 and Sky to help fill 105,000 vacancies with people who embody “kindness, compassion and resilience”, said Sajid Javid, the health secretary. The launch comes amid a staffing crisis in social care, with burnout, Brexit and low pay fuelling the exodus of staff and forcing care operators to cut their bed capacity. Frontline care home staff will be required to have two Covid jabs from 11 November or face redundancy. A similar policy is being considered for homecarers and on Tuesday the Homecare Association said some members have warned it would reduce their staff rosters by over 25%. Of 150 homecare providers surveyed, 90% thought recruitment would become harder and over 80% thought they would need to dismiss staff as a result. A quarter of homecare workers have still not had two doses of vaccine. “This creates a serious risk that homecare will not be available for tens of thousands of older and disabled people who are wholly reliant on support,” said Dr Jane Townson, chief executive of the industry body. With the hospitality industry and retailers including Amazon luring care workers with better wages, unions have argued a pay increase from the current £9.01 median hourly wage is needed to boost recruitment. Many care managers have also seen staff switch to the NHS. The advertising campaign uses the slogan “made with care” and shows care workers taking people on trips to the seaside, exercising, swimming and getting dressed. A voiceover says: “There’s no better time to become a care worker”. Recruitment is not just a short-term problem. An ageing population means 500,000 further new care staff will be needed by 2035. “We are investing record amounts into social care making this an exciting time to join the workforce and play an important role in helping to develop a world-leading social care system as we bring forward our plans for reform later this year,” said care minister Gillian Keegan. But the shadow care minister, Liz Kendall, said: “In the face of overwhelming staff shortages, social care needs a detailed plan to transform staff pay, training and terms and conditions more than this TV advertising drive. There will be no new money for social care from the government’s so-called levy for at least three years, and nothing in the budget except confirmation of a national insurance hike on the very frontline workers we need to recruit.” Gavin Edwards, national officer for care at the trade union Unison, said: “If the government is serious about recruitment, its first move should be to ensure care workers get a decent pay rise. Any ad campaign pushing a job without sick pay, where poor treatment and exploitation are rife, will struggle to succeed.”South Africa’s ruling ANC party looked set to deliver its worst ever electoral performance since the end of apartheid, with support expected to dip below 50% in local government polls. With more than half of polling stations reporting after Monday’s fiercely contested elections, the African National Congress stood at slightly under 46% of the vote, according to electoral commission figures. The municipal elections had been widely viewed as a referendum on the ANC, tainted by corruption and facing a backlash over poor stewardship of an ailing economy beset by chronically high unemployment, and on its uninterrupted 27 years in charge of Africa’s most industrialised nation. The ANC has blamed the poor showing on the coronavirus pandemic, apathy and electricity blackouts imposed by the country’s energy utility Eskom. “I don’t think we could have done better,” ANC’s deputy secretary-general, Jessie Duarte, told AFP. “We believe that some of our own voters stayed away from the polls but … we are not looking at this as a great tragedy, we are looking at this as an opportunity to improve.” The result raises the possibility of the legacy party of Nelson Mandela being forced to govern the country in a coalition, should they be replicated in the next national election in 2024. But the opposition remains fragmented, with the ANC’s main rival, the Democratic Alliance (DA), second on 23% in Tuesday’s count and the Marxist EFF, led by Julius Malema, third with 10%. Poor service delivery has dogged South Africa for years while senior ANC party members, including the former president Jacob Zuma, face corruption investigations. Meanwhile, unemployment has hit 34.4%. Frustrations with the ANC government played out in July when widespread rioting and looting erupted Zuma’s imprisonment for contempt after refusing to testify in a corruption investigation. The unrest claimed at least 354 lives. Until 2016, the ANC had won more than 60% at every election since South Africa’s first multi-racial vote in 1994 when Nelson Mandela was sworn in as president. The party’s support slipped from 62% in the 2011 municipal elections to 54% during the 2016 vote. Ralph Mathekga, an analyst and author of books on ANC politics, said, the election could be “a predictor for what is looming at the next general election. “If the ANC drops below 50% … South Africa will no longer be led by a hegemonic party,” he said, adding that the result could threaten President Cyril Ramaphosa’s position as president when the ANC elects its leader next year. But no other single party yet seems remotely ready to rival the ANC. The DA has struggled to shed its image as a party of white privilege in a country that is nine-tenths non-white, while the EFF’s radical rhetoric scares many voters off. As well as avoiding the loss of its overall majority, the ANC hopes to win back the metropolitan areas it lost to opposition-led coalitions in the 2016 poll, including the commercial hub Johannesburg and the capital Pretoria. At 18.15 GMT, results for Johannesburg from 29% of polling stations gave the ANC 37%, against 22% for the DA. The DA, meanwhile, was leading in Tshwane, which includes Pretoria, with 39% of the vote against the ANC’s 29%, on results from 19% of stations. ActionSA, the most popular newcomer party, whose leader, Herman Mashaba, has been criticised for vociferous anti-immigrant remarks, was on 1.6% nationwide, but polling 17% in Johannesburg, putting it third there.The chair of TikTok’s owner, ByteDance, has stepped down, as the Chinese government tightens its control of China’s tech sector and maintains pressure on the industry’s domestic entrepreneurs. Zhang Yiming announced in May he would step down as chief executive of the tech company he co-founded and on Wednesday he relinquished his chair title, with ByteDance’s English-language website no longer featuring a page that mentioned his formal board role. Instead, there was a photo of Zhang under the heading of “leadership” with no title underneath. ByteDance declined to comment. Reuters reported that ByteDance’s new chief executive, co-founder Liang Rubo, has taken over as chair of the company’s five-person board. It was also unclear whether there had been any changes to Zhang’s control of ByteDance, where he owns 50% of the voting rights. In May, the company had said he would move to a “key strategy” position at the end of the year. At the time, Zhang said he was leaving the role because he lacked managerial skills and preferred “reading and daydreaming” to running the tech group. ByteDance is one of Chinese tech’s biggest global success stories thanks to TikTok, the short-video platform that has amassed more than 1 billion users worldwide and has become a competitive threat to rival US tech firms such as Facebook, Snapchat and Google-owned YouTube. ByteDance was valued at $140bn (£102bn) in a fundraising round last year. It also owns Douyin, a video platform for its domestic market, and other interests that span education, gaming and business software. A number of founders at some of China’s most well-known tech companies have in recent months given up overseeing daily operations amid a government clampdown on the tech sector. Last week, the short-video apps owner Kuaishou said its co-founder, Su Hua, had stepped down as chief executive. The founder of the e-commerce company Pinduoduo, Huang Zheng, stepped down as chair this year, having earlier relinquished his chief executive title. According to analysts, the Chinese government has become increasingly concerned about the power and influence that has been amassed by wealthy tech entrepreneurs, with many of them multibillionaires. Tencent, a social media, gaming and finance group, and Alibaba, an online shopping giant, have both pledged multibillion pound sums to help achieve the “common prosperity” of the nation. Jack Ma, Alibaba’s co-founder, has been a high-profile victim of the crackdown, only recently venturing outside China to go on holiday in Spain. Ma has limited his public appearances since the planned float of his online finance platform, Ant Group, was blocked by President Xi Jinping last year. The move came shortly after Ma delivered a speech criticising Chinese financial regulators. Foreign tech firms are also retreating from China, with Yahoo announcing this week that it was was quitting the country because of the “increasingly challenging business and legal environment in China”. The timing of the withdrawal coincided with China’s new data protection law coming into effect on Monday. The law limits the conditions under which companies can gather personal information and sets rules for how it is used. The ByteDance board move comes after the company on Tuesday announced a major organisational reshuffle to create six business units. It also said TikTok’s chief executive, Shou Zi Chew, would step down as chief financial officer at ByteDance in order to focus on running the video platform full-time. ByteDance has been approached for comment.Segismundo has just woken up in a palace, having spent his life holed up in a tower. In Pedro Calderón’s extraordinary Spanish golden age drama, he is astonished at the luxury he is suddenly immersed in. “Me, surrounded by all these elegant-looking servants,” he says. Except in Wils Wilson’s production, the servants are nothing of the kind. Their look could be called punk Pierrot: all back-combed hair, eccentric makeup and bare feet. In accordance with designer Georgia McGuinness’s dressing-up-box aesthetic, their outfits are a thrown-together combination of long johns and glitz. Their elegance is as provisional as the scrawled chalk line that marks the edge of a stage that extends across the stalls and creates a hallucinatory depth of field. Emerging from the haze of Kai Fischer’s lighting is a fake proscenium arch, distressed and decaying, an expression of the play’s theme about the real and the pretend. With the audience on four sides, Wilson highlights the artifice. However rich and important these characters are, their privilege is stapled on, their venality only one layer of clothing down. All this gives tremendous immediacy to Jo Clifford’s translation, first aired in a production by Calixto Bieito in 1998 and written with a heart-on-sleeve directness. Lorn Macdonald excels as Segismundo, a young man who has spent his childhood imprisoned, in this staging, by the queen, his mother (a deliciously nasty Alison Peebles) for fear he will fulfil a prophecy that he will grow up evil. Naturally, the brutality of his upbringing turns him into exactly the monster his mother feared. Macdonald prowls the stage,grunting with coiled-up anger, switching between primal violence and existential musings on the nature of reality. In a vigorously acted production, he meets his match in Anna Russell-Martin’s Rosaura, a woman seeking vengeance on Astolfo, the lover who abandoned her (a slippery and supercilious Dyfan Dwyfor). Fierce and ferocious, she never lets you forget the urgency of her mission, nor lets you doubt her capacity to carry it out. Few people come out well in this (John Macaulay’s diplomatic Clotaldo gets close), showing us the cruel, animal forces cracking through an all-too-thin veneer of respectability. At the Royal Lyceum, Edinburgh, until 20 NovemberCop26 and the climate ‘hoofprint’ As UN climate talks take place in Glasgow, the role of cows and other farm animals in human-induced climate emissions – and what can be done about it – has been in the spotlight. The world’s biggest meat and dairy companies are being “given a free pass by governments” over the lack of clear targets to reduce climate emissions, say campaigners, who have published a new ranking of the worst offenders. Cutting methane is the biggest opportunity to slow global heating between now and 2040, say experts, who lament that “no country has a real target to reduce its livestock-related emissions or meat consumption”. Brazil and Argentina, two of the biggest producers of beef products and animal feed crops in the world, are reported to have argued strongly against UN recommendations that reducing meat consumption is necessary to cut greenhouse gas emissions. The net zero climate pledges made this year by the world’s largest meat company, JBS, have been critiqued as an attempt to “avoid scrutiny from shareholders and investors” in a new report by the Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy. Downing Street swiftly denied that it was planning to introduce a meat tax, after a proposal was published and then withdrawn within a few hours. Nonetheless, Tory MPs were quick to publicise their opposition. “I’m a huge meat eater. I think it is wonderful,” said Conservative MP Tom Hunt. Meanwhile, Britons have cut their meat consumption by 17% over the past decade, new analysis shows, but this does not go far enough to meet targets for healthy diets and sustainable food production, say researchers. Other news from around the world Microplastics have been found in the blood of cows and pigs, new Dutch research reveals. The study is believed to be the first in the world to show that microplastic particles can be absorbed into the blood of mammals. Researchers say it raises serious concerns about the presence of microplastics in the food chain and air. After our investigation into Europe’s meat industry, which revealed exploitation of workers was rife, Spanish news website el Diario published its own report on the topic. Its research, it says, shows “despite slight improvements, slaughterhouses remain one of the worst places in the country to work … where practically all employees are migrants who face harsh work conditions and accidents, with thousands of workers outside the sector’s collective bargaining agreement”. Meanwhile, in the US, the Biden administration is to stop immigration enforcement raids in meat plants and will focus on targeting companies that continually violate labour laws by hiring undocumented workers. The US Department of Agriculture (USDA) is to work with the meat industry to try to reduce salmonella in poultry. There are more than a million consumer illnesses due to salmonella every year, with more than 23% of those due to the consumption of chicken and turkey. The USDA has faced calls to make chicken processing companies more responsible for their supply chain and tackle contamination before it comes into the slaughterhouse. The USDA is facing a lawsuit for failing to require humane handling of poultry at slaughter. Animal welfare organisations say every year government inspectors document tens of thousands of birds dying before they reach slaughter plants. Birds in plants are also subjected to intentional acts of cruelty by workers, campaigners say, including being kicked, hit, mutilated, driven over, or dumped on to conveyor belts with visibly broken legs and wings. Elsewhere on Animals farmed John Vidal revealed the emergence of at least eight types of bird flu that can kill humans, and how industrial chicken production is a risk for breeding the next pandemic. Milli Legrain explored the growing panic in the US pork sector as the deadly pig disease African Swine Fever led to the culling of tens of thousands of pigs belonging to small producers in the Dominican Republic. And we had an exclusive report on the role of pig farms in contributing to the pollution of one of Europe’s largest saltwater lagoons, in the Murcia region of south-east Spain. It comes as Spain is poised to overtake Germany as the EU’s top pork producer this year. Other news from the UK The cost of chicken is expected to rise by more than 10%, the owner of the UK’s biggest poultry supplier has warned. Ranjit Singh Boparan, who owns Bernard Matthews and 2 Sisters Food Group, said food is “too cheap” and consumers should expect “a reset”. The government stepped in to counter a growing crisis on pig farms by allowing butchers to enter the UK on temporary visas. The environment secretary, George Eustice, announced that butchers in abattoirs and meat processing plants dealing with pigs will be allowed to come to work in Britain for six months. A new strengthened trade and agriculture commission has been launched to scrutinise future trade deals. The government says the move “reconfirms that maintaining the UK’s high standards will be a red line in all our trade negotiations, with no compromise on our high environmental protection, animal welfare or food standards”. Finally, we’ve had a short film on death in farming. The Guardian’s Richard Sprenger stepped inside a farm, an abattoir and a knacker’s yard to see how the industry deals with dead and dying animals, and what that says about our own humanity. Share your stories and feedback Thank you to everyone who has been in touch to share their thoughts on the series. Terry Pride emailed to share the story of a group of ranchers in Nebraska who have raised more than $300m (£240m) to build a sustainable beef plant. To air your views, or share your experiences and stories from inside the farming industry, please contact us at: animalsfarmed@theguardian.com. And if you want to receive this Animals farmed monthly update via email, you can sign up here to get a roundup of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations.At last a shapeless series had a defining image, a clear contour – the awesome arc of a home run smashed out of the ballpark by Jorge Soler that gave the Atlanta Braves their first World Series title since 1995. This November triumph was primed in midsummer through inspiration born of desperation. Injuries, including to star outfielder Ronald Acuña Jr, led Atlanta’s general manager Alex Anthopoulos into the trade market. Judicious signings remodeled the outfield and helped an ordinary team become good. In the playoffs the Braves discovered – perhaps to their own surprise and almost certainly to everyone else’s – that they were great. “We had so many new faces that just fit perfectly,” said first baseman Freddie Freeman. The Braves didn’t have a winning record until August, when they surged into playoff contention. They won the fewest regular-season games of any side in this year’s postseason. Now they’re champions. “We’ve been the best team since the trade deadline and we played like it all the way into the postseason. We just got hot,” said Freeman. Eddie Rosario, signed from the Cleveland Indians on the same July deadline day as Soler, was the Most Valuable Player of the National League Championship Series win over the Los Angeles Dodgers. Soler, the Havana-born 29-year-old acquired from the Kansas City Royals, was one of four midseason outfield signings who hit three home runs in the postseason. His first led off Game 1 against Houston and the second won Game 4. Yet he missed most of the NLCS after testing positive for Covid-19, and hit for an average of only .192 this year with the Royals. With the roof open at Minute Maid Park on Tuesday there was nothing to keep his 446ft three-run detonation in the stadium as it flew over the train tracks above the left-field wall. He watched it leave as he tapped his chest, dropped his bat and gazed over to his teammates. “Immediately after I hit it I turned around to look at our dug-out and celebrate,” he said. After the game he was named MVP of the World Series. Atlanta, the club famously bought by the media mogul Ted Turner so he could broadcast their games on his TV station, then acquired by Time Warner, still have corporate owners in the shape of Liberty Media, who also control SiriusXM satellite radio and Formula One. But these are not the Braves of old, the club that claimed 14 consecutive NL East division titles from 1991 to 2005. That vintage called on the starting pitching of Greg Maddux, Tom Glavine and John Smoltz, Hall of Famers all. With a single World Series title to show for all that talent, that generation were underachievers. The 2021 squad have exceeded expectations, though their fourth successive playoffs appearance indicates they are building solid foundations again in a big city that is not exactly spoilt for title-winning teams. “It’s something that you dream about but I don’t know if you ever feel it’s going to be a reality, honestly,” said the Atlanta manager Brian Snitker, who joined the organization as a minor league player in 1977. “It’s a special group… they have a great work ethic and baseball IQ.” It was hard to detect any pattern in this arrhythmic set of games or single out any one player’s contribution as vastly ahead of the rest. If there was an overall theme it was tactical disruption, as the most unheralded players in the sport – middle relievers – assumed outsize importance as the managers mixed-and-matched and mercilessly yanked their starting pitchers. This was partly out of necessity, since both sides had to cope with injuries to first-choice starting pitchers, including Atlanta’s ace, Charlie Morton, who left Game 1 with a broken leg; partly to counter fatigue; and also from following the trend of replacing pitchers before they face the line-up three times on the basis that familiarity helps the hitter. This irreverence towards starting pitching thrusts the chorus line into center stage and downgrades the drama. We used to wonder how deep into the night a pitcher might go; now we ask, how shallow? And pauses from repeated calls to the bullpen make for marathons that finish late on the east coast and turn off television viewers. So there was a retro, 90s-era nostalgic appeal to watching an Atlanta starting pitcher endure and excel on Tuesday as Max Fried extinguished Houston over six mostly serene innings, even after Astros outfielder Michael Brantley trod on his ankle in a first-inning race to first base. The 27-year-old left-hander was the only player in the series from either side to pitch more than five innings. Each team deployed at least five pitchers in the other games. Fried’s strong showing meant that Atlanta used only three pitchers here. Houston called on eight. The Astros, in their third World Series in five years, with their elite infield of postseason veterans, seemed unlikely candidates to crumple. Yet after their leadoff hitter reached base in three of the first four innings and the team failed to score, Houston’s vaunted offense looked confused and cowed. Jose Altuve’s two home runs in earlier games were the only ones the Astros mustered in the entire series. “The homers, it’s a little crazy,” the second baseman said. “Just them executing pitches,” Carlos Correa, the shortstop, who seems poised to leave in free agency, said. The Astros’ 72-year-old manager, Dusty Baker, was visibly frustrated as Soler power conquered America’s oil capital. Perhaps he sensed it was the moment his second chance at winning the World Series as a manager slipped away, 19 years after his San Francisco Giants agonizingly lost in seven games to the Anaheim Angels. Now out of contract, Baker’s future is uncertain. It was easy to feel sorry for him, as a two-run homer from Dansby Swanson made it 5-0 before the team’s talisman, Freeman, a free agent this winter, drove in another run then hit a solo homer to make the scoreline cringeworthy for the Astros. With a 7-0 win for the visitors clinching a 4-2 series victory, a curious streak continues: no team has won the World Series in their own ballpark since the 2013 Boston Red Sox. But as hundreds of Atlanta fans in the stands celebrated at the end and the players cavorted on the field before hoisting the trophy, the Braves looked perfectly at home.Police in Sheffield are investigating three reports of young women being spiked with needles last weekend, warning those responsible that they are endangering the lives of innocent people and face long jail terms. In recent weeks there has been a big rise in the number of spiking cases, resulting in demonstrations last week at more than 40 university towns and cities across the UK. In Manchester, addressing a crowd of about 1,000 young people, Lucy Nichols described a “spiking epidemic” sweeping the UK. “Every single woman here will have a story about them or one of their friends being spiked,” she said. “Now we can’t even do the age-old trick of covering up our drinks, because they are spiking us with needles now too.” South Yorkshire police said they were investigating three reports of women being injected with a suspected syringe while they were on a night out in the city. The first case was in a city centre club in Eyre Street at 2am on Saturday, when an 18-year reported being injected. She became ill and was taken to hospital and has since been discharged. At the same location, at 4am on Monday, a 19-year-old woman was also injected with a suspected syringe. She was taken to hospital where she remains in a stable condition. The third report was from an incident at a club in Carver Street on Saturday, involving an 18-year-old woman. She became ill and was taken to hospital from where she has been discharged. Police said independent investigations were under way into all three incidents and inquiries “continue at pace” to trace those involved. “While we are not ruling anything out, evidence so far does not suggest that these crimes have a sexual motivation.” they added. DCI Benjamin Wood said he understood how worrying the reports would be. “Everyone should be able to enjoy our night-time economy without the fear of being harmed,” he said. “Please know that we are thoroughly investigating each and every incident reported to us. Please continue to report to us if you think you have been spiked or if you notice any suspicious behaviour while you are out – we are here 24/7 to listen to you and support you. “If you have been spiked, it is not your fault in any way and it is nothing you should feel ashamed of. The blame lies solely with those committing this type of crime.” Addressing the perpetrators, he said: “It is not a joke. It is not a bit of fun. Consider the results of your careless and cruel actions: you are endangering the lives of innocent people who just want to go out and have fun with their friends. You are putting them at risk of serious illness, injury or assault. “You are committing a serious crime, which could result in you being put behind bars for more than 10 years.”After a long hiatus and endless gossip, Alibaba’s founder, Jack Ma, has finally resurfaced. Last month, he was spotted meeting business partners in Hong Kong. More recently, he travelled to Spain on Zen, his luxury yacht, and was last week seen touring Dutch research institutes to “pursue his interests in agriculture technology”, according to the South China Morning Post, the paper he owns. Ma’s reappearance is low-key, but is, nonetheless, significant. It reminds us of his place in the company he founded and in today’s tech scene in China. On the day his trip to Europe was reported the company’s share price went up by 9% in Hong Kong. And sightings of Ma abroad have fuelled recovery of Chinese tech stocks over the past month. The Ma saga over the past year is fascinating. It involves multiple strands in today’s China: wealth, politics, fame and technology. They are all in Xi Jinping’s sights as he revamps Chinese society and prepares for a likely third term as president next year. Like the fluid political situation, both domestically and overseas, China’s technology scene is changing dramatically. Beyond the various gloomy headlines and endless gossip about elite politics, the country’s massive tech sector is also a playground for policymakers. Some believe they are redefining the relationship between technology, society and politics, others worry the politicians are rocking the boat and no certainty anything will work. You say ‘crackdown’, I say ‘reform’ You might be sceptical about all that’s happening in today’s China, but you should nonetheless pay attention to it, because there are parallels in the west, too. Let’s start with language. It’s interesting to notice the difference in vocabulary when you speak to officials and longtime China tech observers. Earlier this year, the veteran analyst Kendra Schaefer had a call with an old-guard China analyst, who remarked: “The world says ‘crackdown’, China says ‘reform’”. “I couldn’t agree more,” Schaefer, who’s also head of tech policy research at the research firm Trivium China, told me from Beijing. “While the crackdown has often been portrayed as a single, concerted push from Beijing to rein in its tech giants, I tend to view it as four different reform efforts, each driven by a different government agency, and each with different goals.” In the past few months, we’ve seen efforts from China’s central bank to mitigate systemic risks posed by the rise of fintech; the cyberspace regulator to rein in data privacy abuses (China’s data privacy law kicked in on Monday); and a push by the market regulator to end anti-competitive practices by platform companies. And then there are a series of efforts to tackle tech-related social issues, such as labour rights for ride-hailing drivers. “These are all areas where China’s tech companies have benefited from lax regulation over the past couple of decades, and now the free ride is over,” said Schaefer. So depending on how you approach it, Beijing is either turning China into a 1984-type of society through technology, or making the sector a huge petri dish that regulators elsewhere would have to pay attention to when scratching their heads over how to deal with an increasingly digitised world. But the devil is always in the detail, said Ma Rui, the founder of Tech Buzz China, an online tech community. “This is the new reality for China’s tech sector, and many are asking what the implications will be for doing business in China in the future. Compliance costs are rising for all businesses, but the tradeoff is that consumer rights may be better protected. The government claims it will protect innovation and small businesses with exemptions, but we will see if that works at all.” ‘Common prosperity’ and ‘social responsibility’ But, of course, one also has to bear in mind the bigger political and societal trends taking place in today’s China: the talk of “common prosperity” – a popular slogan these days in the country. “Achieving common prosperity is not just an economic issue, but a significant political one that matters to the party’s basis to rule,” Xi warned in January told his provincial ministerial-level cadres in January. To be sure, “common prosperity” is a noble goal in itself – one that western governments often struggle to achieve (here I recommend a good book: Trade Wars Are Class Wars: How Rising Inequality Distorts the Global Economy and Threatens International Peace, by Matthew Klein and Michael Pettis). But the crucial question is: what is the right way to achieve them, as political economist Yuen Yuen Ang, of University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, said to me this summer. So far, we’ve seen tech billionaires from Tencent’s Pony Ma to Xiaomi’s boss Lei Jun all of a sudden discovering their charitable side and donating billions of dollars to help the country achieve “common prosperity”, a move that only reinforced the sceptics’ view of China’s future. For years, Beijing had struggled to find an equilibrium between tech and the state. But now, it seems things are happening under the “common prosperity” banner. It is, undoubtedly, redefining the relationship between China’s technology sector, its society and China’s vast bureaucracy. (Although to be absolutely clear, it’s also ultimately an unequal relationship because of the role of the state and the ruling party in today’s China.) The “good old days” of “barbaric growth” – a popular phrase in Chinese lexicon that describes an anarchical expansion – for tech companies are gone now. In the future, they are not only expected to deliver profits for their shareholders, but they will be required to also shoulder social responsibilities, and to make sure the cake is divided between multiple players in the gigantic Chinese market. “It is a vision that embodies Xi’s take on next-gen Chinese socialism – one in which companies are welcome to accumulate wealth, but they can’t do it at the expense of the workers, and they must help the state achieve its national aims in the process,” said Schaefer. So, you’re going to hear a lot of talk about “social responsibility” in regulators’ framing of their policies in the tech sector, for example. Last week, China’s market regulator – the State Administration for Market Regulation (SAMR) – proposed a long list of responsibilities it wanted internet platforms to uphold. For the first time, it defined what it considers “super-large platforms” – including those with more than 500 million users and a market value of more than 1tn yuan. They were urged to, for example, be transparent when recommending products using big data. You won’t be surprised by the names of the companies the regulation may implicate: the likes of Tencent, Alibaba and Meituan. And you won’t be surprised, either, to hear that many Chinese consumers loved it. “The dissatisfaction among users has been accumulated over the years, and it seems Beijing is seizing on the moment to use one stone to kill two birds,” said Ma. ‘The sheriff of China’s Big Tech’ One of the most pressing issues China has been working on in recent years is data – a national security issue for Beijing. In September, the Data Security Law went into effect, giving the security services a prominent role, according to Graham Webster, the editor-in-chief of the DigiChina Project at the Stanford University Cyber Policy Center. This Law in theory affects nearly anything with the ability to store information. And on Monday, the Personal Information Protection Law (PIPL) came into effect, too, limiting, for example, what companies can do with consumer data. Under this legislation, websites must obtain explicit consent from users before hoovering up their personal information. Sounds familiar? “This new legislation could mean really substantial improvement for data protection in China’s private sector, and some of the world’s most direct regulations on algorithm use in markets. Or, it could be under-enforced and stall awaiting detailed regulations,” said Webster. But Webster also observed that Chinese authorities have been distributing data regulation powers across a wide array of sectoral regulators, as well as giving the new SAMR a role in platform governance. “This means the locus of digital policymaking is spreading,” he said to me. Talking about SAMR, this new regulatory body – founded three years ago – has been in the headlines a lot in recent months. Some news outlets call it “the sheriff of China’s Big Tech”. It’s so important that Pony Ma, the founder of Tencent, spoke with them at his own request early this year. Regulation with Chinese characteristics From Jack Ma to China’s equivalent of GDPR, the coherent theme in everything that’s been happening in China’s tech world in the past year is regulation. And, from Beijing’s point of view, there are three different types of regulations. 1) Regulations that keep up with the west: for example, PIPL. It is true that in the one party-controlled China, there is no ultimate privacy and the government can do whatever it wants due to a lack of proper checks and balances. But there’s also a huge grey area in which normal daily life takes place. In this sense, as Webster said, this Chinese equivalent to GDPR will benefit private citizens when they interact with tech companies. And it was years in the making, too. 2) Regulations that are Chinese idiosyncratic: these include things such as limiting the number of hours children can play online video games every week. It’s hard to imagine such regulations appear in Britain and America (although, anecdotally, some parents here also say they wish they could find a way to restrict the number of hours their children spend in front of computers). It’s not a new phenomenon under Xi Jinping. These type of regulations have been around for many years. 3) Regulations through which China wants to get ahead: Remember Facebook’s whistleblower Frances Haugen? “We liked social media before we had an algorithmic feed,” she told British lawmakers last week. In China, the government wants to regulate algorithms, too (although I keep wondering how they can effectively put bureaucrats in the role of evaluating complex and often opaque technical systems?). Then there’s digital yuan. Trials of the virtual currency are ongoing and Beijing is trying let foreign athletes to use it during next year’s Winter Olympics, according to a top central bank official. There are practical and technical questions – and we don’t know how much of an appetite there is among the general public. “This could be a big deal, or it could be mostly hype and imaginative thinking at this stage,” remarked Webster. But if Beijing can pull it off, it would be a significant development in China’s tech space. Capitals from Washington to London will take a keen interest, and it may set standards for other countries. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.In 1996 Andrew C Bulhak of Monash University created a computer program called the Postmodernism Generator, which automatically produces imitations of postmodernist writing. “It is a literally infinite source of randomly generated, syntactically correct nonsense, distinguishable from the real thing only in being more fun to read,” reported Richard Dawkins in his paper Postmodernism Disrobed. Here for instance is the real thing, written by the postmodern psychoanalytic theorist Felix Guattari: “We can clearly see that there is no bi-univocal correspondence between linear signifying links or archi-writing, depending on the author, and this multireferential, multi-dimensional machinic catalysis. The symmetry of scale, the transversality, the pathic non-discursive character of their expansion: all these dimensions remove us from the logic of the excluded middle and reinforce us in our dismissal of the ontological binarism we criticised previously.” I long put off writing about postmodernism, the slippery successor to modernism which seems to be an expression of neoliberal economics as much as it is an effort to dismantle cultural hierarchies. I didn’t want to spend time inside sentences such as those quoted. Still less did I want to inhabit its ugly buildings and formally playful novels. There’s only so much James Stirling and Salman Rushdie a guy can take. But in the end I gave in, writing my new book Everything, All the Time, Everywhere: How We Became Postmodern. Hopefully my book is about gibberish rather than an example of it. Some of the 10 books below are chock-full of high-stepping nonsense and I read several of them, dear reader, so you didn’t have to. But some are terrific pieces of writing that no Postmodernism Generator could produce. 1. I Love Dick by Chris Kraus In this heroically unreliable memoir-cum-novel, Kraus follows her professor husband to California on sabbatical, falls in love with one of his colleagues, Dick, and sends him lots of funny yet unrequited letters. The rest of the book is the epistolatory story of a woman, “Chris Kraus”, seizing control of the narrative. This is despite the fact that in real life, the postmodern critic Dick Hebdige issued Kraus with a cease and desist letter, and compared her intrusion into his life to the press’s stalking of Princess Diana. What makes Kraus’s book revolutionary is not just its reclamation of female subjectivity and sexuality, but its still-shocking sense that truth and fiction are not opposites, but locked in a lubricious lambada. 2. Postmodernism: Or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism by Fredric Jameson The Marxist theorist argues that art has been colonised by commerce. Modernist art (think: Van Gogh transforming personal misery into beauty) sought to redeem the world, he suggests. Postmodern art (think: Jenny Holzer putting an electronic billboard over New York’s Times Square reading, “Protect me from what I want” or Damien Hirst flogging a diamond-encrusted skull for £50m) was made by artists stuck in a world they could scarcely change. “The image,” he writes, “is the commodity today, and that is why it is vain to expect a negation of the logic of commodity production from it; that is why, finally, all beauty is meretricious.” All beauty is meretricious – an incredible yet plausible claim for our era. 3. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity by Judith Butler Is this randomly generated, syntactically correct nonsense or the book we need if we are to overturn the heteronormative patriarchy? You decide. Postmodern artists such as Cindy Sherman, David Bowie and Madonna had already playfully demonstrated the idea that gender is scripted and performed. Butler expanded on this theme in scandalously duff prose, eulogising drag for challenging “the exclusion of those who fail to conform to unspoken normative requirements of the subject”. Which is the thing to say if someone challenges you about watching Danny La Rue or RuPaul. 4. The Postmodernist Always Rings Twice by Gilbert Adair In the early 1990s, the Guardian’s arts editor had a brilliant idea. Let’s get a clever critic steeped in postmodern French theory to meditate on the week’s cultural commodity production. Adair obliged with essays on theatre, homosexuality, Umberto Eco and more, the best of which are collected here. The title alone is worth the cover price. Somebody once asked him if he was the Texas oilman Red Adair. No, Unread Adair, he replied sadly. Let’s make him read again. 5. The Satanic Verses by Salman Rushdie The storm that resulted from this book’s publication typified the clash of civilisations Samuel Huntington would later argue was arising in the aftermath of the cold war. On the one side, a pre-modern Islamic faithful believing in the absolute truth of the Qur’an. On the other, a sophisticated godless novelist apparently betraying his heritage and sneering at the Muslim sanctities. Even if you’re not convinced that The Satanic Verses is postmodern, then you will I hope admit that the episode of Larry David’s Curb Your Enthusiasm about the affair is pure po-mo. There Larry produces a Broadway musical called Fatwa! that, before passing through countless veils of irony and pastiche, culminates in Rushdie and Ayatollah Khomeini duetting about their clashing worldviews. 6. The Language of Postmodern Architecture by Charles Jencks “Boom, boom, boom,” wrote Jencks, the Basil Brush of postmodern theory. He was writing about the moment that the modern world died – at 3.32pm in St Louis, Missouri, on 15 July 1972. The dynamiting of the notorious Pruit-Igoe housing scheme was a noise that resonated around the world. His 1977 book describes what arose from its dust. 7. Learning from Las Vegas by Robert Venturi, Denise Scott Brown, and Steven Izenour This 1972 book hymned the architecture of the Vegas strip, that ostensibly democratic conflagration of signs in the desert, that city bankrolled by means of human stupidity and cupidity, that is to say gambling. The authors looked on this postmodern Sodom and Gomorrah and saw it as a popular, commercial, fun retort to the patrician, mostly socialist and utterly funless architecture of modernism. 8. A Thousand Plateaus by Gilles Deleuze and Felix Guattari Though even more unrepentantly incomprehensible than its companion book Anti-Oedipus, A Thousand Plateaus is valuable because it contains one of the key notions of postmodern theory. “It is odd,” the authors write, “how the tree has dominated western reality and all of western thought, from botany to anatomy, but also gnosiology, theology, all of philosophy: … the root-foundation, Grund, racine, fondement.” They propose another network structure, the rhizome, to substitute for that of the tree as a model for culture. “The rhizome resists the organisational structure of the root-tree system which charts causality along chronological lines and looks for the original source of ‘things’ and looks towards the pinnacle or conclusion of those ‘things.’” There’s more, so much more, of this and all of it in the Bloomsbury translation printed in a fittingly yucky font as if they intended to make the text even more inscrutable. Enjoy! 9. The Condition of Postmodernity by David Harvey The British Marxist geographer argues that neoliberalism is either a utopian project to reorganise international capitalism, or a political programme to restore the power of economic elites. He suggests that it is the latter, and that the role of postmodernism is to be cultural handmaiden to the political aims of Thatcher, Reagan and others. He demonstrates his thesis with the graphs, data and clear argument that postmodern theorists usually disdain. 10. Infinite Jest by David Foster Wallace The title of this baggy monster of a 1,058-page novel refers to an elusive film that terrorists are trying to get their hands on because to watch it is to be debilitated, even killed by enjoyment. Perhaps these terrorists will be able to entertain Americans to death, destroying the evil empire with the very cultural weaponry it deployed on its own citizens and exported around the world. Good luck with that, guys. “Entertainment’s chief job is to make you so riveted by it that you can’t tear your eyes away, so the advertisers can advertise,” said Foster Wallace in a 1996 interview to promote the novel. “And the tension of [Infinite Jest] is to try and make it at once extremely entertaining and also sort of warped – and to sort of shake the reader awake about some of the things that are sinister in entertainment.” The book’s tragedy, as is true of much postmodern culture, is that it succeeded in entertaining, but did it shake us awake from entertainment’s sinister lure? Not so much. Everything, All the Time Everywhere: How We Became Postmodern by Stuart Jeffries is published by Verso. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIn acting terms, Michael Caine brings his A-game to this – as does his co-star Aubrey Plaza. And when this script shows us a glimmer of something real and poignantly plausible between them, as it occasionally does, the film comes to life. Sadly though, it is mainly a rather silly high-concept dramedy intercut with maudlin moments, and the sentimental keynote inevitably dominates by the end. Plaza plays Lucy Stanbridge, the editorial director of a highly unlikely independent publishing house in New York (a little like Meg Ryan’s independent bookstore in You’ve Got Mail) founded by her father and now under financial threat. Desperate to stay profitable, Lucy realises that she is contractually entitled to ask for a new book from the ageing, reclusive and sweary Brit novelist Harris Shaw, played by Caine, a grumpy widower who lives way upstate in a tumbledown house. She chivvies and bullies the adorable old curmudgeon into handing over his new manuscript and going on a book promotion tour – and, of course, his angry, old-fashioned attitude and splenetic outbursts get him a cult following (cue the now outrageously cliched going-viral-on-YouTube montage). Shaw is an old-school writer who doesn’t care about being relatable and building his brand online: he even assaults a sneery critic, played in cameo by Cary Elwes. There are a couple of quite sweet moments here, with Lucy and Harris actually sharing a motel room on the road and developing a close father-daughter relationship, or rather grandfather-granddaughter relationship, which is complicated when we find out the truth about her dad, and his relationship with Shaw. Mainly the film is silly and unlikely, though, which is a shame because Caine can still bring it. Christopher Nolan gives him great small parts with real bite. Surely someone can offer him a substantial feature role that isn’t sentimental slush? • Best Sellers is out now on digital platforms.This deliciously sticky ginger cake from the north of England is traditionally eaten around Bonfire Night, when its dense oatiness makes it the perfect thing to pass round from a tin as you watch the fireworks. Robust enough to travel well, and moist enough to keep for weeks, it’s also a sound choice for camping, hiking and packed lunches at any time of the year. Prep 15 min Cook 1 hr 30 min+ Makes 16 pieces 120g treacle 80g golden syrup 170g butter, plus extra to grease 200g wholemeal flour 200g medium oatmeal (see step 3) 3 tsp ground ginger ½ tsp ground nutmeg 175g soft dark brown sugar ¼ tsp fine salt 1½ tsp bicarbonate of soda 1 egg 45ml milk 1 Melt the treacle, syrup and butter Heat the oven to 160C (140C fan)/310F/gas 2½. Weigh out the treacle, syrup and butter into a medium saucepan (I recommend using a spoon dipped in boiling water to make life easier with the sticky ingredients – they should just slide off) and place on a medium heat, stirring occasionally, until melted together. Do not let the mix come to a boil. 2 Grease and line the baking tin Take off the heat and set aside. Generously grease a roughly 20cm baking tin (or an 18cm x 23cm rectangular one, though a little bigger or smaller won’t matter too much) with the extra butter and line with baking paper, if necessary making small cuts in the corners to help it fit better. 3 Mix the dry ingredients Combine the flour, oatmeal (note that this is not the same as the rolled oats often sold for porridge down south; if it isn’t stocked in your usual shopping destination, it can usually be found in healthfood shops; if you prefer a rougher texture, use coarse oatmeal instead), spices, sugar, salt and bicarb in a large bowl and whisk to mix. 4 Add the treacle mix Pour the treacle mixture into the dry ingredients, stirring until no more dry pockets of flour are visible. Beat the egg with the milk, then stir into the cake mixture to create a batter that’s loose enough to pour into the tin – if it’s still a bit too thick, add a little more milk. 5 Pour into the tin and bake Pour into the tin, level the top, then bake until it’s just firm in the centre and the cake springs back when pressed with a cautious finger – this will probably take between an hour and a half and an hour and three-quarters, but check it regularly towards the end to ensure the parkin doesn’t overcook. 6 Cool, then cut into squares Leave the cake to cool in the tin for at least 30 minutes, then turn out, cut into squares and either serve warm (it’s lovely with ice-cream) or leave to cool completely and store in an airtight tin for up to three weeks – like malt loaf, the texture will improve after baking and become stickier with time. 7 Alternative flavourings If you’re not a fan of ginger or nutmeg, you can substitute them for other warm spices: cinnamon, allspice, ground cloves, cardamom or mixed spice will all be good here (add them to taste), as would grated citrus zest or chopped stem ginger. You could also fold chopped nuts, seeds or dried fruit into the mixture to make it more substantial. 8 To ice or not to ice Parkin is not traditionally iced but, as a southerner, I say break the rules if you feel like it. Sift 225g icing sugar into a bowl, then add the zest and juice of a lemon to bring it to a drizzling consistency, adding more water if necessary. Spoon over the top of the cooled cake and leave to set. 9 Vegan and gluten-free options Vegans: Meera Sodha has an excellent-sounding plant-based parkin recipe on the Guardian website. And, given its high oat content, parkin is also relatively easy to make gluten-free – use gluten-free flour blends, or replace the wheat with oat flour for a denser, but still delicious result. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoUp to 1.3 million cattle would have to be culled in Ireland to reach anticipated government targets for reducing greenhouse gases in the agriculture sector, a new report has concluded. Irish farmers are expecting the worst after taoiseach Micheál Martin described the report by KPMG, commissioned by weekly newspaper the Irish Farmers Journal, as “scaremongering”. The debate over agriculture’s role in reducing carbon emissions is a hugely controversial topic in Ireland, pitting Dublin against rural communities. The country has long relied on farming, alongside multinational investment, to drive its economy. Irish beef and dairy brands such as Kerrygold and Pilgrims Choice are among its most successful exports. But Irish agriculture is under huge pressure: 35% of national greenhouse gases come from the sector, the highest level in Europe, where the average is 11%. And more than 60% of that comes from methane associated with belching by ruminant animals. More than 100 countries pledged to reduce methane emissions by 30% by 2030 in Glasgow on Tuesday in an initiative put forward by the US and the EU. Although methane breaks down relatively quickly in the atmosphere, it is a more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide. Reducing these emissions has been touted as one of the most immediate opportunities to slow global heating. Stephen Prendiville, head of sustainability at the EY consultancy in Dublin, said the debate about methane “had been lost” in the narrative about the climate emergency and this would help countries reliant on agriculture to focus on how to “operationalise” reductions. Irish climate emergency plans The Irish government is due to unveil its sector-by-sector climate emergency plans on Thursday and is considering a 21% to 30% cut in carbon emissions from the agriculture sector. KPMG looked at four scenarios, concluding that rural Ireland faced a €4bn hit to the economy and the loss of more than 56,000 jobs if the government opted for the 30% target. It also warned that a 30% cut would require a 20% cut in cattle numbers, 22% of the beef herd and 18% of the dairy herd. With 6.5 million cattle in the country according to official Central Statistics Office data this equates to a reduction of 1.3 million of the national herd. The lower target of 21% would mean a reduction of about 5%, or 325,000 cattle, according to the KPMG analysis. “Farmers desperately hope that it doesn’t come to this [culling],” said Phelim O’Neill, editor of the Irish Farmers Journal. “There is widespread acknowledgement that we need to reduce emissions”, he said but he had commissioned the report to put some facts back into the “heated debate” that is giving famers “climate anxiety” about their futures. The debate has pitted Dublin versus rural Ireland, with farmers feeling they are being unfairly targeted without government assessments of the impact on their industry. The president of the Irish Farmers’ Association, Tim Cullinan, said it was “extraordinary” to hear the taoiseach say the report was scaremongering. Martin told RTE on Tuesday: “I think we need to be very careful of that scaremongering,” after reports that targets at the lower end of the scale would result in 10,000 fewer jobs in agriculture. “Farming will have to change,” he said. Cullinan said: “We have repeatedly asked for such an exercise to be carried out by our government, but they have refused to do so. Micheál Martin is shooting in the dark and he has no idea what the economic or social impact of these ceilings will be in rural areas.” Ireland has committed to reducing carbon emissions by 50% by 2030 with a cabinet subcommittee meeting on Wednesday to finalise the sector details. Martin told RTE the country had “no choice” and if it did not commit to the targets it would affect the country’s “economic sustainability”. He also admitted that over the past decade carbon emissions in the country had increased and “that is problematic”. This article was amended on 4 November 2021 to remove an incorrect suggestion that Ireland does not have a significant manufacturing sector. Sign up for the Animals farmed monthly update to get a roundup of the biggest farming and food stories across the world and keep up with our investigations. You can send us your stories and thoughts at animalsfarmed@theguardian.comJoe Biden returned to the US in the pre-dawn gloom on Wednesday to a climate agenda still held in frustrating limbo by Congress, following his high-profile cameo at crunch UN climate talks in Scotland that was heavy on dire warnings but light on deep cuts to planet-heating emissions. The US president had aimed to arrive in Glasgow for the Cop26 summit with historic climate legislation in hand, which he could use to brandish at world leaders who still harbor resentments over four turbulent years of Donald Trump, where the climate crisis was variously ignored and mocked. Instead, the intransigence of Senator Joe Manchin, a centrist Democrat and leading beneficiary of fossil fuel industry largesse, has left the landmark climate bill pared back and not voted upon, its fate left uncertain throughout Biden’s trip. In Glasgow, Biden vowed America will “lead by the power of our example”, but was the target of activist protests over oil and gas leases issued back home, while leaders of several major emitters either did not show up or failed to submit vastly improved emissions reduction plans. Biden ended his time in Scotland by ladling blame upon China for not taking the climate emergency seriously. “The most important thing the president needed to do was reassure the rest of the world that the US is back in addressing this global crisis,” said Christy Goldfuss, an environment adviser to Barack Obama and now a policy expert at the Center for American Progress. “But we have to have some humility, we have ground to make up. We can’t reclaim the mantle of leadership until the US can deliver on its commitments. Every Democrat, apart from one senator, supports climate action. That is untenable and everyone understands that.” Biden has sought to play up the positives of his time at Cop26, where he has left negotiators to thrash out a deal aimed at averting disastrous global heating of beyond 1.5C. “I can’t think of any two days where more has been accomplished on climate,” he said. The highlights include a global pledge, led by the US and European Union, to slash methane, a potent greenhouse gas, by 30% by 2030, based on last year’s levels. More than 100 countries, including six of the 10 largest emitters of methane, have signed on to the agreement to cut methane, which is spewed out by oil and gas drilling operations and agriculture and is about 80 times more powerful in trapping heat than carbon dioxide. Biden backed this move with new regulations rolled out by the US Environment Protection Agency to cut methane emissions by about 75% from hundreds of thousands of oil and gas wells. “The pledge to cut methane is the single biggest and fastest bite out of today’s warming,” said Durwood Zaelke, president of the Institute for Governance and Sustainable Development. There was also a sweeping accord, which Biden vowed to support with billions of dollars, to end deforestation within a decade. The pact encompasses 85% of the world’s forests, vital for biodiversity and to soak up excess carbon from the atmosphere, and is backed by Brazil, Russia and China, countries often reluctant to make such promises. But the US was clearly piqued at how little the relentless diplomacy of John Kerry, Biden’s climate envoy, had done to extract deeper emissions cuts from leading carbon polluters. Neither Russia’s Vladimir Putin nor China’s Xi Jinping, who both offered barely improved new targets at the talks, traveled to Glasgow. Biden’s frustration bubbled over as he prepared to depart on Tuesday. “The fact that China is trying assert a new role in the world as a world leader, not showing up? Come on,” Biden said. “It’s just a gigantic issue and they’ve walked away. How do you do that and claim to have any leadership now? Same with Putin in Russia: his tundra is burning. Literally his tundra is burning. He has serious, serious climate problems and he’s mum on his willingness to do anything.” The blame placed at Cop upon China, which is now the world’s largest emitter of greenhouse gases, comes amid frayed US-China relations on several fronts. The Global Times, a newspaper run by China’s Communist party, said in an editorial that Washington’s attitude had made it “impossible for China to see any potential to have fair negotiation amid the tensions”. Goldfuss said: “The blame game is not something the US should be really playing right now given we have so much work to do ourselves.” Back home, Biden has acknowledged his presidency will probably be defined by the proposed reconciliation bill that contains $555bn in climate measures. The White House says the legislation would bring the country close to the president’s goal of cutting emissions in half this decade and help curb disastrous climate breakdown that is already unleashing severe heatwaves, floods and drought at home and around the world. The far-reaching legislation needs every Democratic vote to pass the Senate but West Virginia’s Manchin has questioned its scope, said it is filled with “gimmicks” and has already ensured that a centerpiece plan to phase out fossil fuels from the American electricity grid was axed from the bill. Democrats continue to fret over the fate of the bill, with a vote that could take place as early as this week, with Biden saying he is “confident we will get it done”. But climate campaigners say the president could do more without the help of Congress to stem the flow of fossil fuels that are causing the climate crisis. The opening week of Cop26 saw Biden’s administration announce it will sell off oil and gas drilling leases across 730,000 acres of the US west, with a further auction of 80m offshore acres of the Gulf of Mexico, an area larger than the UK, set to commence later this month. The International Energy Agency has said that no new fossil fuel projects can commence if the world is to keep to the agreed 1.5C warming limit. “With all eyes on Glasgow this week, the Biden administration seems to be turning its back on reality and throwing climate leadership into the toilet,” said Jeremy Nichols, climate and energy program director for WildEarth Guardians.The UK’s longest-lasting snow patch, which has survived countless summers on a remote mountainside in the Cairngorms, has melted away for only the eighth time in 300 years as the Cop26 climate talks take place in Glasgow. Nicknamed “the Sphinx”, the hardy patch of snow is found on Braeriach, Scotland’s third-highest mountain at 1,296 metres (4,252ft), near Aviemore. It had shrunk to the size of an A4 piece of paper in recent weeks before finally disappearing in mild weather. Iain Cameron, an expert in snow cover who has been studying snow patches in Scotland for 25 years, said global heating was a significant factor. “How ironic and prescient it is that our longest-lasting patch of snow melted for the third time in five years, right on the eve of Cop26. Before 2000 it had melted only three times in the last 150 years.” According to records, the Sphinx previously melted fully in 1933, 1959, 1996, 2003, 2006, 2017 and 2018. Before 1933, it is thought to have last melted completely in the 1700s. Cameron, author of the book The Vanishing Ice, said warmer weather caused by the climate crisis “seemed to be the logical” explanation for the increased rate of melting. “What we are seeing from research are smaller and fewer patches of snow. Less snow is falling now in winter than in the 1980s and even the 1990s.” The Sphinx lies in Garbh Choire Mor, a hollow known as a corrie that was formed by ice or a glacier during the last ice age. A report commissioned by Cairngorms national park authority and published last year said declining snow cover had been observed on Cairngorm mountain since the winter of 1983-84. Researchers also noted a trend for increasingly warmer weather since the 1960s, and suggested that by the 2080s there would be some years with very little or no snow at all on Cairngorm. Before Scotland’s ski resorts were hit by coronavirus closures, they faced one of their most difficult seasons in 2019, with a lack of snow forcing many slopes to close. Lauren McCallum, of the international climate crisis campaign group Protect Our Winters, said the Cairngorms – and wider world – needed to be protected from further rises in temperature. She said: “We have to maintain a healthy temperature for our ecosystems and communities to survive.”BMW earned bigger profits than expected in the third quarter of 2021 after a focus on more expensive cars and electric vehicles helped the German premium carmaker to ride out a global shortage of computer chips. Profits before tax rose to €3.4bn (£2.9bn) between July and September, a 38% increase compared with 2020 and a 52% increase on 2019, before the coronavirus pandemic hit, BMW said on Wednesday. BMW achieved the profit rise in spite of a 12% year-on-year decline in overall vehicle sales to 593,000, as it switched production to higher-margin cars such as the x7 sport utility vehicle. Revenues rose by 4.5% to €27bn. Carmakers have been caught out during the global shortages of computer chips, which are made from semiconductors, as demand for electronics soared after the short-lived plunge as the coronavirus first hit. Carmakers rely increasingly on computer chips to control everything from air conditioning to electric car batteries but they cut orders in anticipation of lower sales, leaving them exposed when sales recovered. Oliver Zipse, BMW’s chief executive, said the company was “overcoming difficult situations”, including the lingering effects of the coronavirus pandemic and the situation with semiconductor supplies. He added that sales momentum for electric and plug-in hybrid cars was particularly strong, with sales doubling between January and September. However, fully electric cars – which do not produce carbon dioxide exhaust emissions, unlike hybrids – only accounted for 60,000 sales over that period, or 3% of total deliveries. Zipse said he was confident that BMW would continue to make significant gains in electric vehicle sales in 2022. Orders for new electric cars, including the iX SUV and the i4 saloon, remained strong, the company said. BMW’s ability to ride out the shortages contrasted to some of the difficulties of other carmakers and particularly their suppliers. Nevertheless, Zipse said more investment was required in Europe in semiconductor manufacturing, given the European car industry’s reliance on imports from countries such as Taiwan and South Korea. Volkswagen, BMW’s German rival, last week reported falling profits because of the semiconductor shortage, while Stellantis, formed this year by the merger between Fiat and Peugeot, said revenues had fallen. The boss of Audi, Volkswagen’s premium brand, said he expected chip supplies to remain tight at least until summer, while its Skoda brand said production this year would fall by about 250,000 cars.The first trial of a drug to target the fatigue and muscle weakness experienced by more than half of people with long Covid has been launched in the UK. It is also the first drug trial in long Covid patients who were not hospitalised during their initial infection. The drug, called AXA1125, targets cellular power plants called mitochondria, which it is thought could be dysfunctional in the subset of long Covid patients with severe fatigue. If successful, it could pave the way for similar trials in patients with other forms of post-viral fatigue, including myalgic encephalomyelitis/chronic fatigue syndrome (ME/CFS). Mitochondria help to regulate various cellular processes, and play a crucial role in transforming the chemical energy from our diets into adenosine triphosphate (ATP) – the energy currency that cells depend on to drive essential reactions. Supplies of ATP are quickly exhausted, so cells must constantly regenerate it. This can be done through a process called glycolysis, which produces lactic acid as a byproduct. But ATP is produced more efficiently through oxidative phosphorylation, which involves the mitochondria. Mounting evidence suggests Sars-CoV-2 can hijack cells’ mitochondria, boosting viral replication but disrupting ATP production in the process. “In essence, it’s a fuel switch. The virus invades the mitochondria and seeks to move it towards glycolysis to produce more viral particles, but it leaves the cell damaged,” said Bill Hinshaw, the president and chief executive of Axcella, which developed the new drug. An estimated 56% of long Covid patients suffer from fatigue and many also struggle to exercise. “We originally thought that these symptoms were related to organ inflammation,” said Dr Betty Raman at the University of Oxford, who is researching the impact of Covid-19 on organ health. “But six months down the track, we found that although the heart and lungs were seen to be recovering, these people were still unable to exercise.” Further investigation revealed that they were accumulating lactic acid in their muscles at a faster rate than healthy individuals – a possible sign of mitochondrial dysfunction. “In a normal, healthy person, the mitochondria will be very active in replenishing the ATP to sustain energy,” Raman said. AXA1125 is designed to normalise mitochondrial metabolism in diseases where it may be out of balance. So far it has been tested in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, with some promising results. Raman is launching a study in 40 patients with severe post-Covid fatigue to see if it can improve their exercise tolerance, reduce fatigue and improve mitochondrial metabolism in their muscle tissue – something that can be visualised using imaging techniques. Half will be given AXA1125 for 28 days, and the other half a placebo drug. Results are expected by mid-2022. “I don’t think this one drug will be the solution to everything because long Covid is such a complex disease, but [if it works] it will benefit a significant proportion of patients,” Raman said. Prof Amitava Banerjee, of University College London, who is spearheading a separate trial of long Covid diagnostics and treatments, said: “It is really good to be trialling different drugs and different mechanisms. Mitochondrial dysfunction in fatigue is something that’s been written about and studied for some time, but we don’t know how common it is in this patient population, or how it correlates with the severity of their symptoms.” He is waiting for approval to begin trials of “repurposed” drugs such as antihistamines and aspirin in long Covid patients who were not hospitalised. A trial to identify treatments to boost recovery after Covid-19 patients are discharged from hospital is already under way. Banerjee said: “Whatever we’re trialling, we know there’s tens of thousands of people either waiting to be seen or being seen in clinics. Any new treatments need to be translatable and accessible quickly.” If AXA1125 does help to reduce fatigue in long Covid, there could also be important implications for people with ME/CFS, according to Dr Charles Shepherd, a medical adviser at the ME Association. “We now have a considerable amount of research evidence to indicate that there is mitochondrial dysfunction in ME/CFS, and that the effect this has on muscle energy metabolism appears to be a significant contributory factor in the activity induced-fatigue that occurs.”The Barbican arts centre in London has pledged to introduce diversity targets for its workforce as part of a commitment to becoming an “inclusive, diverse, and equitable arts centre”. The centre’s leadership apologised for the “pain and distress” experienced by some staff and said it was “committed to becoming an anti-racist organisation, which will not tolerate discrimination, bullying or prejudice”. Its statement comes after the publication of Barbican Stories this year, which contained accounts from staff describing the use of racist language and failure to investigate claims of racist behaviour. The Barbican launched an internal review amid reports of a “mass exodus” of employees. The statement said staff “felt they had to speak publicly to galvanise the organisation and to reveal a culture that must change”. It acknowledged that it had not changed fast enough, but said: “We have listened, continue to listen, and we are responding.” New leadership at the centre was committed to equity, diversity and inclusion, it added. The statement continued: “To change on the outside means changing on the inside. We will diversify our workforce and foster an inclusive culture where all our people feel they belong and are able to bring their whole selves to work. “We will set diversity targets for our workforce, to ensure we become an organisation that looks and feels like the community we are based in. We commit to prioritising representation at a senior level, as well as throughout the organisation. “We are committed to becoming an anti-racist organisation, which will not tolerate discrimination, bullying or prejudice. It is important that each and every person who works at the Barbican feels safe, valued, and respected. “If we are alerted to any offensive, threatening, or intimidating behaviour – by either a colleague, audience member, or collaborator – we will be quick and firm in addressing the issue.” Barbican Stories included accounts of employees being racially profiled by the Barbican’s security staff. Others said they had been assumed to be cleaners, and a black employee recalled being asked if he could sell a colleague cannabis. Several described an environment in which people of colour were openly referred to as a “diversity hire”. Staff recalled being routinely mistaken for other people of the same ethnicity in meetings. Following the murder of George Floyd in 2020 and the worldwide Black Lives Matter protests, the Barbican was one of several British arts institutions, including Tate and Somerset House, which pledged to address inequality.A 45-year-old man has been charged with murdering his new bride after her body was found dumped in a suitcase. Dawn Walker, 52, of Halifax, was found dead in a suitcase in the village of Lightcliffe, three miles east of Halifax, West Yorkshire, on Sunday. Friends described her as kind, caring and friendly and said she had married Thomas Nutt just four days earlier. West Yorkshire police said Nutt, 45, of Shirley Grove, Lightcliffe, had been charged with Walker’s murder and he was due to appear before magistrates in Bradford. Walker’s family said in a statement released by police: “We write this with a very heavy heart that yesterday we lost a loving daughter, mother, nanna, sister, auntie and friend. In circumstances beyond our control, you were taken from us so suddenly. We ask at this time as a family, that you respect our privacy and allow us to grieve.” Walker’s daughter Codie-Marie Shaw posted on Facebook: “Words can’t describe our pain right now. RIP Mum.” George Robinson, who represents the Hipperholme and Lightcliffe ward on Calderdale council, said: “This is devastating news for our community. On behalf of everyone in the ward, our thoughts and prayers go out to those that have lost their loved one. This is all very raw, and it would be improper to speculate on the circumstances.” Robinson said he had contacted the council and police to ask what plans there were to engage and support the local community. “I’ve also asked if the local schools have been briefed and how our young people will be supported,” he said. “We’re a close-knit community in Lightcliffe, and it’s an upsetting time for everyone. Please do check in on your neighbours to ensure they are OK.”Jarvis Cocker sashays on – all velvet jacket and garish kipper tie. He throws some shapes, then simply stands, arms weirdly akimbo, to rapturous applause. The pandemic stopped him touring, but he hasn’t forgotten how to make an entrance. Jarv Is … are finally touring 2020’s Beyond the Pale, the 58-year-old’s best set of songs since Pulp. His band now includes a harpist and a violinist. Otherwise, the breathy asides and Roxy Music/Scott Walker influences remain, and his stage moves – Elvis Presley meets tipsy English teacher at the local nightclub – are so ingrained they’re effortless. Lyrically, though, he’s taking ever more askew glances at an ever-changing world. House Music All Night Long – not only dance music, but domestic music – began as a rumination on ageing but accidentally ended up “describing what we’ve all been doing for the last two years”. The terrific Must I Evolve? traces mankind’s de-evolution from the big bang to a rave in a tunnel near the M25. A haunting new song – currently titled both Slow Jam and Bad Friday – describes a conversation with Jesus, who is bored to tears with talking about the crucifixion, and the lyrics perhaps reflect Cocker’s own weariness of talking about Britpop, 90s tabloid hell and the aftermath of shaking his bottom at Michael Jackson at the Brits. There’s no Common People. Instead, the 90-minute set traverses the corners of his career. He sings Aline (from new film The French Dispatch) in French, visits the lovely Big Julie and tears into Further Complications. He says he wasn’t sure whether to play (Cunts Are Still) Running the World during Cop26, but decided “the jury is still out” and it becomes an epic singalong. He seems genuinely touched by the crowd’s warmth, and reveals that after two years’ absence he’d fretted if he could still do it. As if on cue, Pulp’s early classic My Legendary Girlfriend initially collapses, but Cocker rescues proceedings like a pro. “It’s just like the old days,” he chuckles. “Febrile! Edgy!” He’s still got it. At Boiler Shop, Newcastle (Wednesday, 3 November), the Invisible Wind Factory (5 November). Then touring.Belfast, Kenneth Branagh’s autobiographical tale of growing up during the Troubles, and one-shot restaurant-kitchen drama Boiling Point, starring Stephen Graham, have emerged as the frontrunners for the British independent film awards (Bifas) as both picked up 11 nominations. Branagh’s film, which emerged as a serious Oscar contender after winning the influential People’s Choice award at the Toronto film festival, scored four acting nods, for Caitríona Balfe, Judi Dench, Ciarán Hinds and for its young lead Jude Hill, but surprisingly was not nominated as best British independent film or for the directing and writing categories. Boiling Point, which premiered to acclaim at the Karlovy Vary festival in the Czech Republic, also secured four acting nominations (including one for Graham), as well as best British independent film and best director for Philip Barantini. After Love, starring Joanna Scanlan as a woman who discovers her husband’s secret life after he dies, scored an impressive nine nominations, including best actress for Scanlan and best director and screenplay for Aleem Khan. Also on nine is The Souvenir Part II from writer-director Joanna Hogg, the follow-up to Hogg’s 2019 The Souvenir, which was nominated for eight Bifas. The winners will be announced on 5 December at a ceremony in London. Full list of nominees Best British independent film After Love Ali &amp; Ava Boiling Point The Nest The Souvenir Part II Best director Philip Barantini, Boiling Point Clio Barnard, Ali &amp; Ava Sean Durkin, The Nest Joanna Hogg, The Souvenir Part II Aleem Khan, After Love Best actress Caitríona Balfe, Belfast Carrie Coon, The Nest Claire Rushbrook, Ali &amp; Ava Joanna Scanlan, After Love Ruth Wilson, True Things Best actor Riz Ahmed, Encounter Adeel Akhtar, Ali &amp; Ava Stephen Graham, Boiling Point Jude Law, The Nest James Norton, Nowhere Special Best supporting actress Judi Dench, Belfast Jo Hartley, Sweetheart Nathalie Richard, After Love Vinette Robinson, Boiling Point Tilda Swinton, The Souvenir Part II Best supporting actor Talid Ariss, After Love Richard Ayoade, The Souvenir Part II Lucian-River Chauhan, Encounter Ciarán Hinds, Belfast Ray Panthaki, Boiling Point Douglas Hickox award (best debut director) Prano Bailey-Bond, Censor Celeste Bell, Poly Styrene: I Am a Cliché [also directed by Paul Sng] Cathy Brady, Wildfire Aleem Khan, After Love Marley Morrison, Sweetheart Breakthrough performance Lauryn Ajufo, Boiling Point Nell Barlow, Sweetheart Max Harwood, Everybody’s Talking About Jamie Jude Hill, Belfast Ellora Torchia, In the Earth Best documentary Cow Dying to Divorce I Am Belmaya Keyboard Fantasies Poly Styrene: I Am a Cliché Best screenplay Clio Barnard, Ali &amp; Ava Terence Davies, Benediction Sean Durkin, The Nest Joanna Hogg, The Souvenir Part II Aleem Khan, After Love Breakthrough producer Michelle Antoniades, Sweetheart Helen Jones, Censor Jessica Malik, She Will [also produced by Bob Last] Hester Ruoff, Boiling Point [also produced by Bart Ruspoli] Rob Watson, The Power [also produced by Matthew James Wilkinson] Best debut screenwriter Prano Bailey-Bond, Censor [also written by Anthony Fletcher] Cathy Brady, Wildfire Aleem Khan, After Love Marley Morrison, Sweetheart Reggie Yates, Pirates Raindance Discovery award Bank Job The Bike Thief I Am Belmaya Poly Styrene: I Am a Cliché Rebel Dykes Best British short film Egúngún (Masquerade) Femme Night of the Living Dread Play It Safe Precious Hair &amp; Beauty Best international independent film Compartment No 6 First Cow Flee Petite Maman Pleasure Best casting After Love Ali &amp; Ava Pirates Belfast Boiling Point Best cinematography The Nest Cow Boiling Point Censor Belfast Best costume design The Electrical Life of Louis Wain The Souvenir Part II Everybody’s Talking About Jamie Benediction Belfast Best music Pirates Ali &amp; Ava Encounter In the Earth Belfast Best effects Dashcam Censor The Electrical Life Of Louis Wain Best editing The Souvenir Part II Cow Belfast Censor In the Earth Best makeup &amp; hair The Souvenir Part II The Electrical Life Of Louis Wain Censor Everybody’s Talking About Jamie Belfast Best production design Belfast The Souvenir Part II The Electrical Life Of Louis Wain Boiling Point Censor Best sound Cow Boiling Point Censor In the Earth EncounterGeorge Gater was a congenial colleague at the National Economic Development Office (NEDO) in the 1970s. Some of his colleagues involved in the organisation of the “little neddies”, the industrial working parties, tended to favour the interests of particular sectors. But George never lost sight of the ultimate purpose of the activity – improving the performance of the British economy – on which economists like me were more focused. Our lunchtime conversations ranged more widely, to such matters as the influence of social and historical factors in national economic performance.Children locked in their rooms for up to 23 hours a day, young teenagers exposed to violence and excessive force, safeguarding systems in disarray: for those of us familiar with G4S’s record of running prisons, these appalling practices found at Oakhill secure training centre, a children’s prison in Milton Keynes, come as no surprise. The security giant G4S has a long and undistinguished history of running children’s prisons – something that the new justice secretary, Dominic Raab, who has been in post for less than two months, is evidently still naive about. The findings from Oakhill last month by the joint inspectorates Ofsted, the Care Quality Commission and HM Inspectorate of Prisons were so damning that they issued an urgent notification to Raab to respond with proposals to remedy the situation within 28 days. The situation at Oakhill was “unacceptable”, he tweeted; the details of the report “truly shocking”. But these results are not shocking at all, in fact they are horribly familiar – a repetition of failings and abuses that have occurred ever since the security giant opened the very first secure training centre (STC), Medway, in Kent, in April 1998. By January 1999 there had been a riot there, and a report from the social services inspectorate concluded that children were subject to “excessive use of force”, including neck and wrist restraints. In 2004, 15-year-old Gareth Myatt died three days into his sentence after being restrained by three G4S officers at Rainsbrook STC near Rugby in Warwickshire. The restraint followed his refusal to clean a sandwich toaster. Myatt was under 5ft tall and weighed six and a half stone; one of the restraining officers was 6ft tall and weighed 16 stone. During the restraint Myatt said he could not breathe. He was told: “If you can talk, you can breathe.” He died from positional asphyxia, choking on his own vomit. In 2016, Panorama secretly filmed staff physically abusing children at Medway, while the Guardian revealed similar abuses had been reported to G4S and all the relevant monitoring bodies as far back as 2003, but nothing had been done about it. The Guardian also interviewed two women who had been detained in Medway as children in 2010. Roni Moss was left locked in her room by herself while having a miscarriage at the age of 15, while Lela Xhemajli, also 15 when she was imprisoned, alleged that her face was repeatedly smashed on icy ground by a G4S officer. These investigations led to G4S being stripped of its contract to run Medway STC, and the company announcing it was pulling out of the youth prisons sector in 2016. The Ministry of Justice (MoJ) announced that STCs would be replaced by secure schools, and that the first one would open on the Medway site in 2020. Five years on, it is yet to open – and G4S is still running Oakhill. G4S is clearly recidivist. The inspectorates made a preliminary visit to Oakhill, which currently holds 46 boys between the ages of 12-17, in September after a whistleblower had alleged abuses to the children’s rights charity Article 39. They found conditions that “barely met minimum standards of human decency”. When they returned in October for a full inspection, the list of failings was extensive. Unjustifiable – and in some cases unlawful – levels of force were being used by staff on children as young as 15; children experienced frequent incidents of violence; allegations made about staff abuses were not passed to the local authority by G4S, contrary to statutory guidance; children had access to inappropriate adult content via televisions in their rooms. To be fair, G4S is not the only private security company that has failed the children in its care. In June this year, the inspectorates ruled that serious and widespread failings at Rainsbrook, run by the US-based contractor MTC, had put children and staff at risk of harm. After children told inspectors they feared that someone was going to die or be seriously harmed, the inspectorates triggered an urgent notification for the second time in six months. The MoJ then removed the children from the centre; some were transferred to Oakhill. In August 2004, 14-year-old Adam Rickwood hanged himself after being restrained at Hassockfield STC in County Durham by four Serco officers using a technique known as “nose distraction” – a painful chop to the nose. The inquest jury concluded that the restraint was unlawful and contributed to the decision to take his own life. The government has shown itself equally incapable of looking after our incarcerated children. In 2019, the inspectorates reported that staff at Medway, by now run by the MoJ, were still restraining young people unlawfully. Britain’s secure training centres are simply not fit for purpose. It is a change of culture that is needed, not a change of management or name. These institutions must focus on education and rehabilitation as the Spanish do so successfully, rather than the punishment and pain they have subjected children to. They should be run by qualified carers with ambitions for the children rather than unqualified custody officers, many of whom see their job as metaphorically (and sometimes literally) squashing them. But in the short term, the justice secretary has to deal with Oakhill and G4S. And surely Raab can only reach one conclusion when he responds to the urgent notification about Oakhill within the coming week. G4S has shown time and again that it cannot be trusted to care for vulnerable children. It must be relieved of its contract and banned from running our children’s prisons. This will be the first step in fixing a broken system. Eric Allison is the Guardian’s prisons correspondent; Simon Hattenstone is a Guardian writerDowning Street has confirmed that Boris Johnson backs an extraordinary attempt by backbench Conservative MPs to shake up the parliamentary standards system, in order to protect their colleague Owen Paterson. A No 10 spokesperson said: “This isn’t about one case, but providing members of parliament from all political parties with the right to a fair hearing.” They pointed to the lack of an appeals process when parliament’s sleaze watchdog finds against an MP, saying: “As in any normal workplace and all walks of life, people should be entitled to the right to appeal. This is sacrosanct in providing fairness and natural justice, and ensuring there is an opportunity to check due process and that the right procedures were followed.” Downing Street sources confirmed that meant the prime minister was supporting an amendment tabled by the former leader of the House of Commons Andrea Leadsom that would halt Paterson’s suspension. It was confirmed that the amendment had been selected by the Speaker, and would thus be voted on by MPs later on Wednesday. The parliamentary commissioner for standards called for the North Shropshire MP to be suspended after he committed an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules on behalf of two companies that were paying him more than £100,000. Labour’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, challenged Johnson directly over the issue at prime minister’s questions, accusing him of trying to “change the rules to allow cash for access”. Standing in for Keir Starmer, who is self-isolating with Covid, Rayner told the prime minister: “In no other profession in our country could someone be found guilty by an independent process and just have their mates vote them back into the job.” Replying, Johnson thumped the dispatch box as he said “paid advocacy is wrong”, but insisted that was “not the issue in this case”. “The issue in this case, which involves a serious family tragedy, is whether a member of this house had a fair opportunity to make representations in this case, and whether as a matter of natural justice our procedures in this house allow for proper appeal.” He accused Labour of “playing politics”, but Rayner said: “If it was a police officer, a teacher, a doctor, we would expect the independent process to be followed and not changed after the verdict – it’s one rule for them, and one rule for the rest of us.” Paterson was found to have broken three rules when he lobbied government on behalf of two firms: Randox, a clinical diagnostics company, and Lynn’s Country Foods, a processor and distributor of meat products. The former environment and Northern Ireland secretary said he was acting as a whistleblower to raise concerns with the Food Standards Agency (FSA) and Department for International Development about milk and bacon standards. However, the standards commissioner accepted that while this applied for the original communication and meeting he held, it did not to the subsequent ones. Paterson was found to have praised Randox’s “superior technology”, which the standards committee said was an attempt to “confer a benefit on Randox, to whom he was a paid consultant”. Other messages sent by him to the FSA in November 2017 promoting Lynn’s Country Foods were found to be potentially directly beneficial to the company. The commissioner also found Paterson used his parliamentary office and meeting facilities in parliament 25 times for his work for paying clients, and that there were two letters sent on parliamentary paper. The combination of factors led to the commissioner saying Paterson’s breaches “were so serious and so numerous that they risked damaging public trust” in the House of Commons and in MPs generally. Paterson has protested his innocence and claimed 17 witnesses whom he wanted to be able to give oral evidence in his defence were not called to do so – though the committee said this was because their written evidence was sufficient, and it was not a question of what Paterson’s motivations were, but simply of the fact of whether he broke the rules or not. Despite the last-ditch bid to save Paterson, some Tories are very uncomfortable. A minister told the Guardian they were “being asked to do something which is cutting corners and allowing my integrity to be questioned as a result of someone else’s silliness”, adding that Paterson was “clearly way over the line”.David Chase, the creator of The Sopranos, has spoken about his irritation at viewers’ desire to see Tony Soprano die at the end of the hit series. Speaking on the Hollywood Reporter’s Awards Chatter podcast, the 76-year-old said he had been “bothered” by people’s obsession with the blackout ending of the 2007 finale, which stopped short of confirming the fate of its lead character. Asked whether he found the scrutiny of the scene annoying, Chase said: “I had no idea [there would be] that much of an uproar. And was it annoying? What was annoying was how many people wanted to see Tony killed. That bothered me.” Chase, who directed the final episode and was the series’ showrunner, underscored his discomfort with viewers insistence on seeing the fate of James Gandolfini’s troubled mob boss confirmed in black and white: “They wanted to know that Tony was killed. They wanted to see him go face-down in linguini, you know? “I just thought: “God, you watched this guy for seven years and I know he’s a criminal. But don’t tell me you don’t love him in some way, don’t tell me you’re not on his side in some way. And now you want to see him killed … You’re a criminal after watching this shit for seven years.” Chase was typically equivocal when asked whether Soprano had indeed died at the end of the series. The sixth season ended with a mystery figure approaching Soprano during a family dinner at a diner, to the strains of Journey’s Don’t Stop Believin’, followed by a black pre-credits screen. In a 2019 interview with Alan Sepinwall and Matt Zoller Seitz for the book The Soprano Sessions, Chase referred to the final shot of the series as “the death scene”. Asked on the podcast whether that had been “a slip of the tongue”, he said: “Was it?” before adding: “No,” but stressing that he had been discussing his initial ideas for the finale, rather than the episode that made it to screen. As in previous interviews, Chase intimated that Soprano was dead, but neither confirmed nor denied the character’s fate. Speaking about the location for the final scene, he said: “I was driving on Ocean Park Boulevard [in Los Angeles] near the airport and I saw a little restaurant. It was kind of like a shack that served breakfast. And for some reason I thought: ‘Tony should get it in a place like that.’ Why? I don’t know. That was, like, two years before.” Chase also said that Chris Albrecht, the former chairman of HBO, which commissioned The Sopranos, had been gravely concerned for the future of the show after Soprano killed another character for the first time. “[He was screaming:] ‘How could you do this?! You’ve created one of the most dynamic characters of the past 20 years and you’re just going to ruin him. You’re going to kill him right now because he kills that guy!’ And I said: ‘Well, then don’t air it.’ And he went nuts. “I wasn’t trying to be a smartass. [I said:] ‘Chris, he’s a captain of a crew and he comes upon a guy who was a rat. If he doesn’t kill that guy, the show’s over.’” And he said: “OK, OK, OK.” But he made me make some small little side thing, that the rat was also selling drugs to kids in high school.” Chase’s interview followed the release in September of the big-screen Sopranos prequel The Many Saints of Newark. It featured Michael Gandolfini playing a younger version of the character made famous by his father, who died in 2013. • This article was amended on 3 November 2021 to remove a reference to the London bombings, which occurred in 2005, not 2007.The staggering take-up of solar power in India has enabled the prime minister, Narendra Modi, to announce a more ambitious climate plan at the Cop26 conference in Glasgow, according to the country’s foreign secretary. India’s commitment to get half of its energy from renewables and to reach net zero by 2070 was arguably the most positive news from the opening phase of the UN gathering. Some tried to portray this as the successful result of international pressure, diplomatic arm-twisting by the UK host and still-unfulfilled promises of financial support, but senior Indian officials said the decision was based on practical domestic considerations, in particular the unexpectedly fast expansion of photovoltaic energy. “We voluntarily and unilaterally enhanced our commitments,” the foreign secretary, Harsh Vardhan Shringla, said. “It was very, very carefully thought through and considered.” He said the take-up of solar power had been so quick that India’s original target of adding 175 gigawatts of renewable capacity by 2022 was on course to be achieved. In response, the government had first upped the target to 450GW, and now, in Modi’s speech, to 500GW. This was encouraging news, because it suggested the price and popularity of the technology was driving the pace of change far faster than planned by the government, which continues to support coal power. Shringla said it had put the 2070 net zero target in sight. “We have consistently met our targets and surpassed them,” he said. “These are the stepping stones for us to reach that net zero figure.” He predicted the gap between India’s peak emissions and net zero would prove the smallest of any country. As an example of the spread of solar, he said he had recently seen many remote homes along the Brahmaputra river with photovoltaic panels, which residents had chosen because that was the cheapest and best way to power their homes, which were not otherwise connected to the grid. On a macro level, the government plans to upgrade its energy infrastructure further and joined the UK and other countries this week in unveiling plans for a global network of interconnected solar power plants that could ensure the world is powered by sunlight. The One Sun, One World, One Grid plan envisages more investment and regulations to encourage cross-border transmission lines and shared renewable energy. Until now, Shringla said India had funded its own expansion of clean energy. “We have to do what we do for our own country, our own people and future generations,” he said. But he emphasised that greater finance was needed to hasten the process in India and other developing nations. The question, he said, was the amount of support. “It is clear that it is not in the billions, but in the trillions of dollars.” This did not all have to be grants, he said; it could also be zero- or low-interest concessional loans that help developing countries invest in renewables. • This article was amended on 16 November 2021. In an earlier version, foreign secretary Harsh Vardhan Shringla was indirectly quoted as saying India had a target of adding 175 gigawatts of capacity by 2030. This should have referred to a target of an extra 175 gigawatts of renewable capacity by 2022.Collective failures by the security services, police and probation officers before the terrorist killings at Fishmongers’ Hall in London must be addressed to avoid a similar attack in future, a coroner has warned. In a prevention of future deaths report, Judge Mark Lucraft QC, a former chief coroner, set out 22 “matters of concern” arising from the incident, including a failure by MI5 to share intelligence information about the likelihood of the attack. In November 2019, the convicted terrorist Usman Khan stabbed Jack Merritt, 25, and Saskia Jones, 23, to death at a prisoner education event at the hall, after he was released under licence. Khan, who was invited to attend by Cambridge University’s Learning Together programme, was shot dead by police after being fought off by others attending the event. In a report released on Wednesday, Lucraft, the coroner who presided over the inquests, said: “There are risks that future deaths could occur unless action is taken.” In May, an inquest jury found “missed opportunities” in the way Khan was investigated by the security services and the police before the incident probably contributed to the deaths of the victims. Khan had served eight years in high-security prison for trying to set up a terrorist training camp in Pakistan. When he was released on licence in December 2018 he had been placed under priority investigation by MI5 because it had intelligence that he was planning an attack. But this information was not passed on to the probation officers managing Khan. He was then allowed to attend the Fishmongers’ Hall event without a police escort or a search of his bag, which contained two knives used to carry out the attack. Lucraft said the failure to share this information about Khan was “very unsatisfactory” and as a result those responsible for managing him in the community were “entirely ignorant” of intelligence that he was intent on carrying an attack. “Every effort should be made to ensure that a situation of this kind does not occur again,” he says. Lucraft also expressed alarm that the decision to allow Khan to attend the Fishmongers’ Hall event unaccompanied was not recorded in multi-agency public protection arrangements (Mappa) meetings attended by police, the security services and probation. He writes: “It would not be fair to lay the blame on the offender manager, when in fact there appears to have been a collective failure by the Mappa participants to give any thought to the risks arising from the prospective visit to London. In this regard, it should be noted that the jury found ‘serious deficiencies in the management of Khan by Mappa’ and a ‘blind spot to Khan’s unique risks’.” The report calls for better record-keeping and possibly audio recordings of Mappa meetings. Lucraft says information could be shared without compromising security by giving an officer involved in covert operations personal responsibility to ensure that Mappa members are properly informed about intelligence. Lucraft says: “It is vital that decisions on the management of terrorist offenders should take account of relevant security intelligence information.” Merritt’s family broadly welcomed the report but expressed disappointment that the coroner was not more explicit in his criticism of MI5. In a statement they said: “We appreciate that the coroner has called for a senior police officer to be given individual responsibility on information and intelligence sharing from a covert operation, but that doesn’t stipulate any corresponding expectation from MI5 to be proactive in relation to Mappa meetings, making sure that the nominated police officer is properly briefed, that reasoned decisions are made about what is (or is not) disseminated and to whom, or that there is feedback to MI5. We think that MI5 needs to emerge a little more from the shadows and take responsibility and scrutiny. That improves decision-making.” Lucraft’s other recommendations include: Random drug testing for offenders on licence, after toxicology analysis revealed Khan had taken cocaine before the attack. Better mentoring arrangements of offenders under licence to ensure they do not suddenly stop, as they did in Khan’s case, because of contractual dispute between the Home Office and the provider. Police should be allowed to search terrorist offenders released under licence without specific legal grounds. Forensic psychologists should be involved in risk assessments of terrorist offenders released under licence. Learning Together should be given risk profiles of offenders attending their courses. Learning Together should consider how it mitigates the risk for its students of coming into contact with serious offenders. • This article was amended on 4 November 2021. It was toxicology analysis, not blood samples, that showed Usman Khan had taken cocaine before the attack.A “citizens’ income” scheme in Italy intended to alleviate poverty was allegedly cheated by thousands of claimants, some of whom owned Ferraris, yachts and several properties, police have said. Among those claiming the benefit was a presumed mafia boss and a person who invented having children in order to boost their monthly income. The details emerged during a six-month investigation in the southern regions of Campania, Abruzzo, Puglia, Molise and Basilicata. “There is a bit of everything among those who have unduly received the citizens’ income in southern Italy,” police said. The cost to the state was said to be almost €20m. The investigation identified more than 5,000 cases of people fraudulently drawing the benefit, of whom 90 had criminal records. Among them was a 70-year-old in the Campania province of Avellino who owned a Ferrari and numerous properties, and a person in Puglia who owned “a large pleasure boat”. In Isernia, a town in Molise, a female claimant was found to be the owner of a car hire business with a fleet of 27 vehicles, while another person in Avigliano, Basilicata, managed a dance school. A 50-year-man believed to belong to the Cavalese mafia clan operating in Avellino was also tapping into the benefit scheme, police said. The citizens’ income was the flagship policy of the Five Star Movement (M5S) and was introduced in 2019, when the party was in government with the far-right League. Claimants had to prove their household income was less than the poverty line figure of €780 a month. The amount that could be claimed ranged from up to €780 for single people to €1,300 for a family with two children. Luigi Di Maio, the M5S former deputy PM and now foreign minister, who spearheaded the scheme, thanked the police for uncovering the alleged fraud and reiterated the scheme’s value. “Like all measures, it has to be tested and fine-tuned,” Di Maio said on Wednesday. The opposition far-right Brothers of Italy party has called for the scheme to be scrapped. In its first year the initiative cost the government €7.1bn, an expenditure that contributed to clashes with the European Commission over Italy’s budget for 2019 and almost led to the country being sanctioned.A University of Oxford college is to change its name to honour Vietnam’s richest woman after she offered it a £155m donation. Linacre College says it will ask the privy council for permission to change its name to Thao College after signing a memorandum of understanding over the money with Sovico Group, represented by its chair, Nguyen Thi Phuong Thao. The graduate college, founded in 1962, is named after the Renaissance humanist, medical scientist and classicist Thomas Linacre. The donation will help to pay for a new graduate centre and graduate access scholarships, the college has said. “We have long been one of the least well-endowed colleges at the university, so we are delighted that a significant part of the donation will be for our general endowment fund, to help support the daily running of college,” it said. “Sovico Group has also committed to all their subsidiaries reaching net zero carbon by the end of 2050 with the input from leading Oxford academics. “After receiving the first donation of £50m, we will approach the privy council to ask for permission to change our name from Linacre College to Thao College in recognition of this landmark gift.” At Oxford there has been disquiet over Thao’s donation to the institution, which has styled itself as “one of the greenest colleges in Oxford”. Sovico’s business interests include offshore oil and gas exploration, fossil fuel financing and Vietnam’s first private airline. According to the Tab, Thao made much of her fortune from the budget airline VietJet Air, which is controlled by Sovico. The conglomerate is also the largest shareholder in HDBank, on the board of which she serves as vice-chair. HDBank is the main financier of the state-owned Vietnam National Petroleum Group. The Oxford University Climate Justice Campaign, which has previously called for the names of fossil fuel companies to be taken off university buildings and institutes, said the donation risked undermining net zero standards. “We are disappointed to hear that Linacre College has accepted donations from Sovico group, a company whose fossil fuel extraction threatens our planet’s survival,” the spokesperson said. “Linacre’s own failure to date to become carbon-neutral shows that actions speak far louder than words. We are sad to hear what Linacre’s actions have told us: that Linacre values money more than people and the planet.” Dr Maria Kawthar Daouda, a lecturer in French literature at Oxford, told the Telegraph that college names should not be altered simply because “a major gift has been made”. “Thankfulness for Madam Thao’s money could be expressed in ways that do not erase what the donation is meant to protect,” Daouda said. Another don, who was not identified, was more relaxed about the change. “If this were one of the great historic colleges one would have deep reservations,” he said. “But as it’s a modern college and has not got a big endowment, one can understand the decision. If someone is going to put in a colossal amount of money, it’s not unreasonable to have something to show for it.”If it seems premature to be staging Charles Dickens’s yuletide story of restless ghosts and Christian goodwill in early November, it is worth remembering that Mark Gatiss’s adaptation has been delayed by a year; so it is, in fact, overdue. Besides, Adam Penford’s production amps up the ghostly effects so it seems fitting in the direct aftermath of Halloween. Gatiss’s script is surprisingly faithful, given his flair for imaginative reworks of canonical stories (from Dracula to Sherlock), and some dialogue is unchanged along with the words of the narrator (Christopher Godwin). This reminds us of the inherent theatricality in Dickens’s storytelling, heightened with the use of puppets and some bewitching surprises such as a delightful cloud of ghosts that suddenly emerge and swing around the auditorium. Gatiss also includes Dickens’s dark comedy that is so often overlooked. We begin with a flashback to Marley’s death that seems like a comic prelude as Gatiss – who plays Marley as well as several minor characters – dies suddenly in his office. When Nicholas Farrell’s Scrooge realises what has happened, his response is to put out the candle at Marley’s desk and say, smartingly: “Waste not, want not.” Farrell’s Ebenezer is a pompous, wizened old grump, largely preoccupied with his ledger at first, every inch “as self-contained and solitary as an oyster.” But he comes out of himself and steers close to comic caricature, with Farrell squeezing laughs from Dickens’s humorous lines. But it comes at a cost: when he visits the parallel worlds of past and future, he does not wring enough emotional drama from his transformative journey but seems instead to stand on the theatrical sidelines. Characters such as Belle and Fezziwig come and go with little sense of individuality. The Cratchits are sweet if a little generic – a merry, stoic band – but Gatiss’s ghostly Marley is imaginatively portrayed as a creepily sashaying figure. The ghosts of Christmas past, present and future do not particularly surprise or chill. Much of the drama lies in the lighting, designed by Philip Gladwell (sometimes piercing, sometimes hazy) and sound by Ella Wahlström (full of jumps and screeches). There is also strong projection work (video design by Nina Dunn and illusion by John Bulleid). Sometimes these effects come too thick and fast, especially the lighting which changes jaggedly. Paul Wills’s set is made up of towering filing cabinets along with doors and beds, all on wheels, which create an almost constant bustle as they come and go, sometimes for only bite-size scenes. Other atmosphere-building exchanges – of an impoverished mother singing to her child, of street crowds – are too many, too short, and feel like pauses to the story. Some key moments feel too fleeting and don’t carry enough emotion, including Tiny Tim’s deathbed scene. But when the human drama slows down, it gains an emotional catch, such as a romantic pause between Belle (Aoife Gaston) and the young Scrooge, and the final scene between Scrooge and Bob Cratchit (Edward Harrison); we wish for a few more of these. The end brings a clever twist and a great surge in festive feeling, with carol singing and general good cheer. “There is much about comfort in the story,” noted GK Chesterton, and it does feel comforting here, even this far from Christmas. At Nottingham Playhouse until 20 November and then at Alexandra Palace, London, 26 November-9 JanuaryNewcastle United’s new Saudi Arabian-led owners have had a painful setback after Unai Emery decided against accepting an invitation to become the club’s manager. Emery had indicated he was prepared to leave Villarreal for St James’ Park but the former Sevilla, Paris Saint‑Germain and Arsenal head coach began having second thoughts after news of the proposed switch leaked on Tuesday. By Wednesday lunchtime Emery had released a statement committing his future to Villarreal and Newcastle were reopening talks with Eddie Howe. The former Bournemouth manager impressed during interviews with Amanda Staveley, the director responsible for running the club on a daily basis, and was regarded as the second-choice candidate after an extensive process in which, among others, Paulo Fonseca, Lucien Favre and Roberto Martínez were spoken to. Howe is believed to have presented Newcastle with a blueprint for extracting the team, second-bottom of the Premier League and without a win, from relegation danger but any appointment is unlikely before the match at Brighton on Saturday. All decisions made by Staveley and her fellow UK-based director Jamie Reuben have to be approved by the Saudis and Yasir al-Rumayyan, the nonexecutive chairman, may wish to examine the credentials of alternative contenders. As late as Tuesday evening it seemed Staveley had presided over quite a coup in enticing Emery but after Villarreal’s home Champions League win against Young Boys the Spaniard held talks with his board and decided to stay put. Emery had been upset and disconcerted to find himself facing awkward questions about Newcastle before and after such an important European game and was also understood to be concerned at being in the dark as to the identities of the director of football and chief executive yet to be appointed at St James’ Park. Although Newcastle attempted to resurrect the deal it was soon apparent they would not, after all, be paying Villarreal about £6m in compensation. Tentative plans for Emery to preside over training before the Brighton trip were abandoned. “Villarreal CF is my home and I am 100% committed,” Emery said on social media. “Honestly, I am grateful for the interest of a great club but even more grateful to be here and that is why I communicated to [the club president] Fernando Roig my decision to want to continue being part of this project because of the commitment and respect that I perceive from the club and from my players, which is mutual and reciprocal.”This year, early November offers you two choice festivals: Bonfire Night and Diwali. In one, we burn effigies of a centuries-old failed revolutionary as a brutal reminder that we are for ever doomed to struggle under the unknowable power of the state. And then there’s Diwali, a five-day-long celebration observed by Hindus, Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists, created to symbolise “victory of light over darkness, good over evil, and knowledge over ignorance”. Which, you know, does sort of sound better. So, what should you eat for Diwali? Here are 10 Diwali recipes for your delectation. Chocolate barfi For the most part, Diwali calls for sweets. And, although this list won’t be solely dedicated to them, it’s honestly hard not to jump in with both feet when they are as tremendous as Monisha Bharadwaj’s chocolate barfi. Given that a barfi is a solid cube of condensed milk, it doesn’t require too many ingredients. A tin of condensed milk, some cocoa powder and a handful of chopped nuts for good luck. People can be put off by the complexity of some Diwali dishes, but barfi is proof that this isn’t always the case. Carrot halwa The carrot halwa, as perfected by Felicity Cloake four years ago, sounds like it has a sheen of healthiness. But do not be deceived: not only does a halwa require a shedload of evaporated milk, it also has two types of sugar. Grate a bunch of carrots and fry them with cardamom, then add the milk and sugar along with some dried fruits. Once it has dried out a little, this is a beautifully buttery treat. Pistachio kulfi Curiously, the Guardian’s 2007 recipe for pistachio kulfi is anonymous, but that doesn’t make it any less great. Or less easy to make, for that matter. Boil some milk and sugar, chuck in some chopped nuts, and freeze. Just like that, you have an all-time classic dessert. Murukku Originating in Tamil Nadu, murukku – deep-fried rice twists – are another Diwali staple. Traditionally, they take a lot of effort to make, because the rice has to be soaked, dried and ground. However, Padhu’s Kitchen has a recipe for butter murukku that uses rice flour instead, which requires a lot less faff. That said, you do still need to buy a murukku maker, a sort of gleaming metal dough press, to form them into the correct shape, but you can pick them up for about £20 online. If you’re going to make murukku a tradition, it’s a wise investment. Gujiya Pretty much every cuisine in the world has some variation on a pastry dumpling. Some are filled with meat, others with vegetables. The north Indian version, gujiya, is filled with milk solids sweetened with sugar and nuts. Press a dollop of the mixture into a palm-sized circle of pastry, and seal into a semicircle. Gujiya can be baked, but Diwali only comes around once a year so, what the hell, you might as well deep-fry them. Medu vada Listen, we’ve already deep-fried a bunch of stuff today, so why stop. Medu vada are deep-fried south Indian doughnut-shaped lentil fritters. And, for once, these aren’t sweet; as per Hebbar’s Kitchen’s recipe, you season them with ginger, coriander, chillies and curry leaves. They may look dense but, if done correctly, these are crispy, fluffy and gorgeous. Chivda I hate the fact that I only discovered chivda when assembling a roundup of recipes that use cornflakes. Hopefully I can rectify that anomaly by offering you a more traditional version of this crispy grazing snack. Cook With Manali’s chivda is made with poha (flattened rice) that is baked in a single thin layer, crushed a little and mixed with a range of ingredients. Manali adds peanuts, cashews, raisins, turmeric and chilli powder, but what you add will be down to individual taste. Nippattu From the south-west Indian state of Karnataka comes nippattu, a spicy rice cracker. Indian Healthy Recipe’s version is made from a combination of ground peanut, coconut, gram flour and rice flour. This is seasoned with curry leaves and chilli powder, rolled into a ball, flattened and then – you guessed it – deep-fried. Gulab jamun A Diwali recipe roundup would be incomplete without gulab jamun. A treat too sweet even for my infant palate, gulab jamun are small balls of dough made from milk solids, which are deep-fried and then boiled in syrup. Veg Recipes of India calls for syrup sweetened with rosewater. Delicious, but don’t expect to wolf too many down in one go. Jalebi And then we have jalebi, which in many ways is a thrilling mixture of everything we have covered up to this point. Is there a floury batter? Yes. Do you deep-fry the batter? Yes. Do you then remove the batter and soak it in sugar syrup? Yes. Could you eat a billion of these without even noticing? Also yes. Happy Diwali, everyone.The pledges on greenhouse gas emissions on the table at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow would limit global temperature rises to below 2C, the first time the world has been on such a trajectory, according to research. Plans by India, the world’s third biggest emitter, have made a sizeable difference to the global temperature estimate, research by the University of Melbourne has found. If its commitments and those of other nations at the talks are fulfilled, temperatures would probably rise by about 1.9C above pre-industrial levels. That would be lower than the 2C upper limit but higher than the 1.5C lower limit set out in the 2015 Paris climate agreement. Ed Miliband, Labour’s shadow business secretary and a veteran of the dramatic 2009 Copenhagen Cop, warned that much more needed to be done. He told the Guardian: “Any progress is welcome but we need extreme caution about declaring success on the basis of vague and often vacuous net zero targets three or more decades hence. For example Australia has a 2050 net zero target but its 2030 plans are in line with 4 degrees of warming. There is a reason for the focus on halving emissions this decisive decade. It reflects the urgency, clarity and specificity we need to keep 1.5C alive. We cannot allow political leaders to shift the goalposts.” Alok Sharma, the president of Cop26, said the new commitments represented important progress but that more would have to be done at this Cop to bring the 1.5C goal within reach. With India’s and other recent national pledges, he said, 90% of global GDP was now covered by net zero pledges, up from only about 30% over a year ago. But the near-term target of halving global emissions by 2030 was still lacking, he said. How to address this gap in ambition was now the key question for the Cop. Patricia Espinosa, the UN climate chief, added: “We have to work on how to address this gap, that’s the biggest challenge of this conference. But I have not heard anyone saying they do not want to go for 1.5C.” The report’s author, Malte Meinshausen, an associate professor in climate science at Melbourne and a lead author for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, said the “momentous” shift in the projected global warming was largely triggered by recent improvements in India and China’s emission targets for 2030, as well as India’s commitment to net zero by 2070. He said it was the first time the combined pledges and probable emissions paths of more than 190 countries had given a better than 50% chance of limiting warming to below 2C. But achieving the below-2C rise remained highly conditional and depended on countries mapping credible pathways to net zero as promised and developing nations receiving the climate finance they have called for to reach carbon neutrality. Scientists have said improved research since Paris shows the 1.5C target was the limit of safety, beyond which some of the impacts of climate breakdown were likely to become irreversible, such as small islands being inundated and extreme weather taking hold across swathes of the planet. The UK hosts of Cop26 have set “keep 1.5C alive” as the key aim of the conference, but leading figures have said the goal may be in doubt. For the world to have a good chance of staying within the 1.5C threshold, global emissions must decrease about 45% by 2030, compared with 2010 levels. Countries meeting in Glasgow will not hit this target, major figures at the talks conceded, but the race is on to close the gap between the pledges made and the 45% reduction needed. India’s headline target, of reaching net zero by 2070, was criticised by some at Cop26 as being lacklustre and less than should be expected from a major country. Developed countries are being asked to meet net zero by 2050 at the latest, and developing countries by 2060. China has set 2060 as its goal but some analysts say the world’s biggest emitter is likely to meet it sooner. India also pledged an increase in clean energy to 500 gigawatts by 2030 and a reduction in emissions intensity of its economy by 45% by the same date. It reckons its emissions are likely to peak by 2040, but some of its actions are dependent on receiving suitable finance. “It’s still a huge if, because many of the net zero targets – including the net zero target from India – are conditional on international support,” Meinshausen said. “We need to see that happen.” Nicholas Stern, the chair of the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics, said: “This was a very significant moment for the summit, with prime minister [Narendra] Modi pledging stronger action by India on climate change, with five new targets. This demonstrates real leadership, based on a track record of action and ambitious targets, that can deliver on both economic development and climate change, from a country whose emissions per capita are about one-third of the global average. The rich world must respond to prime minister Modi’s challenge to deliver a strong increase in international climate finance.” Dr Radhika Khosla, of Oxford University, said: “India’s commitment to net zero is a strategic stitching together of its climate ambition and its development priorities. The 2030 targets, of 500GW of non-fossil fuel capacity and 50% of electricity to be renewable, both require near-term changes in the energy system, which will be key to locking in the pathway for a longer term net zero target. With this raised ambition compared with its 2015 pledge, the demands for greater funding for developing countries has even more heft. Meinshausen said the goal of limiting heating to the 1.5C goal still remained a distance challenge, with a roughly 90% chance it would be exceeded based on existing commitments. Australia is one of the countries yet to come up with emissions-cutting plans in line with a 1.5C limit. Meinshausen said: “Australia put forward a net zero pledge that is not conditional, but simply hollow and hard to believe, as it is not underpinned by any credible policies at home.” • This article was amended on 4 November 2021 because, in an earlier version, part of the comment by Sir Nicholas Stern had been incorrectly attributed to Dr Radhika Khosla.Alok Sharma, the UK cabinet minister and president of the Cop26 summit, has been accused of appropriating the climate activism movement after he told conference delegates “you are the new Swampys”. Opening the summit’s finance day, which aims to channel cash towards transitioning global economies to net zero carbon emissions, Sharma recalled climate protests of the 1990s. He compared financiers and politicians with Dan Hooper, nicknamed Swampy, who became a household name in 1996 after his fierce campaigning to stop new road projects. Sharma said: “When I started my career in finance in the 1990 in the City, there was a guy called Swampy – some of you may recall him? He spent his time occupying trees and tunnels and he was the main face of climate action in the United Kingdom. “But today the Swampys of the world are all around us, in boardrooms, in government departments, in multilateral development banks and trading floors all around the world – you, my friends, are the new Swampys, so be proud. “That means finance is increasingly flowing to climate action. Delivering the Paris agreement requires nothing short of aligning all financial flows with clean and resilient development, and of course we know that the devastation caused by the pandemic makes this all the more urgent.” Swampy is currently spending his 20th day in a tunnel in Wendover, Buckinghamshire, in an effort to block the progress of the HS2 rail project. His fellow campaigner Dr Larch Maxey, who is on bail for alleged offences relating to his protests against HS2, said: “Unfortunately everyone is not down that tunnel with Swampy.” He continued: “To say we are all Swampys is appropriation, it is attempting to take resistance, to take the truth and commercialise it and commodify it for the corporate agenda. If only what he was saying was true. If only we were all Swampys – then we wouldn’t be in the greatest threat humanity has ever faced.” He said world leaders were still trying to “coax and cajole” big industry into action, rather than leading by example. “[Sharma] is trying to say ‘everything is OK, folks, you just trust us, the experts, the bankers, the politicians, and your future is safe’,” he said. “Well, it’s not – the future is in danger because of their actions over the last 30 years and because they are carrying on.”It seems an unlikely proposal, if not an indecent one, to turn the story best known as a Demi Moore-Robert Redford movie into a musical. But after Pretty Woman, Heathers and Back to the Future, why not another classic VHS revamp for the stage? In fact, writer Michael Conley hasn’t seen the film. His blueprint is Jack Engelhard’s 1988 novel, a less glossy, more complex tale. Here, the central couple, Johnny (Norman Bowman) and Rebecca (Lizzy Connolly), are both on their second marriages. She gave up a comfortable life; he has a daughter who needs cash to go to college. Now they’re living in a crumbling room, working multiple jobs in Atlantic City casinos, when a high-rolling stranger offers them a million dollars to spend the night with Rebecca. Charlotte Westenra’s production of this chamber piece communicates their sense of desperation. Struggling songwriter Johnny is a man who’s been through the mill, voice straining into the mic on a treadmill of thankless gigs. Ako Mitchell’s smug billionaire Larry plays games with them from the start and nobody comes out of it well. Johnny’s response to the offer: “One million dollars? It’s kinda classy!” The subject matter is fascinating. Questions of power and consent emerge. Can a relationship survive infidelity? What would you do for a life-changing sum of money? Johnny is visibly vexed, but the grappling remains on the surface, the songs often literal inner monologues – shall I do this or shall I do that? And Dylan Schlosberg’s music rarely makes us feel something beyond the words. Tonally it jars. We’re in a 1980s casino but the music is poppy guitar strumming. Dark themes alternate with comedy (including an incongruous punchline about Hi-de-Hi!). Rebecca’s retro wardrobe reads as 2021 hipster, while Johnny wears a plaid shirt and work boots on the casino stage – no wonder he’s not booking better gigs. Their soulmate connection is never entirely convincing. And you realise what you’re missing when jazz vocalist Jacqui Dankworth performs as lounge singer Annie. The range and tone of her voice, her ability to connect with a song and an audience: the class in this act belongs entirely to her. At Southwark Playhouse, London, until 27 NovemberTwo of the world’s biggest wind energy companies have warned of difficult conditions as slower-than-usual winds and supply chain difficulties delay manufacturing. Ørsted, a Danish company, said lower-than-normal wind speeds throughout the third quarter had affected its earnings. Across the first nine months of 2021 slow winds cost the company 2.5bn Danish kroner (£290m) compared with the previous year. Ørsted makes about two-thirds of its revenues from offshore wind including off the UK’s coasts. Vestas, the world’s largest wind turbine manufacturer, on Wednesday cut its profit guidance for the second time this year, citing supply chain instability and cost inflation that was hitting the wind power industry. It came as political and business leaders gathered in Glasgow for the Cop 26 UN climate summit, with green energy high up the agenda. Increasing the supply of renewable energy is a key part of ambitions to limit global heating. However, the slower winds have contributed to the global increase in the prices of gas and other fossil fuel sources of energy before winter in Europe. In the UK, wind energy has provided 60% of energy needs at peak times but becalmed conditions have forced the country to resort to burning gas and coal to keep the lights on. Higher gas prices have fed through to retail energy providers, and 18 have gone bust since the start of September after failing to protect themselves against price moves. At the same time, manufacturers have endured months of delays to parts as the rapid recovery from the coronavirus pandemic has knocked timetables out of joint. Shares in Vestas slumped by 15% on Wednesday in early trading after it revealed that profits had halved during the third quarter of 2021 to €206m (£175m). It also cut its forecasts of future earnings. Vestas’s chief executive, Henrik Andersen, said the company had faced an increasingly challenging global business environment for renewables. He cited “supply chain instability and rising energy prices as well as accelerated cost inflation from raw materials, transport, and turbine components, which severely impacted profitability and limits visibility”. Marika Fredriksson, Vestas’s chief financial officer, said: “The prices are something I don’t think anyone has experienced previously and it’s a very, very tough environment. “I think it’s likely it’s going to continue into next year and I don’t see the trend changing,” she said, adding that the company had not cancelled any projects but there had been several delays. Mads Nipper, Ørsted’s chief executive, said the company had achieved “good financial results in the third quarter despite low wind speeds and unusual market conditions”.Name: Gen Z v the brussels sprout Age: Current. Appearance: A generational war the likes of which we have never seen. Hang on, I thought brussels sprouts were cool again? OK boomer, try to keep up. Brussels sprouts had their moment in the sun last year, when they were deemed to be “the nation’s favourite green vegetable”, overtaking broccoli. But life moves pretty fast, and now everyone agrees that they’re awful again. Why? Gen Z is why. They’ve cancelled sprouts. Why? Sexual misconduct? Cultural appropriation? No, nothing of the sort. They just don’t taste very nice. Oh, the indignity. As such, gen Z has decided to simply stop eating them. According to a new survey for Tesco, nearly three-quarters of people aged 18-24 aren’t fans of the humble sprout. At this rate, the sprout’s days may be numbered. Kids these days. Exactly. They think they’re the first generation to ever not like sprouts. Well let me tell you whippersnappers a secret: people have hated sprouts for centuries. But you know what? We still ate them. Even though they were bitter. Even though they were soggy. Even though they were actively unpleasant in every regard, we still ate sprouts at Christmas. It’s called tradition. Precisely! These pampered infants don’t understand the role of the Christmas sprout. The sprout exists as a reminder that, even on the happiest day of the year, you still have to force down a little pile of vegetables. Life is pain, and that’s why we have sprouts. So what are they eating at Christmas instead of sprouts? Get this: brunch. Brunch? Yes, brunch. The survey revealed that an increasing number of young people are shunning Christmas dinner altogether in favour of a festive brunch spread, perhaps because it looks better on Instagram. This is appalling news. Did I mention that they hate Christmas pudding, too? No, but that does make sense. What? No it doesn’t. They prefer to have chocolate-based desserts instead. Aren’t you outraged? Not really. Oh, I suppose you don’t agree that colossal roast dinners should immediately be followed by a bowlful of unidentifiable, osmium-dense, butter-drenched sludge that someone sets on fire? You don’t want to feel uncomfortably full to the point of unconsciousness, is that it? Yes, that’s exactly it. Well, that won’t stop me from being mean about gen Z. They’re rude about how I use emojis and are disparaging about my unironic and objectively tragic adulthood love of Harry Potter. They deserve nothing but scorn from all quarters. Do say: “The brussels sprout is an endangered species.” Don’t say: “Does this mean we can finally admit that they’re horrible?”New Zealand came here in search of two precious points and a hefty boost to their net run rate, and one out of two will have to do. Having sprinted through the first group stage with three wins out of three, Scotland have a less impressive kind of 100% record three games into the Super 12s, but it took an innings of great quality and immense bravery from Martin Guptill to take this game away from them as they eventually lost by 16 runs. Scotland made several fine contributions, with bat and ball. Mark Watt is having a wonderful tournament and his four overs brought just 13 runs and the wicket of Devon Conway, who gloved a catch to Matt Cross behind the stumps when attempting a reverse sweep. Safyaan Sharif’s first two overs cost two runs and brought two wickets, Daryl Mitchell and Kane Williamson dispatched in the space of four balls (his second two overs went for 26). Later Kyle Coetzer, like Guptill a veteran of the meeting between these teams at the 2009 World T20, started Scotland’s innings with real intent; Cross hit Adam Milne for five successive fours (but those balls aside seven off 24); in the space of one Ish Sodhi over George Munsey twice heaved the ball over midwicket for six before clumping down the ground, where Tim Southee took an excellent low, running, one-handed catch; and Michael Leask hit three sixes and as many fours in an outstanding 20-ball 42. But this was Guptill’s match, after an outstanding innings during which it gradually became apparent that he was suffering badly in Dubai’s intense heat. Over the course of the innings the sun dipped behind the west stand, eventually allowing Scotland to bat in full shade, but for most of New Zealand’s knock the square was in full sun, and in trousers, pads, gloves and helmet it must feel like playing in your own microsauna. The first clue that something was amiss came when the 35-year-old started taking off his helmet and either squatting or bending double during breaks in play, and his running gradually turned into a grudging stumble. By the 19th over he spent the interval after Glenn Phillips’s dismissal with his trousers down around his knees to allow a bit of ventilation. He was out next ball, as he tried to hit over long-on but with his strength fading could only guide the ball straight to Calum MacLeod. He had by then been dropped twice by Leask, one a regulation catch at deep midwicket, the other a pull scooped high into the air that looped into the sunshine before dropping to a fielder inches from the rope and thus forced to worry about his feet and his eyes as well as his hands, which turned out to be at least one thing too many. Guptill had hit seven sixes, the most of any innings in this tournament, on his way to a 56-ball 93, and somehow those levers had kept swinging with sweet timing even while his torso was having to drag his unwilling legs around, lolloping from end to end as if wearing Wallace and Gromit’s Techno Trousers. In the circumstances it was impressive to see him take the field for the start of Scotland’s innings, and understandable that he was not still on it at the end. “I was,” he said with considerable understatement, “pretty cooked.”Michelle Wu has made history after being elected as mayor of Boston, becoming the first woman and person of color elected to the position in almost 200 years. “From every corner of our city, Boston has spoken. We are ready to meet this moment. We are ready to become a Boston for everyone,” said Wu to her supporters on Tuesday night. “I want to be clear, it wasn’t my vision on the ballot, it was ours, together.” In a victory for progressives, on an otherwise difficult night for Democrats, Wu defeated the Democratic city council member Annissa Essaibi George, who identifies as a first-generation Arab-Polish American. Essaibi George was also born and raised in Boston, with her family roots being heavily emphasized throughout her campaign. “I want to offer a great big congratulations to Michelle Wu,” said Essaibi George at her election party on Tuesday night. “She’s the first woman and first Asian American elected to be mayor of Boston.” In addition to Wu’s election as the first Asian American mayor in Boston, Cincinnati also elected Aftab Pureval, the city’s first Asian American mayor. Wu, who will be succeeding acting mayor Kim Janey, the first woman and Black person to lead Boston, is the child of Taiwanese immigrants. She moved to Boston from Chicago and is a graduate of Harvard University and Harvard Law School. After launching her political career in 2013 when she was first elected to Boston’s city council, Wu has worked as a progressive, supporting policies like a Green New Deal for Boston and has been endorsed by other high-profile Massachusetts progressives including Senator Elizabeth Warren and Congresswoman Ayanna Pressley. Wu’s mayoral platform also included progressive proposals like free public transit, an initiative that several US cities have been implementing, improving housing in Boston through rent stabilization and rent control, as well as abolishing the Boston Planning and Development Agency, with Wu saying it was time to “empower a planning depart to create a master plan for updated zoning and clear, consistent rules”. The mayoral race between Wu and Essaibi George, two women of color, as well as Wu’s victory suggest major changes for Boston’s political scene. After 199 years of only white, male mayors, Wu’s win signals the changing values and increasingly diverse demographics in Boston. Currently, more than half of the city is made up of people of color and white populations continue to shrink.Tymal Mills has been ruled out of the remainder of the T20 World Cup after scans confirmed a significant thigh strain and has been replaced in the England squad by Surrey’s Reece Topley. The news represents a significant blow for England, with Mills bringing express pace, knowledge of local conditions and a skill set uniquely honed to the Twenty20 format. He had started each of their four games at the World Cup, but pulled out of his run‑up midway through his second over in England’s latest fixture, against Sri Lanka in Sharjah on Monday, and immediately left the field. “Absolutely gutted but I’ve been here before,” tweeted Mills, who has struggled with injuries throughout his career. “Loved being back in an England shirt and will do all I can to get back again. Only a minor injury but I won’t be where I need to in the next 10 days.” His absence will increase the pressure on the squad’s one other bowler of genuine pace, Mark Wood, to recover from an ankle injury. Topley does not have significant experience of conditions outside the UK – the deal to play the Big Bash League with Melbourne Renegades this winter, also announced on Wednesday, is his first with an overseas T20 franchise – but at 6ft 7in he presents a different problem to opposition batsmen. Mills’s injury has been the first significant setback in what has so far been an almost note-perfect English World Cup campaign. In particular, Jos Buttler’s form with the bat has been exceptional – the opener has hit 214 runs in four innings and only once been dismissed – but within the squad his achievements have come as no surprise. Dawid Malan said: “When he gets going he’s an absolute freak – you need about 15 fielders and some more over the ropes. When we arrived in Oman [for their pre-tournament training camp] you could see he was hitting the ball differently. It’s hard to explain but when you watch someone batting in the nets you just hear the way they are striking the ball and the cleanness with which they are hitting the ball. Everyone at this level hits the ball well but there’s a different sound with Jos.” Malan came into the tournament as the world’s top-ranked batsman, but on Wednesday slipped to No 2, overtaken by Pakistan’s Babar Azam. “The No 1 tag is a great tag to have but it doesn’t guarantee you runs,” he said. “The good thing is that it probably proves that on your day you’re as good as anyone, which is all that matters at this level.”The prices of Ikea furniture and homeware are to rise as a result of lasting disruption to its supply chain, the brand’s owner has warned, after increased costs of raw materials and transport knocked its full-year profits. Inter Ikea Group, the parent company of the Ikea brand, which is operated by a string of franchise businesses, said it expected challenges in its supply chain to last well into 2022. Like many home furnishing retailers, Ikea benefited from soaring demand for its products during successive coronavirus lockdowns as consumers who were confined to their homes decided to spend money on sprucing them up. Despite this, Inter Ikea Group’s pre-tax profit fell by 16% in the fiscal year to the end of August to €1.7bn (£1.4bn). Profits were 4% lower than the privately held company reported in 2019 pre-pandemic despite achieving record sales. The owner of the flat-pack furniture company said: “The global pandemic affected our operating income in FY21. The biggest cause was the steep increase in transport and raw material prices in the second half of the financial year.” The company, which mostly makes money from selling goods to its franchise partners, in October reported record annual sales at its stores during the year to August. “Keeping Ikea stores and warehouses stocked has been a challenge. Supply chain disruptions led to a substantial drop in the availability of products that we have yet to recover from,” the firm said, adding that it expected this situation to continue well into next year. The company has previously said one of its biggest challenges is exporting products from China, where about a quarter of its goods are produced. Its North American shops have been the most affected by product shortages, followed by stores in Europe. The retailer has been temporarily removing out-of-stock items from its website and stores, to avoid disappointing shoppers, and has suggested other products instead. Inter Ikea said it would have to pass on some of its higher costs to the brand’s stores during the coming year. “Though we can’t continue to secure fixed prices to the retailers under these challenging conditions, we also plan to absorb part of the increased costs during FY22,” it said. It will be up to store owners how much of those price increases that they decide to pass on to consumers. The firm last month described the extra measures it has been taking to transport materials from Asia to Europe to get round shipping bottlenecks, including hiring its own trains. Jon Abrahamsson Ring, the chief executive of Inter Ikea, told the Financial Times that the “availability and raw materials challenge” would last “for a longer period than we thought of at the beginning of the crisis”.Too vast in scope to be contained within war drama, the Holocaust movie constitutes an entire genre unto itself, collecting a potentially infinite number of tragedies great and small. The history of the 20th century’s most massive atrocity comes with thousands of footnotes now gradually expanded upon by media depicting the unsung courage and untold evil. Israeli documentary film-makers Daniel Sivan and Mor Loushy singled out one such extraordinary tale for their latest joint project, Netflix’s short film Camp Confidential, drawing attention to a highly covert military operation only recently released from behind redaction-marker bars. “The first thing is, when producers Benji and Jono Bergmann approached us with this and told us of the story, we didn’t believe it,” Sivan tells the Guardian. “It was just so out-there.” The black-op facility tucked away in northern Virginia’s Fairfax county sounds like something out of a pulp paperback: Jewish soldiers, many of them refugees from the devastation in Europe, watched over Nazi prisoners of war in a surreally domestic setting. Known as PO Box 1142, it housed such notables as spymaster Reinhard Gehlen and rocket scientist Wernher von Braun. But those in charge of the base were also tasked with maintaining a baseline quality of life for the inmates, leading to bizarre scenes such as a department store outing with former members of the Third Reich to purchase unmentionables for their wives. Bulldozed after the war and buried in secrecy until the National Parks Service unearthed some remnants in the early 2000s, the clandestine camp now doubles as a cautionary tale for modern Jews and a memorial for those who came before them. “We had hours of these interviews, and I remember very vividly that we were shocked,” Loushy says. “I had chills. This was an unbelievable relationship forming there, between the Jewish refugees and the Nazis who would’ve captured them. Nobody knew about it, and the people who conducted the interviews never told anyone about it. They didn’t even tell their wives or children – they took this secret to their grave.” Sivan and Loushy had the privilege of sitting down with Arno Mayer and Peter Wiess, two veterans of this odd operation, thought to be the last living survivors able to set the record straight. With candor and a little apprehension, the two men recall a confounding daily contrast, caught between the satisfaction of sweating their captive guests and the indignity of catering to their needs. In one of the many flashback scenes rendered as animation to capture the dreamlike quality of memory, we see Jewish soldiers using the Nazis’ own inhumanity against them by flooding a van with dust from a vacuum cleaner and letting the sadists assume they were being gassed, just like they would be doing if the positions were reversed. The former servicemen claim to have taken the high ground and avoided outright torture, instead gaining the prisoners’ trust by playing host in their new country of America. “You can hear so many instances of them asking the interviewers, ‘Is this safe? Can we talk? Is this not censored?’” Sivan says. “It took everybody a long time to understand that yes, it is safe to discuss this. When you listen to the audio tapes, once they started talking, you see a combination of pride and shame at the same time. On the one hand, they feel that they did collect important intelligence, and they did succeed in their mission. But on the other, they did take part in whitewashing the German ex-Nazi scientists into becoming the perfect American heroes.” As the film explains, there’s a bitter irony to the fate of Wernher von Braun, vilified during the war right up until the US government figured his scientific acumen could be put to good use. Under Operation Paperclip, hundreds of Nazi technicians were brought to the States and put to work before they could get snapped up by space race rivals in the Soviet Union, an unsavory gambit that paid off when Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin set foot on the moon. But the image rehabilitation Von Braun enjoyed as a principal architect of rocket travel – the medals, the smiling photo ops next to President Kennedy – left a bad taste in the mouths of those who recalled his heinous deeds. “We all know that [Von Braun] knew about Auschwitz, and that he participated with the Nazi regime,” Loushy says. “The US, in giving him citizenship with all the other scientists, showed what was important to them.” “They’re different, Arno and Peter,” Sivan adds. “What Peter really wanted to convey was the question of whether bad means can be justified by a good cause. He believed the cause was righteous, but that the means of achieving it were so corrupt that it wasn’t worth it. Arno, however, wanted to talk about the cold war. During the second world war, while the fighting was still going on, his mission was to start fighting the Russians. The fact is that the US had already targeted a new arch-enemy, and it’s shocking to see how fluid it is, the changing of enemies. Who was once your friend and ally is now the source of all evil. And these Nazis, who were the pinnacle of evil, were suddenly our best friends.” The film-makers view this chapter of the past as a moral and ethical thought experiment with ample resonance to the present, weighing pragmatism in the national interest against the sin of whitewashing. Does building an effective coalition supersede the mandate to hold fascists accountable for their actions? Neither Sivan nor Loushy is all that convinced. “I personally believe that evil is evil, and don’t think that a few years can change that,” Sivan says. “People taking part in mass murder, even if they were not physically part of it, they were in support of it.” “You see these Jewish refugees who’d escaped Europe a few years before, all of their families murdered in the Holocaust, and now they’ve got to form a relationship with Nazis?” Loushy adds. “It’s absolutely insane. There’s a red line to causes, at the end of the day. The Nazis committed crimes against humanity.” With domestic Nazi activity and Russia paranoia both having spiked under Trump, the takeaway from this brutal social studies lesson is clear: the nasty tendency to overlook transgressions for the sake of political usefulness hasn’t gone anywhere. We’re still repeating the mistakes of previous generations, putting what’s expedient over what’s right, leaving the civilian souls caught in the crossfire to be forgotten, abandoned or ignored. Mayer and Weiss share their recollections in the hope that we can break this cycle, and hold our leaders to a higher standard of humanity. “This is not a story of the past,” Sivan says. “The US is collaborating today with a bunch of dark regimes, Israel as well. If you look anywhere in the world, Europe or Asia, everyone’s working with tyrants and other people who have blood on their hands. It’s always in the ‘national interest’, too. This isn’t a story about terrible things that happened back in the ’40s. We didn’t learn our lesson.” Camp Confidential: America’s Secret Nazis is now available on NetflixI saw these women leaving Marr’s fish-processing factory in Hull one Friday lunchtime in December 1977, wearing headscarves and carrying shopping bags, their white overalls underneath their coats, after a morning of filleting and packing fish. I expect many of them were thinking about their Christmas shopping, but who knows? I liked the reflection in the puddles, the row of chimney stacks behind, even though I had to stand in the mud to get the shot. Looking back, I can see how it relates to the whole history of Hessle Road, which was the beating heart of Hull’s fishing industry. Deep-sea trawling, which is the basis of the city’s fishing fortunes, was the most dangerous industry in the world: they used to say for every miner killed, four fishermen died at sea. Less than a decade before this photo was taken, after three trawlers sank, killing 58 men, Lillian Bilocca from Hessle Road led a women’s movement that became known as the “headscarf revolutionaries” to improve safety at sea. Their campaign was successful, but by the time I started photographing Hessle Road, it was under attack: the cod wars with Iceland were destroying the deep-sea fleet, while the council was demolishing all the old houses, because it didn’t want the city to be regarded as a little fishing backwater. So, sadly, when you look at this picture today, you know the people were all going to be moved out. I don’t come from a fishing family – my dad was on the cargo ships. He went to work in America and came back with a typewriter and a camera, which were out of the ordinary in a working-class family at that time. I left school without any qualifications, only later going to university to study psychology. But in 1970, I bought a second-hand German Rolleicord TLR camera for £12, and took it travelling. In terms of photography, the turning point for me came in September 1971, when I went over to Northern Ireland to see for myself what was going on, because there was increasing bloodshed and I didn’t trust the BBC. I was warned not to photograph British troops or even adults, but I found the youngsters were more than happy to be photographed in the streets of Londonderry and Belfast. That inadvertently sowed the seeds of my photo-documentary study of Hull’s fishing community and trawling industry. My very first solo exhibition, in 1979, was called The Kids of Hessle Road. I consider myself more as a psychologist with a camera than a photographer. At first, I was keen on sunrises and sunsets, then moved on to silhouettes of trees, before settling on people as my subject. My mum was a bit snobbish about Hessle Road, but I started to cycle down there and meander around, waiting for photo opportunities. I took more than 6,500 shots of the area between 1971 and 1986, but once the houses were demolished, the customers for the shops disappeared, too, and today there aren’t many people living there. I’ve given my archive to the Hull History Centre, part of the university, and have also just raised money through a Kickstarter campaign for a book. Hull is divided by a river. You had the west side, the trawlers and the fishing, and the east side, which was the cargo docks. The east side was called the Christian side, which implied that the west was pagan. It’s common in all communities that live with extreme danger for there to be a lot of superstition. I was born within what were once the old town walls, so I was from neither east nor west. I was an outsider to the fishing community – and having gone to university as well, you know, that does detach you. But they trusted me. Alec Gill CV Born Hull, 1946. Trained Self-taught. Influences “My university supervisor advised all undergraduates to specialise – he meant in psychology, but I applied it to my photography.” High point “An MBE for ‘services to Hull’s fishing community’.” Low point “Being turned down by a variety of grant-(not)-giving bodies.” Top tip “Take photographs out of love and not for the money you can get out of them.”A Star Is Born was both a blessing and a curse for Lady Gaga. A blessing because it put her at the centre of a commercially successful, Oscar-nominated film, thereby rocketing her to the top of a profession of which she had very little experience. A curse, too, because she was essentially just playing herself; a singer who went from performing in drag bars to commanding huge stages in very little time. Quick, without looking, tell me the name of the character Lady Gaga played in A Star Is Born. You can’t, can you? You’ve always just called her Lady Gaga. This means that she ultimately had two options after A Star Is Born. She could abandon her movie career in the knowledge that she had blurred the line between character and performer more successfully than any actor working today, or she could find another role. A role not so heavily steeped in her own biography. A role that would finally prove to the world that she was an actor of the highest calibre. You already know by now that Lady Gaga chose the second option, since she has appeared in almost every scrap of promotional material that exists for Ridley Scott’s forthcoming House of Gucci. But, nevertheless, she still has to demonstrate that A Star Is Born was not a fluke. And, as an interview with Vogue reveals, she is doing that by proving that she is the actoriest actor who ever actored. There is method, and then there is a vast chasm, and then there is what she put herself through for House of Gucci. For reference, in House of Gucci, she plays Patrizia Reggiani; a real-life socialite of unimaginable wealth who married the heir to the Gucci fashion house then, after he divorced her, served 18 years in prison for hiring a hitman to murder him. The role was previously mooted to be played by Angelina Jolie, Penélope Cruz and Margot Robbie. Just by turning up for work on a job like this, Lady Gaga basically guaranteed herself an Oscar nomination. But clearly that wasn’t enough. Gaga explained to Vogue: “I lived as her [Reggiani] for a year and a half. And I spoke with an accent for nine months of that. Off camera, [too]. I never broke. I stayed with her.” Additionally, her accent training was so vigorous that you might be able to hear subtle variations depending on which Italian town the character is in. There’s more, too. Despite having no indication that Reggiani was a photographer, Gaga started carrying a camera around with her, taking pictures of everything. “I noticed that Patrizia loved beautiful things,” she explained. “If something wasn’t beautiful, I deleted it.” Does this sound like a difficult undertaking? Does permanently inhabiting the mannerisms and vocal quirks of a stranger for more than a year sound so all-consuming that it carried a risk of poor mental health? You’d be correct, and you’d also be correct in expecting Gaga to explain it in print. Describing the situation as a “psychological difficulty”, Gaga told Vogue: “I was either in my hotel room, living and speaking as Reggiani, or I was on set, living and speaking as her. I remember I went out into Italy one day with a hat on to take a walk. I hadn’t taken a walk in about two months and I panicked. I thought I was on a movie set.” This is undoubtedly a lot of effort for a film that, judging by its trailers, seems to be about a bunch of cartoon vampires in ironic 1980s dress-up. And it’s also worth pointing out that most actors understand that a line has to be drawn somewhere. It’s one thing to do your research, but quite another to go full Jim &amp; Andy: The Great Beyond. But, still, it seems very clear that Lady Gaga has her sights set high. She is determined to be taken seriously as an actor, and if that means losing complete sight of herself in the pursuit of artistic truth, so be it. Call her Gaga Day-Lewis.Now here’s an intriguing proposition for Guardian readers, a letter from Major General EHH Allenby, inspector of cavalry, aka the Bloody Bull, on behalf of the British Olympic Council, published on Thursday 7 August 1913, calling for volunteers to step forward for the British team in the new Olympic discipline of modern pentathlon at the Berlin Games in 1916. “The competition consists of the following five events,” Allenby explained, “revolver or pistol shooting at a whole figure decimal target, distance, 25m, swimming, 300m free style, fencing, weapon; epee, riding cross-country, 5,000m, cross-country running, 4,000m.” Tempted? The Guardian, it has to be said, didn’t go in much for modern pentathlon at the time. The very first competition, at the Stockholm Games in 1912, only made a single line at the foot of an article about the continuing controversy in the Olympic tug-o-war, in which the “redoubtable British team”, drawn from the ranks of the City of London police, were disqualified when they fell over in a heap because they lost their footing. But the new sport was a striking idea, designed by the International Olympic Committee’s founder, Pierre de Coubertin, “to test a man’s moral qualities as much as his physical resources and skills”. The winner was meant to be “the ideal, complete athlete”. De Coubertin modelled it on the “romantic rough adventures” of a cavalry officer trying to deliver a message back from behind enemy lines. “His horse is brought down in enemy territory; having defended himself with his pistol and sword he swims across a raging river and delivers his message on foot.” A century later, the sport’s governing body, the UIPM, has apparently voted to swap the horses for bikes, an idea which will turn the event into an armed triathlon, and will, inevitably, somewhat diminishes the whole “rough and romantic” aspect of it, by turning the event into the derring-do adventures of an officer who catches a flat. Sharpe’s Puncture. The horses have always been a problem. In 1912 De Coubertin was, apparently, “very upset” because the Swedes expected all the competitors taking part in “his baby” to bring their own rides with them. De Coubertin had already had to give up on the idea of including a rowing race as one of the five disciplines, because it would have made the organisation “even more difficult”, and, as he admitted, “it was already quite complicated enough”. Now this. He insisted that the competitors couldn’t be expected to bring their own mounts, so the only solution was that the athletes would draw them from a pool of horses provided by the hosts. Which is how it has been ever since. It has become, oddly enough, one of the event’s defining features. The job of taking a strange new horse and, after 20 minutes’ preparation, trying to guide it around the course, is one of the most wildly unpredictable in all the Olympic events, and there are countless stories competitors who were foiled, after four years of dedicated training, because the misfortune to draw a surly and unwilling nag. It is an extreme test of horsemanship. You guess old EHH Allenby, who was known to fly off the handle when his junior officers split their infinitives and once exploded in anger when he saw a corpse without its regulation tin helmet, would agree. Which is why it was such a surprise to find that the sport has been going around in circles on this particular argument for a long time. The legendary Jim Fox, who won team gold for Great Britain at Montreal 76, has been an advocate for years. “In my day I argued they should have exchanged the horse for a motorcycle,” Fox told the Guardian in 1992, “but they didn’t like the idea of motorised assistance in the Olympics. Why not a mountain bike?” Back then, the modern pentathlon was under threat from De Coubertin’s successor Juan Antonio Samaranch, who wanted to replace it with a sport people actually take part in, such as golf or tennis. In the end the UIPM scrapped its team event, brought in a women’s competition and cut the event down from four days’ duration. Samaranch was still determined to junk it. Then they made him a vice-president of the governing body, which seemed to fix the problem. He was even made an inductee into the “modern pentathlon hall of fame”, for his “tireless efforts to modernise the sport”, which is a quaint way of describing his repeated attempts to kill it off. But the sport still struggles to justify its place on the Olympic programme, which is why the cross-country running and shooting phases were combined into one event. It survives, in large part, because of the IOC’s own sense of tradition, and the support of a handful of influential administrators. Even they might struggle to save it from the reputational damage caused by the sight of a well-respected coach punching one of the horses in Tokyo this summer. And really, the sport is overdue for renewal, before it goes the way of bicycle polo, ballooning, tug of war, and all the other dead Olympic events. The five events they chose to include more than a century ago are so antiquated now that they make modern a misnomer. If the IOC wants to save it, it’s not the original disciplines that matter, but the spirit in which they were picked, and the idea that they ought to be a test of moral qualities, physical resources and skills. Here then, is another proposition for Guardian readers: a century later, what are the five events that ought to go into a properly modern pentathlon?The Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai has apparently accused a former vice-premier of sexual assault, engulfing the highest echelons of Beijing’s ruling Communist party in a #MeToo scandal for the first time. Authorities scrambled to stop the allegations from spreading, with online censors even appearing to block the word “tennis”. In a now-deleted post on one of her social media accounts, Peng, 35, said she and Zhang Gaoli, 75, had an on-off extramarital “relationship” over several years, which she said he tried to keep secret. Peng said Zhang had stopped contacting her after he rose in the ranks of the Communist party, and that at one point he expressed concern that she might tape their encounters. About three years ago, she wrote, Zhang invited her to play tennis with him and his wife and then sexually assaulted her in his house. “I never consented that afternoon, crying all the time,” she wrote. Peng’s post on Weibo, a Chinese microblogging site similar to Twitter, was not visible on Wednesday, suggesting it may have been deleted, and the Guardian was unable to confirm its authenticity. From 2013 to 2018, Zhang was one of just seven members of the elite Politburo Standing Committee, headed by China’s leader, Xi Jinping. He has not commented on the allegations and the Guardian cannot independently verify them. In her post, the former top-ranked player acknowledged she would be unable to produce evidence to back up the accusations but said she was determined to voice them. “Like an egg hitting a rock, or a moth to the flame, courting self-destruction, I’ll tell the truth about you,” said Peng, who became No 1 in the 2014 Women’s Tennis Association doubles rankings. Within hours after the post appeared on Tuesday night, China’s “Great Firewall” appeared to have gone up. Searches for Peng’s name, and in some cases the word “tennis”, seemed to have been blocked by China’s notoriously effective censors. Peng’s Weibo account was hidden from searches and users were unable to comment on her posts. In China, authorities have charged government officials with sexual misconduct in the past, often in conjunction with corruption investigations. However, such accusations have never been publicly disclosed against someone in such a senior political position as Zhang. The country’s #MeToo movement has gathered pace in recent years, and the arrest in August of one of China’s biggest pop stars, Kris Wu, on rape allegations had raised hopes that authorities were finally addressing allegations. Wu has denied the claims. Zhou Xiaoxuan, who became the face of the domestic #MeToo movement in 2018 after accusing a state-run television host of groping and forcibly kissing her, wrote online that she was sympathetic towards Peng. “I hope she’s safe and sound,” she wrote. Popularly known as Xianzi, Zhou lost her legal case in October, although she is credited with encouraging women to go public with their accounts. The man she accused, Zhu Jun, has sued her for slander. Lü Pin, a US-based Chinese activist who founded the online forum, Feminist Voices, praised Peng on Twitter. She warned people not to dismiss the “tangled and chaotic” post in which the tennis player expresses “a lot of shame and self-blame”. “I fully sense the humiliation and anger in her heart.”Jimmy Kimmel Jimmy Kimmel celebrated a US vaccination milestone on Tuesday evening: according to the White House, 70% of US adults are now fully vaccinated, and 80% are at least partially vaccinated. “The other 20% are still waiting for the results of the clinical trial being conducted by Kyrie Irving of the Brooklyn Nets,” Kimmel said of the unvaccinated basketball star. “This is the part where peer pressure should kick in,” Kimmel said of remaining vaccine skepticism. “A wave of popular opinion, like remember a few years ago when everybody was doing the Harlem Shake? And at first you thought, ‘Oh, that’s dumb,’ but then like 80% of your friends were doing it on social media so you’re like, ‘I guess I should do the Harlem Shake?’” “This is like that, but in this case, if you dance, you won’t die on a ventilator, so why not?” The host then turned to Joe Biden’s efforts at Cop26, the UN climate conference in Glasgow, where 100 world leaders agreed on Monday to end deforestation by 2030. “Basically, they made a deal to save the Amazon from Amazon,” he quipped. In a video address, Queen Elizabeth II asked leaders to “act for our children and our children’s children, all of which she’s probably going to outlive”, said Kimmel. “What is that woman, a thousand years old now? She was around before the earth even had climate.” And UN secretary general António Guterres kicked off the conference on an urgent, dire note, telling the delegation that humanity is “digging our own graves” with the burning of fossil fuels. Kimmel added: “Senator Joe Manchin was like, ‘Yeah, but if we stop, we’re gonna put a lot of gravediggers out of business. What about them?” Stephen Colbert Tuesday was Dia de los Muertos, or “Day of the Dead, but if climate change continues at its current pace, soon it will just be called ‘day,’” joked Stephen Colbert on The Late Show. But world leaders were “talking about maybe doing something about it” at the UN climate conference in Glasgow. “Wait a minute, doing something? About climate? At a climate conference?” Colbert mocked. “What are the odds! Not good.” “But they agreed to do some stuff,” he continued, such as the pledge to end deforestation by 2030. “Of course, to do that, they’ll need a detailed plan that they’ll need to print out on thousands and thousands of pieces of paper,” Colbert noted. Colbert also touched on the Queen’s video statement, in which she hoped the conference would be “one of the rare occasions where everyone will have a chance to rise above the politics of the moment”. “We must all come together because the enemy is so clear,” Colbert said, imitating the Queen. “Just like in world war two, when everyone knew where they stood, and no one’s uncle was Nazi curious – don’t Google it.” Trevor Noah And on The Daily Show, Trevor Noah looked at the supreme court’s hearing on the extreme Texas abortion ban, which authorizes private citizens to report on and sue anyone who provides or abets an abortion. The measure, signed by Texas’s Republican governor and designed by conservative lawmakers, could run into trouble with the court’s conservative justices for trying to evade federal law. On Monday, Justice Brett Kavanaugh, who was appointed by Trump, theorized that a similar measure could be used in left-leaning states to offer a $1m bounty against those who sell an assault rifle, and claim it wasn’t using state power because only private parties could bring the suits. “Uh oh, looks like the conservative justices are gonna have to choose what they care more about: guns or fetuses?” Noah explained. “And this is tough. That is, unless … what if women gave birth to guns! That’s it! We just make women give birth to guns, then everybody wins,” he joked. On a more serious note, “this really shows you how bullshit this law is,” he continued. “Because banning abortion has been the goal for conservatives for what, four decades now? But even they aren’t willing to do it like this. It would be like a lonely guy finally losing his virginity, but only because he fell into the gorilla pit at the zoo. It’s not what he wanted.”The climate crisis is a humanitarian crisis (Europe’s record summer ‘impossible’ without global heating, 3 November). More frequent and intense extreme weather events, driven by our greenhouse gas emissions, mean more disasters for the world’s most vulnerable people, especially those already facing conflict, displacement and hunger. Children, women, older people and people with disabilities are always the worst affected. The recent IPCC report warns that without immediate, rapid and large-scale reductions in emissions, limiting global warming to 1.5C degrees will not be achieved. Every fraction of a degree will threaten more lives and livelihoods. As agencies dealing with humanitarian crises, we – the 15 charities that make up the Disasters Emergency Committee – stand ready to respond to these disasters alongside our local partners, and are helping people to adapt. However, we urge governments meeting at Cop26 to urgently reduce global emissions, meet their commitments to finance mitigation and adaptation measures to protect at-risk communities, and to address loss and damage that has already occurred or is unavoidable. As president of the summit, the UK government must ensure those most vulnerable to the climate crisis are at the heart of solutions and policies agreed. The risks of disaster must be lessened by increasing the resilience of these communities. But if we fail to prevent runaway global heating, the increasing number and severity of cyclones, droughts, floods and heatwaves could overwhelm our ability to respond, putting millions more lives in danger. Jean-Michel Grand Executive director, Action Against Hunger UK Frances Longley Chief executive officer, ActionAid UK Chris Roles Managing director, Age International Mike Adamson Chief executive officer, British Red Cross Christine Allen Director, Cafod Laurie Lee Chief executive, Care International UK Amanda Khozi Mukwashi Chief executive officer, Christian Aid Danny Harvey Executive director, Concern Worldwide (UK) Laura Kyrke-Smith Executive director, International Rescue Committee UK Tufail Hussain Executive director, Islamic Relief Danny Sriskandarajah Chief executive officer, Oxfam GB Rose Caldwell Chief executive officer, Plan International UK Gwen Hines Chief executive officer, Save the Children UK Nigel Harris Chief executive officer, Tearfund Mark Sheard Chief executive officer, World Vision UK • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Inspectors have upheld a complaint by the Scottish health secretary, Humza Yousaf, after a nursery allegedly refused to offer his daughter a place. The Care Inspectorate said Little Scholars nursery in Broughty Ferry, a suburb of Dundee, had failed to “promote fairness, equality and respect” in its handling of applications following a three-month investigation. Yousaf and his wife, Nadia El-Nakla, complained to the inspectorate claiming the nursery repeatedly failed to give their daughter a place despite offering places to applications from people with “white-sounding names”. The couple, who live in Dundee and are pursuing separate legal action against the nursery, said they became suspicious after their daughter was twice refused a place despite the nursery confirming to others with non-minority-ethnic names it had vacancies. The Care Inspectorate, the sector’s regulator in Scotland, said: “We have upheld a complaint in relation to this matter. We found that the service did not promote fairness, equality and respect when offering placements. Every child in Scotland has the right to good quality care that meets their needs and respects their rights. “We have identified areas for improvement and we will follow up on these to check on progress. We continue to monitor this service. If we are not satisfied that the improvements required have been met, we will not hesitate to take further action.” The inspectorate has given the nursery until 12 December to show it is well managed and has “consistent and robust” systems for admissions requests which show “these are processed in a transparent and equitable manner”. Little Scholars nursery, whose owners are of Asian heritage, was furious at the ruling and has instructed lawyers to challenge the inspectorate’s “highly misleading” statement about its findings. A spokesperson for Usha Fowdar, the owner, said of media reports on Wednesday the inspectorate had upheld complaints of discrimination, that it had made no such findings. The inspectorate has previously rated the nursery “very good” after statutory inspections. “As a small family business, we’re always looking at ways we can improve things,” the statement said. “Whilst the Care Inspectorate found our admission procedure could be improved, this had nothing to do with discrimination or equality and within a few days of becoming aware of Mr Yousaf and Ms El-Nakla’s complaint, we reviewed and updated our system for dealing with admissions.” El-Nakla, who works for the Scottish National party MSP Shona Robison, said she became suspicious after getting a curt response from Little Scholars when she first applied for a place for her daughter, Amal. After a second request was refused, she said she asked a white friend to apply and said that friend was offered a place. El-Nakla then put in a fictitious application from a relative with a Muslim-sounding name and another made-up one with a white-sounding name. The nursery only offered a place to the “white” applicant. After Yousaf contacted the Record newspaper about the story, a reporter repeated the exercise. “She created two profiles with kids same age, their requirements the same. ‘Aqsa Akhtar’ application was rejected while ‘Susan Blake’ was offered a choice of 4 afternoons,” Yousaf said on Twitter. Scottish Hindu leaders later accused Yousaf of stirring up anti-Hindu sentiments after Yousaf challenged the idea during a BBC radio interview that Asian-heritage people were incapable of discriminating against others of Asian background.The conclusion by Yorkshire County Cricket Club (YCCC) that the use of a racial slur against one of its players by another was just “friendly banter” has shocked many people. But for some, it has also inspired a grim sense of deja vu. Azeem Rafiq’s allegation of racism at Yorkshire was first raised more than three years ago, but it has shot up the political agenda this week after a report on Monday by ESPNcricinfo revealed more details about the club’s investigation into the issue. The investigation by the club concluded that the repeated use of the P-word by a senior player, who is still at the club, towards Rafiq was “in the spirit of friendly banter”. When Sunder Katwala, the director of British Future, heard this familiar defence from the cricket club, his first thought was that the 1970s were calling. “That was the dominant argument about casual racism in the 1970s, before we saw this shift in social norms about racist language and racist epithets. Television sitcoms like Love Thy Neighbour, which at the time thought it was being a bit progressive, were basically portraying racial stereotypes and then saying: ‘But can’t you take a joke?’” he said. “And that argument came back again in the 1990s with the lads’ mag era, which was very much like: ‘Maybe you can do sexism ironically and maybe do racism ironically. We’re all in on the joke, aren’t we?’” Cricket is not alone in dismissing the use of racial slurs as banter. In 2009, following the emergence of video footage showing Prince Harry using the same racial slur against a fellow cadet, some suggested it was just “army banter”. Students at universities and football players have since spoken out about banter being used as an excuse or justification for sexism and racism. But, as the former director of a race equality organisation points out, the conclusion that the use of a racial slur is just banter would only make sense if there was a non-racist meaning to that word. That seems unlikely when YCCC deemed the word to be offensive enough to asterisk throughout its report, which raises the question: why is it not offensive to say it to an Asian player? The banter defence had successfully been delegitimised, Katwala added, with campaigners and local communities successfully demonstrating the difference between banter and prejudice. “We’ve seen big generational shifts on prejudice and racism over time. One of the reasons is just that we’ve gotten better social relationships, especially if you’re younger and you grow up with mixed ethnic circles at school. You’re a bit more aware that what felt like maybe it was banter is actually quite hurtful. And that that kind of depth breaks through across generations,” Katwala said. YCCC is now facing significant pressure from senior politicians over its handling of Rafiq’s allegations, with the health secretary, Sajid Javid, calling for “heads to roll”. Sayeeda Warsi, the peer and former Conservative party co-chair, who is from Yorkshire, added: “Too many of us in too many walks of life have heard the ‘defence of banter’ for too long as an excuse for racism.” It is not the first time the club has been accused of mishandling issues of racism. In 2003, when Darren Lehmann was banned for using a racial slur against a Sri Lankan opponent during a one-day international for Australia, Yorkshire refused to take any action. The crucial difference, Katwala said, was that the UK now had senior politicians like Javid and Warsi. “In 2003, there were very few prominent politicians and prominent journalists from an ethnic minority background so again that kind of ‘well he didn’t really mean it, it was in the heat of the moment, let it all go’ thing wasn’t challenged. “I think it’s very interesting that Sajid Javid has spoken about having that word thrown at him as a teenager, feels very personally about it, and has intervened. I think that intervention and the intervention of the select committee have probably made it impossible for Yorkshire to brush it under the carpet.”Swedish pop group Abba have postponed the promotion of an upcoming show for 24 hours, after two people died in a dramatic fall at a tribute concert. On Tuesday night, an 80-year-old man fell or jumped seven storeys to his death at a concert hall in Uppsala, north of Stockholm, in a presumed accident, striking another attendee. The 80-year old died at the scene and the 60-year-old man he struck died later, police said. A woman who was with the 60-year-old man was hurt but her injuries were not considered life-threatening, police said. The venue was to host a tribute show for an audience of about 1,000 called Thank You For the Music, honouring the works of Bjorn Ulvaeus and Benny Andersson, the two male members of Abba. “In the light of the tragic news at the tribute concert in Sweden last night, we have decided to hold off on releasing our concert trailer until tomorrow,” a post from the Abba Voyage Twitter account said. The venue’s website said it would be closed from Wednesday until Friday because of the deaths. “We are all shocked by the tragic accident and our thoughts go to the deceased, their relatives and their families,” a message on its website said. Police said they have no reason to suspect foul play in the 80-year-old’s fall from the seventh floor. A new album, Voyage, is being released on Friday, 40 years after the group split up. In addition to the release of the album, announced in September, the band is building a venue in London to host a show that includes digitised “avatars” of its four members, scheduled for May 2022. The exact form of the avatars, designed by a special effects company that worked on the Star Wars films, is still shrouded in mystery, but the band insists they will not be mere holograms. The “Abbatars” will represent Agnetha Fältskog, Björn Ulvaeus, Benny Andersson and Anni-Frid Lyngstad as they looked in 1979.A council that rose to notoriety after a video call row between its members went viral has decided to change its name in an attempt to move on from its “toxic” past, its chair has said. In the December Handforth parish council meeting, held and recorded via Zoom, several male members rounded on the stand-in clerk, Jackie Weaver, in a dispute over procedural rules governing such meetings. The recording gained more than 6m views after being published online and made a household name of Weaver, who during the meeting was warned by the embittered then chair, Brian Tolver, that she had “no authority here” before he was booted off the call. Since the meeting, two councillors have resigned and Tolver has relinquished his chair duties, but remains a councillor, while Weaver has launched podcasts, hosted live events and on 27 November is switching on Handforth’s Christmas lights. Weaver told the Guardian changing the council’s name was a “brilliant decision” as it marked a fresh start for a body that is “free of the challenging elements that were within”. The new chair, John Smith, said the Cheshire authority had been renamed Handforth town council because they wanted to “move away from the toxic side of Handforth”. He said: “We have a new name and three new councillors and along with the other remaining councillors are committed to improving Handforth. We are also moving away from the viral, toxic Handforth parish council as portrayed on YouTube and are leaving it behind.” He said the move was also down to a feeling among councillors that Handforth residents would identify more with a secular-sounding name as opposed to one with the religious connotations of “parish”. He said: “Many residents have understandably believed that Handforth parish council is in some way attached to the church. For those of a certain age, the Vicar of Dibley comes to mind.” Weaver, who is employed not by Handforth parish council but the Cheshire Association of Local Councils, told the Guardian: “I think it is a brilliant decision of the council – it marks the start of a ‘new’ council that is free of the challenging elements that were within and able and ready to refocus on the terrific work that such local councils can do within their neighbourhoods. “Handforth most definitely has the authority to rename itself as a ‘town’ and it is certainly big enough in terms of area and responsibility to carry that name. We should, however, acknowledge that the chairman, John Smith, can now refer to himself as Mayor Smith if he so wishes.”🎵RECORD BREAKER!🎵 The Fiver wouldn’t be where it is today without proper football men such as Neil Warnock. The Middlesbrough manager is often derided as a meat-and-two-veg manager with outdated views, who has outstayed his footballing welcome. And while it is usually us doing the deriding we’d also argue that he has as much in common with right-on Silicon Valley types as he does with prehistoric long-ball merchants. You see, he’s been a prolific digital content provider down the years thanks to his preference for effing telling it like it is. Not bad considering the internet wasn’t even invented when he took charge of his first game. He’s helped fill Big Website with plenty of material in just half of his managerial career, which in its entirety stretches back over four decades. He’s also come out of retirement more often than some managers have overseen games. So we owed the 72-year-old a tip of the hat when he donned his padded coat and trotted out at Luton Town to take charge of a 1,602nd match in professional football on Tuesday. It’s a record that is unlikely to be beaten, such is the churn of managers these days. Not bad for a trained chiropodist whose speciality was treating ingrowing toenails. Middlesbrough lost, of course, and Warnock pleasingly played the hits. “We didn’t seem to get any rub of the green tonight,” he growled. “The linesman over the far side … I don’t think he’s ever given us anything when I’ve seen him. I’ll not miss him when I retire.” Some Boro fans would like that moment to come sooner rather than later. There were calls for his sacking in September after a defeat at Reading but three wins on the spin later and all was right with the world again. The 3-1 loss at Luton was Boro’s second on the bounce and, with a trip to West Brom up next, some wags might get gobby again. Not that it will bother Warnock, who was born with a coat like Teflon™. “I’ve been called ‘Marmite Man’ and all sorts – and that’s even your own fans. Some like you, some dislike you,” he shrugged before the Luton game. “When you’re my age, you do get labelled … you’re ‘dinosaurs’ and all that, ‘long-ball merchants’. I look at some of the teams in our league and I’ve never been as long as them in a million years but because they’re young, they don’t get criticised.” Had Boro won on Tuesday they’d have scraped into the play-off spots, territory Warnock is as adept at negotiating as he is at ripping out big toenails. No one in England has won as many promotions as Warnock’s eight. So we’d advise those on Teesside to stick with their old leader for a while longer yet. He might enjoy a long throw-in a tad too much, but he has a knack of getting results when the days get dark and the Championship gets serious. And even if they do give him verbal pelters, he’ll only take pleasure from it. “When I pass away, I don’t want clapping or a minute’s silence, I want a minute’s booing,” he once said. Almost makes us want to applaud the cranky old war horse. Almost. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Scott Murray from 8pm GMT for hot Big Cup MBM coverage of Liverpool 1-1 Atlético Madrid, when Gregg will be on hand for Manchester City 3-0 Club Brugge. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Villarreal is my home and I am 100% committed. Honestly, I am grateful for the interest of a great club, but even more grateful to be here” – Unai Emery rips up Newcastle’s Plan A. FIVER LETTERS “The man in the Yellow Submarine knows a sinking ship when he sees one. Good ebening” – Mark McFadden. “My friend Eric noted the same shortlist of managerial candidates that gets recycled every time there’s a job opening. To shake things up, may I nominate Eric as a potential manager for Newcastle/Everton/Crisis United? He has a solid record with his U-8s and plays an attractive brand of kick-and-run football with the kids. Plus, he regularly gets post-match ice creams for the players. Could be a change from Big Sam or the Portuguese, Spaniard, or Italian manager du jour” – Mike Wilner. “It seems Premier League new boys Brentford are the model of consistency. Currently sitting 12th with 12 points, 12 goals for and 12 against. I’m sure many of the long-serving teams below them will be envious of their points and goal difference. Long may it continue” – Raymond Dyer. “The Fiver’s accurate prediction of Atalanta 2-2 Manchester United (yesterday’s Live on Big Website!) reminded me that I must change the battery in my watch. Has anyone else ever found The Fiver useful for anything?” – Martyn Shapter. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Mark McFadden. RECOMMENDED LISTENING Get your listening gear around the latest Football Weekly podcast. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS A man who livestreamed himself on Facebook racially abusing Marcus Rashford, Jadon Sancho and Bukayo Saka has been jailed for 10 weeks. Jonathon Best, 52, posted the rant after the Euro 2020 final. Tottenham suit Fabio Paratici reckons the club has everything in place to achieve success now that Antonio Conte is in situ. “We have everything to achieve – infrastructure, big club, players, history, big fans,” he honked. That alarm you can hear is one going off around Manchester now that United defender Raphaël Varane is set to miss Saturday’s derby due to hamstring-twang sustained in the 2-2 Big Cup draw at Atalanta. Chelsea coach Arno Michels is getting all the love after suggesting a tactical tweak in the 1-0 Big Cup win at Malmö. “All credit to my assistant,” roared Tommy T. “He had the idea. We liked it. Malmö were defending in a low block.” And Cambridge United youngster Ben Worman feels he may have peaked only two games into his professional career after scoring this two-touch beauty in their League One win at Morecambe. “I don’t know if I’ll hit a better strike,” he sighed. STILL WANT MORE? “They are the hyperactive toddlers of English football, equally capable of moments of startling insight and unfettered joy as they are of throwing valuable household ornaments into the toilet” – Jonathan Liew riffs on yet another confusing Manchester United performance. Today’s Spurs comment comes from David Hytner, musing on how Antonio Conte eventually became a convenient fit for Daniel Levy. This week’s Knowledge answers questions about managers of the month getting the chop swiftly afterwards, perfect home records and Brits abroad scoring in European competitions. Aston Villa’s Anita Asante gets her chat on with Suzanne Wrack about being an activist and player. This quiz asks questions – fiendishly difficult ones at that – about footballers on screen, courtesy of our chums at the Blizzard. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! DIOLCH YN FAWR, NICKThe Senegalese novelist Mohamed Mbougar Sarr has become the first writer from sub-Saharan Africa to be awarded France’s oldest and most prestigious literary prize, the Prix Goncourt. The award, announced on Wednesday at the Drouant restaurant near the Opéra Garnier in Paris, was hailed as “symbolic” by the French literary establishment, 100 years after the prize – presented since 1867 – was first won by a Black author. L’Express magazine said the award crowned “the revelation of the literary year”, a “shining proof of the vitality and universality of the French language”. Le Monde said the “impressive ambition and stunning energy” of Sarr’s novel “carried all before it”. The decision comes amid an increasingly bitter culture war in France in the run-up to next year’s presidential elections, with the far-right polemicist Éric Zemmour recently calling for a ban on “non-French” names such as Muhammad. “I feel, quite simply, enormous joy,” said Mbougar Sarr, 31, who is the youngest winner of the Goncourt since 1976. The eldest in a family of seven boys, the son of a doctor, he grew up 100 miles from Dakar before moving to France to study literature. His novel, La plus secrète mémoire des hommes (The Most Secret Memory of Men), tells the story of a young Senegalese writer living in Paris who stumbles by chance across a novel published in 1938 by a fictional African author named TC Elimane, nicknamed “the Black Rimbaud” by an ecstatic Paris media. The story, described as a reflection on the links between fiction and reality, echoes the real-life experience of the Malian writer Yambo Ouologuem, who in 1968 became the first African winner of another celebrated French literary prize, the Prix Renaudot, but was later accused of plagiarism, fled France and vanished from public life. “With this young author, we have returned to the fundamentals of the Goncourt,” said Philippe Claudel, a member of the jury. “Thirty-one years old – he has a few books ahead of him. Let’s hope this award will not dampen his desire to write them.” The jury of seven men and three women “made its mind up on the first vote – there was not need for a second round”, said another jury member, Paule Constant. “This book is written in flamboyant style. It’s a hymn to literature.” This year’s award was tainted by a judging scandal when it emerged that the shortlist included a book by the boyfriend of one of the judges, who had written a scathing review of one of the other contenders for the prize. The Prix Goncourt is worth just €10 but guarantees renown and massive book sales. Previous winners, who include Marcel Proust, André Malraux, Simone de Beauvoir and Marguerite Duras, have seen novels rack up sales of 400,000 copies. Last year’s winner, Hervé Le Tellier, sold more than a million. The first Black winner of the Prix Goncourt, in 1921, was René Maran, whose early childhood was spent in Martinique. The rival Prix Renaudot, widely seen as the runner-up award to the Goncourt, this year went to the prolific French-speaking Belgian novelist Amélie Nothomb for Premier sang (First Blood), dedicated to her father who died last year.What would post-apocalyptic chiller The Road look like if it starred Tom Hanks opposite an adorable robot? A bit like this strange, sentimental sci-fi on Apple TV+ – co-written by veteran British producer Ivor Powell (who worked on Ridley Scott’s Alien and Blade Runner) and directed by Miguel Sapochnik. Well, it undoubtedly boasts some amazing visual effects work. Tom Hanks plays Finch, an ageing, unwell inventor, who is perhaps the only person left alive on Earth after a human-made environmental catastrophe destroyed the ozone layer and left cities eerily half-buried in heat and dust. Now Finch scavenges for canned food by day and spends his evenings building an android called Jeff (a motion-captured Caleb Landry Jones) which has a Borat-slash-Stephen-Hawking electronic voice. Jeff goofily learns how to walk, to drive Finch’s RV and to understand the world – and his main task will be to look after Finch’s other special friend, a dog called Goodyear, when Finch is dead. So the character dynamic in this film is odd: it’s basically a three-way cute-off between Finch, Jeff and Goodyear and there are no other humans in the movie, except for the ones Finch remembers in harrowing flashbacks. And weirdly, the menace and danger that you might expect – the people or things that would actually threaten our lovable trio – are simply not there. While in their RV, Finch, Jeff and Goodyear appear at one stage to be pursued by someone in a car, and then … well, these people, whoever they are, seem to just to go away. There is a curious lack of jeopardy. Our heroes don’t run out of water or food and there are no battery-life issues with Jeff. At the very end, there is the crucial question of whether Goodyear can learn to love and trust Jeff the way he loves Finch, and it is Jeff who we are supposed to find sympathetic and relatable: he is not like the creepy robots from 2001: A Space Odyssey or Dark Star, and the film even sneakily changes the way Jeff speaks from the ironically affectless robot voice to a more human tone. There is something anticlimactic and bland in it. • Finch is released on 5 November on Apple TV+.There is a troubling inconsistency in the police’s response to rape and sexual violence complainers, according to a report from Rape Crisis Scotland, which highlights poor communication, outdated attitudes and lengthy, unclear processes that leave survivors feeling isolated and anxious. Among the “prejudicial attitudes” displayed by officers, one complainer reported that the detective inspector who dropped her case told her: “You weren’t raped, it was consensual.” The publication of the report comes as all police forces have been challenged to address institutional misogyny after the conviction of Wayne Couzens, who used his status as a Metropolitan police officer to abduct and murder Sarah Everard. Last month a damning tribunal judgment accepted evidence of a sexist culture in Police Scotland, and on Tuesday the force apologised to women in Glasgow who had to walk home in darkness on Monday night after well-lit streets were blocked off due to Cop26 climate summit security concerns. The report, by the Survivor Reference Group, which was formed in 2019 of individuals across Scotland who had engaged with the Scottish justice system, notes one case where an individual had to give seven statements, with the last of these lasting for eight hours without a break, and suggests that many of those reporting sexual assaults were left “feeling as though they were being cross-examined”. In another instance, a woman was “told she’d done the wrong thing by accepting a drink of water from people who found her after she had been attacked”. The report makes a series of recommendations that it says “could radically improve the landscape of seeking justice for survivors of rape, sexual assault and abuse in Scotland”. It calls for urgent work to confront the “problematic and outdated” attitudes reported, and recommends that staff at all levels should be given trauma-informed communication training. It suggests that those reporting sexual offences should be given a named single point of contact, and that video statements should be used more widely to “reduce time and trauma involved in giving evidence”. Sandy Brindley, the chief executive of Rape Crisis Scotland, said: “Though reporting sexual crimes will never be easy, the Survivor Reference Group and Rape Crisis Scotland argue that it does not have to be this hard. Many of the experiences detailed in the report – of poor communication, inconsistent approaches, and prejudicial attitudes – are not inevitable, and with will and investment could be changed to ensure that, at the very least, survivors are not retraumatised by a system that is supposed to protect them”. Malcolm Graham, the deputy chief constable of Police Scotland, welcomed the report, saying it highlighted “the positive difference specialist officers can make”. He confirmed that the use of video-recorded interviews was being piloted in three divisions and the force was working with Rape Crisis Scotland and the Crown Office and Procurator Fiscal Service. He added: “We have a duty and an opportunity to lead a change in policing and across society which improves the experiences of all women, and listening to Rape Crisis Scotland and the survivor reference group is an important part of that work. We know there is much still to do.” Last month the chief constable, Iain Livingstone, ordered an independent review after an employment tribunal found that a female firearms officer was victimised by Police Scotland colleagues in a “horrific” workplace culture condemned as an “absolute boys’ club”.Desperately needed and preferably before the visit of Manchester City on Saturday: the vital percentage that could yet transform Manchester United’s expensively assembled footballers into the forces they are billed as and give the besieged Ole Gunnar Solskjær what he craves – stability and control. As Bonfire Night nears this is a dominant strand in the tale of United’s dislocated season. An off‑the-boil team manned by misfiring players who when not being beaten 5-0 (by Liverpool), 4‑2 (Leicester City), 1-0 (Aston Villa), 2-1 (Young Boys), and 1‑0 (West Ham), thrash Tottenham 3-0, Leeds 5-1 and Newcastle 4-1, while having to rely on last-minute goals in Europe,in a 2-1 win against Villareal and the 3-2 victory and 2-2 draw with Atalanta. These last three were possible only due to the one-man salvage act of Cristiano Ronaldo, a remarkable footballer who revelled in producing a remarkable late show for each of these strikes. The 36-year-old is a phenomenon but he should not have to heave United around on his shoulders virtually each time they kick off. What Ronaldo requires is simple to identify but is not being delivered from those who line up alongside him: consistent eight- and nine‑out‑of‑10 performances. This is a test of Solskjær’s management. Whatever the Norwegian did last season has been missing and by the time City arrive he has to rediscover how to elevate players so they match, at least, that standard. Last season Solskjær oversaw a reliable core who turned it on in enough games to take United to a second-place league finish and the Europa League final, which was lost via the penalty shootout lottery to Villarreal. In this cadre were Bruno Fernandes, Aaron Wan-Bissaka, Mason Greenwood, Edinson Cavani (when injury free), Luke Shaw, Scott McTominay, Paul Pogba, Marcus Rashford and Harry Maguire. Now, only Ronaldo, Greenwood, and David de Gea can be included: two outfield players and the goalkeeper is not enough. Shaw, Wan-Bissaka and Maguire are part of a rearguard which is a liability, with only two clean sheets in 23 games stretching back to April. The engine-room artistry and mettle of Pogba and McTominay have mutated into situations vacant where elite midfielders should be; Cavani has become peripheral and Rashford continues to ease his way back from a shoulder injury. Add underwhelming contributions from Victor Lindelöf, Fred, Nemanja Matic, Jadon Sancho, who cost £73m in the summer and finds himself in the Donny van de Beek category of player non grata, and United are akin to an ever‑tiring man treading water who may go under soon. A prevailing view states that Ronaldo, who has five goals in the first four Champions League group games (a club record), is the problem. If this is correct of United’s top scorer, who has nine strikes in 11 appearances, then what is Maguire? For the captain to impress he needs the extra fraction present in his game. Otherwise a mid-range talent is bedevilled by the lax positional sense that allowed Atalanta’s second goal on Tuesday, a clumsy touch and the dither of a man confused as to whether he must play to rediscover his best or in doing so is merely descending to new depths. Shaw has forgotten defending’s basic tenets – example: do not play the opposition onside, as for Naby Keïta’s opener for Liverpool – and the marauding runs that offer United a different dimension, and Wan‑Bissaka could use a confidence boost. There was a moment in the first half at the Gewiss Stadium when the right-back juggled the ball, pirouetted, swished infield and scattered the Atalanta defence. It illustrated a glittering array of skill and showed what the 23-year-old is capable of. But after that he vanished. If City are beaten on Saturday United will draw level on points with the champions. This is both remarkable, given their form, and a particularly big if. When discussing their Champions League group, which Solskjær’s side lead on goal difference from Villarreal, Shaw could also be speaking generally. “We need to take charge, we need that confidence and belief that we can and should be doing it,” the left-back told MUTV. “And of course, we know that we still need to improve. We know that just because we beat Spurs 3-0 and we got an OK point [at Atalanta] we can’t just relax and get comfortable. “We need to keep improving. We know that as a team and there’s much more to come with the talent we have in this squad. So, we need to keep focused, keep improving and getting better and better.” Ronaldo, too, spoke of the need to be better, after his latest Roy of the Rovers routine. He did not mean himself, of course. This is a message for the majority of his teammates – and, surely, for Solskjær. They and the manager need to sharpen up quickly or United will fail. Starting against City. • This article was amended on 8 November 2021. An earlier version erroneously referred to a 2-1 win over Young Boys rather than Villarreal.More than 20 countries and financial institutions will halt all financing for fossil fuel development overseas and divert the spending to green energy instead from next year. The move marks a significant boost for the transition to clean fuels. The Guardian understands the countries involved include the US, UK, Denmark and some developing countries that would receive such finance, including Costa Rica. The European Investment Bank is one of the financial institutions involved. Diverting their funding from fossil fuels to low-carbon efforts will generate an estimated $8bn a year around the world for clean energy. The agreement will prevent the funding of any fossil fuel development, including gas, though there are provisions for loopholes. However, China and Japan, two big funders of fossil fuel development around the world, have shunned the initiative. The countries involved will also be able to continue developing their own fossil fuel resources at home, including oil and gas fields. The US has at least 24 pending fossil fuel projects representing more than 1.6 gigatons of potential greenhouse gas emissions. The UK is licensing new oil and gas fields in the North Sea, despite hosting the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. The UK will also be able to press ahead with funding a controversial gasfield in Mozambique, because that project is already in the pipeline and the initiative covers only new investments. Funding for fossil fuels from private sources will also not be affected by the agreement. The move also builds on the UK’s efforts to end the overseas financing of coal, as president of the G7 this year as well as host of Cop26. The G7 agreed in May to stop funding coal development overseas, despite resistance from Japan, and China – one of the biggest funders of coal development around the world. Collin Rees, the programme manager at the Oil Change International campaign group, said the initiative, which will be made public on Thursday when the Cop26 summit is focusing on energy issues, would mark a major change in outlook for fossil fuel investment around the world. He said: “This is a massive step forward. This represents a serious chunk of the current international public finance for fossil fuels. It’s a really big thing, though there may be some devil in the detail.” Rees pointed to the advice of the International Energy Agency, published in May, that found all new development of fossil fuel resources globally must end after this year if the world was to limit global heating to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels. “This move is significant in light of the IEA report,” he said.Covid vaccination is to be made compulsory for the NHS’s 1.45 million staff in England, despite criticism that forcing frontline personnel to get jabbed is heavy-handed and will lead some to quit. However, the tough new approach will not come into force until April, after Sajid Javid heeded warnings that introducing it soon could lead to an exodus of staff during the winter, the health service’s busiest time of year. An announcement is due imminently, the Guardian understands. The health secretary appears to have been influenced by NHS Providers and the NHS Confederation, the two organisations that represent NHS trusts in England, strongly advising him to delay implementing the move until next year. On Monday, Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, said that while a majority of hospital bosses backed jabs becoming compulsory, more than 90% of them feared it could exacerbate the understaffing that is already endemic across the service. He highlighted “the potential loss of those staff who don’t take the vaccine when the service is already under huge pressure and carrying 93,000 vacancies”. He said: “The government must recognise the risk of losing unvaccinated frontline staff and support efforts to maximise voluntary take-up first.” The latest NHS figures show that 90% of NHS personnel in England – 1,303,605 out of 1,452,256 – have had two doses of vaccine. However, as recently as September the figure was as low as 78% – barely three out of four – in some trusts. One senior NHS source said: “Given the NHS is a horror show just now, with unprecedented pressure all over the place, to chuck an additional spanner in the works by making Covid jabs mandatory now would be foolhardy, and Sajid Javid isn’t a foolhardy politician.” The policy is likely to be controversial, with many NHS staff groups opposed to it. “We do not think that making the Covid vaccine mandatory for doctors is either necessary or proportionate. So if it’s true that the Department of Health is pressing ahead with compulsory vaccination we would be very wary,” said Prof Helen Stokes-Lampard, the chair of the Academy of Medical Royal Colleges, which represents all the UK’s doctors professionally. “While we do think that it is the professional responsibility of doctors to get the jab, when we know that more than 92% of them have already done so, you have to ask why such a heavy-handed approach is being taken, especially when this could well lead to damaging disputes at a local or national level which would be nothing more than a distraction from the real challenges the NHS workforce is facing right now.” The British Medical Association, the doctors’ union, last week urged Javid to delay making jabs compulsory until the Department of Health and Social Care had undertaken an impact assessment to give ministers an idea of how many staff might quit if it is introduced. Dr Chaand Nagpaul, the BMA’s chair of council, stressed the “legal, ethical and practical implications” of pressing ahead with the policy and said that “any reduction in healthcare workers could be devastating for patient services as we face a record backlog of care and winter pressures”. Javid has already made vaccination mandatory for care home staff in England. From Thursday 11 November, anyone working in a care home will have to prove they have been double-jabbed or face being dismissed. The most recent data suggests about 90% of the sector’s 600,000 personnel have had two doses, leaving 60,000 who have not. Social care experts have said compulsion could lead to many thousands of staff deciding to quit, worsening already chronic shortages in the service. Some hospitals in the US have made vaccination compulsory for their staff. Last month, two hospital groups in New Jersey fired 238 workers for refusing to comply. RWJBarnabasHealth, which runs 15 hospitals in the state, terminated the contracts of 118 personnel while Virtua Health said 120 staff had “elected to discontinue their employment” instead of getting jabbed. Neither health provider disclosed details of what types of health professionals had left over the policy. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “We have taken action to introduce vaccination requirements in care homes and we recently consulted on extending this further across health and other social care services. No final decisions have been made and we will set out our response in due course. “Vaccines are safe and effective and almost four in five people in the UK have already had both jabs to protect themselves against Covid-19. It’s never too late to take up the offer and we would urge everyone who is eligible to come forward as we head into the winter months.”Much of the anger among Conservative MPs keen to overturn the verdict against their colleague Owen Paterson has been focused on the independent parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone. They argue that her approach is high-handed, and her investigations “amateurish”, in the words of one Paterson ally, the former Brexit secretary David Davis. But her supporters insist this criticism just reflects Stone’s determination to take on vested interests. Employed by parliament, rather than the government, to safeguard independence, Stone is the sixth commissioner since the post was created in 1995. She has previously published highly critical reports on the behaviour of the former Labour MP Keith Vaz and the DUP MP Ian Paisley Jr. If Stone decides a sufficiently serious breach of the rules on MPs’ conduct has taken place she can refer the case to parliament’s committee on standards, which is chaired by the Labour MP Chris Bryant. Stone picked up responsibility for the Vaz inquiry, involving claims that he had procured drugs for sex workers, from her predecessor Kathryn Hudson. When that inquiry reported, resulting in a six-month suspension for Vaz, then the MP for Leicester East, she complained he had “failed, repeatedly, to answer direct questions, given incomplete answers and his account [had], in parts, been incredible”, underlining her willingness to be tough with MPs where necessary. More recently she announced she would be reviewing the MPs’ code of conduct to reflect their use of Twitter and other social media, saying in her annual report: “I have been surprised at the way some MPs express their views and opinions on social media.” She opened 26 inquiries between 2020 and 2021, 11 of those on her own initiative, and the rest after cases were referred to her. Stone was born in Derby and went to school in nearby Belper before taking a degree in sociology and a masters in women’s studies at Loughborough University. She has a long history of tackling politically contentious issues. She previously served as the commissioner for victims and survivors in Northern Ireland, with the delicate task of tackling the legacy of the Troubles. Stone was also a commissioner for the Independent Police Complaints Commission, overseeing investigations, including into the Rotherham force’s failure to tackle child sex abuse. She began her working life caring for children with disabilities and went on to run the charity Voice UK, which represents people with disabilities who have experienced crime or abuse. She was given an OBE in 2007. In her current post – and perhaps most relevantly, given Downing Street’s interest in the Paterson case – Stone has found herself investigating the prime minister’s personal finances. She found against him over a free holiday he took in Mustique courtesy of a Tory donor, because he “did not make sufficient inquiries to establish the full facts about the funding arrangements for his free accommodation, either before his holiday, as he should have done, or in 2020”. However, Bryant’s committee subsequently sought additional information from the prime minister and the donor in question, the Carphone Warehouse founder, David Ross, and concluded Johnson had correctly declared the luxury stay. Johnson is known to have been irked by the investigation into the funding of his 2019 Christmas holiday, which was one of a series into his financial affairs; they included one by the new ministerial standards watchdog, Lord Geidt, into the refurbishment of the Downing Street flat, an issue the Electoral Commission has subsequently been examining. Geidt’s predecessor Sir Alex Allan resigned after the government disregarded his finding that the home secretary, Priti Patel, had breached the ministerial code over bullying allegations. Stone, who began the job in January 2018, is due to serve a five-year term.The career of the Bee Gees singer Sir Barry Gibb has been honoured on a new set of stamps in the Isle of Man. Gibb, 75, was born on the island in 1946 before moving to Manchester in 1955. He and his brothers Robin and Maurice sold more than 200m albums worldwide in a career spanning five decades. The seven stamps show Gibb at various stages of his career between 1969 and 2019. A statement hailed his “peerless musical career” and “tireless charitable work”. One stamp shows him on the set of the 1978 film Sgt. Pepper’s Lonely Hearts Club Band, while another is of him on stage at Glastonbury in 2017. Others show him at home and on stage in locations around the world. Gibb said he was “very proud” of his Manx roots. “I was born and bred on the ancient, mystical, magical Isle of Man, and I have very fond memories of growing up there, so to appear on a set of its stamps is not only a wonderful surprise, but also an honour and a privilege,” he said. President of Tynwald, Laurence Skelly, said the Bee Gees were “arguably the most famous Manx export”. “Throughout their careers they have all been outstanding ambassadors of the Isle of Man and so proud of their birthplace and I believe this issue and commemoration is fitting for the last surviving brother, Sir Barry Gibb,” he said. At the request of Gibb, the stamps will raise money for the music therapy charity Nordoff Robbins. It follows the unveiling of a statue of the Bee Gees on the Isle of Man in July.Public financial institutions overseas, including export credit agencies, poured $36.7bn into Australian fossil fuel projects over a decade, according to new research. The report, by a group of environmental groups including Jubilee Australia and the Australian Conservation Foundation, found this was 11 times more than the amount directed to renewable energy, which received $3.3bn between 2010 and 2020. But it also found the gap between finance available for fossil fuels and renewable energy had narrowed in recent years. The paper has been released as the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow is expected to bring closer focus on the public financing of fossil fuels, with the UK reported to be pushing for a deal to stop foreign funding of such projects. Earlier this month, OECD countries agreed to end export credit support for unabated coal-fired power plants. In September, China announced it would no longer fund coal-fired power plants overseas. The research examined databases – including Oil Change International’s Shift the Subsidies database – that track public energy financing. Of the $36.7bn, it found $28.07bn went to LNG projects in Australia, including $9.67bn to the Ichthys LNG development in north-west Australia and $7.76bn for Australia Pacific LNG in Queensland. The research says the total figure is likely to be higher because many public financial institutions do not publish detailed records of their transactions. Three countries supplied Australia the bulk of this LNG financing, with Japan providing 41% ($11.7bn), China 20% ($5.6bn) and South Korea 14% ($3.96bn). About $6.7bn went to coal projects. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Jubilee Australia campaigns director, Dina Rui, said public financing for fossil fuels would need to end if countries wanted to avoid the worst effects of the climate crisis. “Even the traditionally conservative International Energy Agency says that staying below 1.5C of warming means there can be no new coal, oil or gas projects,” she said. “Australia should support the shift away from fossil fuels, not try to hold back progress by blocking stronger agreements to end public funding of coal and gas.” Contributions peaked in 2012, when about $18.5bn flowed to Australian projects. The report found contributions had fallen in recent years, particularly in 2020 when $364m went to fossil fuel projects, compared to $317m for renewables. But the research put this down to the Covid-19 pandemic “lowering fossil fuel demand and causing project delays, rather than a downwards trend”. Tim Buckley of the Institute for Energy Economics and Financial Analysis said pressure was building on countries to end capital subsidies for fossil fuels. “My number one issue is the constant refrain from the Morrison government that fossil fuels are a low-cost source of energy and that renewables aren’t as cost-effective,” he said. “If they were so viable, why does an industry that has been around for centuries still need subsidies?” But he said the amount of global public finance directed toward fossil fuels had diminished in the past two years, with a shift towards investment in renewables. “I expect that trend to continue,” he said. “But the question is why is anyone still providing literally billions in capital subsidies to coal, oil and gas?”The company contracted by the federal government to run the controversial cashless debit card claimed $2m in jobkeeper payments before increasing its revenues during the pandemic. Payments firm Indue, which was handed a $26m, two-year extension to its contract to keep running the scheme late last year, received about $2.1m in jobkeeper wage subsidies in total. That comprised $632,700 in June 2020 and $1.49m between July and September 2020, according to its annual report. The company’s revenue increased in 2019-20 and 2020-21, leading to profit of $2.1m and $2.5m, the report shows. Under the jobkeeper program, businesses were required to estimate whether their turnover would decrease by 30-50% when compared to the previous year, depending on their size. There is no suggestion Indue did not qualify for the payments under the rules of the scheme. Controversially, the government elected not to include a clawback provision to recoup money from those companies that outperformed expectations. Labor’s assistant treasury spokesman, Andrew Leigh, who has called for greater accountability for firms that claimed the subsidy, said Indue should voluntarily pay the money back. “Indue makes tens of millions of dollars running the cashless debit card for the Morrison government,” he said. “Now it turns out they got $2m in jobkeeper, despite increasing their revenues during the pandemic.” Parliamentary budget office analysis, first reported by the ABC on Tuesday, found the Morrison government paid out a total of $38bn in jobkeeper to businesses that did not suffer sustained downturns during the pandemic. Several Australian companies have faced public pressure to pay back jobkeeper funds, and some have, but the government has resisted calls to compel them. At the same time, the government has sought to claw back about $50m from 16,000 welfare recipients who were overpaid due to an overlap with jobkeeper payments. A spokesperson for Indue said the company met the jobkeeper criteria by estimating their “GST turnover had fallen or would likely fall by 30% or more”. The spokesperson said the company could “confirm that our actual GST turnover fell by more than 30%”. The money was used to “preserve employment for Indue staff and allowed Indue to support hardship applications from our customers impacted by the pandemic”. “Accordingly, we intend to retain the jobkeeper payments on the basis that Indue met the qualifying criteria, the payments were accessed for legitimate reasons and used by Indue for the purposes it was intended,” the spokesperson said. The spokesperson said the company’s “modest profit” included its jobkeeper payments. “As outlined in our latest annual report, the government measures supported consumer confidence which assisted payment volumes and revenue to progressively recover as lockdowns lifted,” the spokesperson said. Running the cashless debit card is only one part of the company’s operations, which include other banking services, fraud mitigation and other payment products. Leigh’s call for Indue to pay the wage subsidy back comes amid a political fight over the future of the cashless debit card. The scheme aims to reduce social harm – such as gambling, alcohol and drug abuse – by quarantining 80% of a person’s payments onto a card that can’t withdraw cash or be used to buy items banned under the program. Given 42% of participants are Indigenous, the government’s card scheme has been branded racist, and cardholders have told Guardian Australia it causes stigma, has led to missed rental payments, and limited their ability to access cheaper goods online or in the cash economy. A Senate inquiry previously heard claims one mother could not buy a children’s book from a bookstore because the shop also sold books on distilling alcohol, while a nursing student is said to have been stopped from buying a stethoscope and university books from the Medshop. The Senate submission claimed that Indue staff said she could not buy those things as she may be trying to buy hand sanitisers to drink. Labor MP Julian Hill told parliament last month one woman was “forced to beg Indue for permission to buy a bra that fitted her from a shop that wasn’t on the approved list” and “forced to send in photos”. The government insists that such claims are handled by Services Australia, not Indue. Hill has introduced a private members’ bill to scrap the scheme once it expires at the end of next year and is among a number of backbench Labor MPs claiming the government plans to place age pensioners onto the card. Anne Ruston, the social services minister, has described the claim as a “lie”, and repeatedly ruled out plans to expand the card to age pensioners. The two-dozen age pensioners currently on the card have volunteered or been placed on the scheme by Cape York’s Family Responsibilities Commission. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning While the Cape York site is overseen by the commission, the government runs the trials in Bundaberg and Hervey Bay in Queensland, the Goldfields and East Kimberley in Western Australia, and Ceduna in South Australia. The card also operates in the Northern Territory. Labor argues the card is an example of the privatisation of the welfare system and it has been long opposed by the Greens, welfare groups and grassroots campaigners. Indue’s total contract with the government, dating back to 2015, is worth $70m, including a $26m two-year extension when the government won a Senate vote in December to keep the scheme going. One major study into the card’s effects in Ceduna found it had “no substantive impact” while a government commissioned independent report was mostly inconclusive on whether the card had led to a reduction in social harms. Last month the government announced participants in the Northern Territory would be able to select from the Traditional Credit Union as well as Indue as their card issuer.Deaths from flu and other respiratory infections in Australia have dropped significantly during the Covid-19 pandemic, according to new data. The latest release of Australian Bureau of Statistics mortality data shows that two people died of influenza in July – the first deaths from the viral infection in Australia for an entire year. The figures come as research by Doherty Institute scientists suggests that one of the four main kinds of influenza virus that cause seasonal epidemics may have become extinct due to Covid-19 health measures. As of 24 October, there have only been 584 cases of laboratory-confirmed influenza recorded by the National Notifiable Diseases Surveillance System this year, with the federal health department noting that “activity in the community remains at historically low levels in 2021”. In the 2020 influenza season, there were just 21,266 laboratory-confirmed influenza cases, compared to the year before when there were 313,033 influenza cases and 953 deaths. In Australia, there were 1,276 deaths recorded from all respiratory diseases in July, the latest month for which figures are available. Modelling by the Actuaries Institute, a professional body, predicted 1,600 deaths for the same period if the Covid pandemic had not occurred. Jennifer Lang, chair of the Actuaries Institute’s working group on Covid, said pandemic-related public health measures were likely the cause of the drop. “It’s the fact that we’ve taken steps to avoid infection from Covid, which has helped us to avoid being affected by a whole lot of other respiratory diseases,” she said. “It’s impossible to be absolutely certain because this is one of those statistical things that might just have happened, but certainly this has been the lowest level of respiratory death in the time that we’ve looked at.” Lang said flu cases have been down worldwide. “It’s been all of the different measures that people are taking to avoid mixing which has reduced the level of flu in circulation worldwide. A lot of health professionals are watching carefully to see what happens as people start mixing again.” A recent study led by Doherty Institute researchers, published in Nature Reviews Microbiology, has suggested that the “suppressive conditions of the Covid-19 pandemic” may have either strongly suppressed or completely wiped out a lineage of influenza B virus. Known as B/Yamagata, the lineage is one of two that usually results in seasonal illness, but it has not been definitively detected since April 2020. The study’s authors noted that pandemic-related behavioural changes such as social distancing, mask wearing, and travel restrictions were major factors contributing to a global drop in influenza incidence. The Doherty Institute’s Prof Ian Barr, the co-author of another influenza paper currently under review, said B/Yamagata’s extinction “may well reduce the amount of influenza B that circulates”. “We probably need to wait at least another year before we could be confident that it’s gone,” he said. Northern hemisphere bracing for flu season Barr, also deputy director of the World Health Organization’s Collaborating Centre for Reference and Research on Influenza, said the closure of international borders has been a key reason for the drop in flu cases throughout the pandemic. He believes the relaxation of travel restrictions “will increase – definitely – the number of cases of influenza in the northern hemisphere in their coming winter”. In the UK, the health service is aiming to immunise a record 35 million people with the seasonal influenza vaccine – more than half the country’s population – amid fears that the winter flu season could be particularly deadly. It was difficult to determine how severe the next flu seasons – in both the northern and southern hemispheres – would be, Barr said. In Australia, the reopening of international borders meant there was potential for out-of-season flu outbreaks, he added. Last summer, Australian hospitals noted unseasonably high rates of respiratory syncytial virus in children. “With influenza, we had a big year in 2019,” Barr said. “That started very early in the year – February or March – and so that is a possibility to happen again.” Barr noted, however, that because influenza cases were down globally, it could also take time for infections to rise in Australia. “People should consider influenza vaccination in 2022 even if they didn’t get it in 2021, because of the increased risk.” The four-component seasonal flu vaccine selected for use in the 2022 southern hemisphere flu season will include B/Yamagata. But if the lineage is truly extinct, flu vaccines in future could be simplified down to three components, to protect against two strains of influenza A and a lineage of influenza B known as B/Victoria. “That may make the [vaccine] quicker and easier to make, and cheaper,” Barr said.Fans without puff, a wasteful composter and a sugar-laden children’s snack are among products named by the consumer advocacy group Choice in its annual Shonky awards as among the worst it has seen this year. The chief executive of Choice, Alan Kirkland, said he was amazed the organisation had to keep giving out the awards, now in their 16th year. “Healthy toddler food should actually be healthy. An expensive compost bin shouldn’t generate more waste … a smart fan should cool you down.” ‘The worst we’ve ever tested’ A bladeless fan sold under a number of different brand names and put through its paces by Choice expert tester Adrian Lini was assessed as performing seven times worse than the average tower fan, and 70 times worse than the best fan. The Smarthome Bladeless fan from Kogan sells for a full retail price of $300, but Lini also found imitations of exactly the same design priced as low as $60. The bladeless fans were one of the “worst performing” retail appliances Choice had ever seen, Kirkland said. “The labs originally tested the Kogan model and found it to be the worst we’ve ever tested but once we dug a little further, we found a number of these knock-offs littered across Australian retail,” he said. Essentially the same fan was found under different brand names in a number of different stores and across retailers online. Lini said the fan advertised a lot of “gimmicky features”, but there wasn’t “much to it”. “It’s got a poor design, extremely poor performance, a weak motor and a high cost,” he said. “Once you move outside the metre or half a metre range, there’s absolutely no airflow … at the end of the day, the fan just does not perform. “It’s tricking you into thinking you’re buying something at a different level of quality, but it’s just a very light breeze. “You can’t trust a product off brand name alone … find independent reviews or go into the store itself,” Lini said. Kogan did not respond to a request for comment. More landfill, at a hefty price The Breville FoodCycler, retail price $499, was little more than an “extremely wasteful” and “pointless” compost bin, Choice said. The food disposal system transforms food waste into odourless eco chips for the garden or bin, claiming to reduce waste by about 80%. “We found it bulky, expensive, complicated and noisy,” Kirkland said. “This product is marketed to make you feel like you’re doing the right thing – putting your food scraps to good use and avoiding landfill. “The reality is you’re buying an alternative to a simple compost bin that will cost at least $2,000 over the course of its lifetime.” Home economist and “kitchen nerd” Fiona Mair said the product was “taking advantage” of people who wanted to look after the environment. Mair said its intermittent “ear piercing” noises drove Choice staff to take it away from its lab for testing “because it was so annoying”. “It’s hard to explain, we didn’t notice it at first, just this irritating noise doing our head in until we had to move it out of the kitchen lab,” she said. The FoodCycler, which takes between four and six hours to turn waste into eco chips, also requires regular replacement filters, which contribute further to landfill. Mair said people without access to a garden for composting would be better off asking their local council for food waste bags, or trying a bokashi bin. “Why would you want to spend money to reduce your food waste into landfill when you can buy compost bins or worm farms that virtually cost nothing to do the same thing?” Mayer said. “It’s just another appliance that sits on your bench, and it’s contradicting itself. It takes energy to make, it’ll probably end up in landfill, as appliances do, and it’s a waste of money.” Breville’s general manager, Lucy Martyn, said Choice’s review missed the “bigger point” that most food waste went to landfill at “significant cost and grave environmental consequences”. “We completely agree … that compost bins are a great option for dealing with food waste – however the reality is … not everyone can compost and the volume of food waste that makes it to landfill is evidence of that,” she said. “By focusing on this narrow comparison, Choice … distracts from the more important issue. Every kilogram of food waste in the landfill produces 1.3kg of CO2 … even when powered by Australia’s predominantly coal-based grid, there’s a net carbon reduction when you FoodCycle versus sending food waste to landfill. “The cost is also misrepresented … a typical household running the machine three to five times per week will likely require filter replacements every three to six months so we can estimate this at $120 per year. Based on an average power rate of $0.25kWh and 0.8kWh per cycle four times per week this is approximately $42 per year. The bucket lid filters do not require regular replacement.” An advocate that doesn’t advocate The Airline Customer Advocate received a Shonky for its alleged inefficiency as a complaints handling body after prolonged Covid flight cancellations left travellers stranded. Last year, the Airline Customer Advocate announced it wouldn’t be taking complaints about common problems faced by air travellers during the pandemic, included being offered flight credit in place of a refund. The body is funded by Jetstar, Qantas, Rex and Virgin Australia to provide a “free and independent service” to facilitate unresolved complaints about participating airline services. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “The Airline Customer Advocate is no advocate,” Kirkland said. “It can’t investigate your complaint, it can’t make an independent decision and it has no power to make airlines do anything. Instead, it will forward your complaint back to the airline, asking nicely for the airline to respond to you in 20 days. And that’s about it. “It’s basically a complaint forwarding service masquerading as an independent complaints handling body. The Airline Customer Advocate did not respond to a request for comment. A sugar bomb for $150 a kilo Choice experts said they were “shocked” to find Kiddylicious Strawberry Fruit Wriggles contained more sugar, in the form of concentrated fruit sugars, than lolly snakes. Choice said that claims such as “packed with real fruit” and “no artificial additives” were liable to lead parents to believe the product was healthy: 61% of respondents to a Choice survey perceived the Kiddylicious wriggles as healthier than jelly snakes. “This product markets itself as a healthy, fun toddler-friendly snack, but the reality is it’s an expensive, sugar-laden dud,” Kirkland said. “Kiddylicious … [makes] you feel like you’re doing the right thing by your child, but these lollies are 68% sugar, at a cost of $150 a kilo.” A Kiddylicious spokesperson said the sugars contained in the fruit wriggles were “naturally occurring” in the fruit used to make the product. “Unlike lollies, there are no added refined sugars to this product. In fact, for each 12g packet of strawberry fruit wriggles, we use approximately 87g of fresh fruit,” they said. “We do not employ any marketing tricks, what’s in the pack is clearly labelled on the pack. Our products are portion controlled to provide parents some peace of mind.” The spokesperson said Kiddylicious snacks were marketed as a “sometimes food” but specifically formulated for babies and toddlers. “Our range is designed to support a child’s development, with shapes, sizes and textures which aid self-feeding, play and co-ordination,” they said. Up to $30,000 of debt Buy-now, pay-later products have rocketed in popularity in recent years, but humm was criticised for allowing customers to borrow up to $30,000 at a time. “Buy-now pay-later products have been deliberately designed to avoid safe lending laws,” Kirkland said. Choice said loans from such companies fell into a gap in safe lending laws. “That means they don’t need to check whether you can afford to repay a debt before they lend you money.” Kirkland said humm, which markets itself as the “bigger” buy-now pay-later brand, demonstrated how “dangerous” these products were. “Buy-now pay-later providers like humm like to pretend they are just a modern form of layby, but nobody ever laybyed $30,000. This is unregulated credit, pure and simple,” Kirkland said. Choice said it approached humm four times to ask how it checked whether it was lending safely, and “could not get a straight answer”. A spokesperson for humm said it was only contacted on two occasions with two separate sets of questions and responded “quickly, fully and transparently” each time. They said the company provided an interest-free product, built with “consumers’ best interest at its core” and played a key role in developing the Buy Now Pay Later code of practice. They said humm ran a “series of checks” for all potential customers including a third-party product suitability check with the third-party credit bureau Illion. “For purchases over $1,000, income verification is mandatory for all purchases. We also conduct thorough identity checks and ensure that we comply with AML obligations,” they said. “We utilise our own sophisticated credit algorithms to ensure that customers have the ability to repay … our exceptionally low hardship, loss and arrears rates demonstrate that we have this balance right.”Religious groups have warned the Morrison government to retain a clause allowing discrimination against staff who don’t share their faith in the Coalition’s religious freedom bill, as Liberal MPs reserve their right to cross the floor over the draft legislation. The attorney general, Michaelia Cash, is preparing to introduce the religious discrimination legislation to parliament in the final sitting fortnight starting on 22 November and is attempting to navigate deep divisions within the party. The bill is now in its third iteration. Greg Bondar, a spokesperson for conservative Christian lobby group FamilyVoice Australia, said opponents of “religious freedom” legislation incorrectly claimed organisations couldn’t hold religious views. Bondar cited Qantas’s support for the sacking of Israel Folau and banks’ decisions on climate change-related lending as evidence institutions are allowed to act on “religious and political views”. The bill has divided the Morrison government with several Liberal MPs, including Warren Entsch, speaking out on the need to strip back provisions that enable discrimination. The three issues that will face opposition within the Liberal party room are the inclusion of a “Folau clause” that would give legal protection to someone expressing a statement of belief; conscientious objection provisions that would allow health practitioners to refuse to provide certain treatment; and the ability for religious institutions to discriminate against staff on the basis of religion to maintain a “faith-based ethos”. It is understood that Entsch and North Sydney MP Trent Zimmerman are prepared to cross the floor if the government pushes ahead with a bill that includes the Folau clause and allows for conscientious objection. Wentworth MP Dave Sharma said he was hopeful a resolution could be reached to fulfil the election commitment of protecting religious freedom but in a “minimalist” bill. “I’m concerned to see this bill narrowly constructed so that it protects people of religion and faith on the basis of their religion and faith and allows them to practise that. It cannot be used to undermine existing rights, particularly among the LGBQTI community,” Sharma told Guardian Australia. “It really should be a shield and not a sword.” In the Senate, Liberals Andrew Bragg and Dean Smith are also understood to be “reserving their right” to oppose the legislation, which is yet to be signed off by cabinet. In consultations undertaken by Cash this week, MPs have raised concern about the clauses being unnecessary and “toxic”. One MP told Guardian Australia the bill was a “diabolical mess”. After months of consultation including the involvement of Scott Morrison’s office, the Australian Christian Lobby’s Martin Iles boasted in mid-October that the Folau clause had been put back into the bill. Bondar, who Cash consulted on Tuesday, told Guardian Australia he was “confident the government will produce a very workable bill and adhere to the principles of religious freedom”. Bondar said FamilyVoice was not shown a final version of the bill, but lobbied for the inclusion of provisions that gives religious schools and hospitals powers to maintain their ethos through hiring and firing decisions. “The principles of religious freedom ought to protect both the individual and organisations,” he said. “Those who are against religious freedom don’t want the bill to apply to institutions, and ask ‘How can an organisation hold religious views?’” “Organisations can have political and religious views. Qantas does when they supported [Rugby Australia’s decision] to sack Israel Folau. And the Commonwealth Bank does when they believe in climate change.” The Executive Council of Australian Jewry co-chief executive, Peter Wertheim, said smaller faiths wanted institutions that catered to the special needs of their communities to “continue to provide kosher food to people in aged care, or prayer facilities in a Jewish hospital” without being accused of discrimination. But Wertheim said it was larger faiths including Christian churches which “want to preference members of their own faith in staffing” while Jewish institutions were “far too small to have that luxury”. “We don’t begrudge them that – they want to create a faith community to further their ethos, we don’t have an issue with that.” ECAJ supports the ability of medical practitioners to conscientiously object to a medical procedure – provided it is disclosed to patients who are then referred to another service.Australians thinking of buying Christmas presents from overseas should do themselves and the economy a favour by ordering early, competition watchdog Rod Sims says. The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission chair said the nation had been hit hard by disruptions in global supply chains due to the coronavirus crisis, with freight costs soaring, empty containers piling up and industrial disputes slowing down the nation’s ports and making them unattractive to shipping lines. He said that in normal times Christmas orders came “in a big lump and the system can handle that, but at the moment the system won’t be able to handle it”. “So the more we spread the Christmas purchasing out over a longer period, the better it will be for everybody.” Covid-19 has caused major disruption to global supply chains, raising sea freight costs about seven times above what they were before the crisis, the ACCC said in a report on Thursday. The supply chain woes, which are caused by the ripple effect of China closing ports because of coronavirus cases, has retailers urging people to plan ahead and led to fears that the traditional Christmas shopping bonanza could be ruined. But the ACCC said that even without the coronavirus, Australia’s ports were in bad shape, with the productivity of stevedores flatlining despite investing billions into infrastructure over the past decade and shipping lines becoming bigger and more powerful. Citing research by the World Bank and IHS Markit, the ACCC said that even before the pandemic Australia’s two big ports, Melbourne and Sydney, were in the bottom 15% of global ports, ranked by efficiency. Stevedores have also been hit with higher costs after ports were privatised, according to ACCC research. The regulator said that during the pandemic the average time a ship spent idle at berth in Port Botany increased from 11.9 hours to 21.2 hours, leading some shipping lines to skip the port entirely. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Australia’s exporters are also suffering because they are competing against empty containers, which shipping lines want to move back to places like China where they can be put to work. The competition regulator called for more investment in infrastructure so that ports can take larger ships, service them by rail and deal with the mountains of empty containers. Industrial relations and restrictive work practices at stevedores should be addressed, privatised ports regulated so that rents and charges are kept reasonable and a law enabling global shipping groups to legally form cartels should be abolished, the ACCC said. The ACCC said shipping line capacity fell during the pandemic, leading them to concentrate on more lucrative routes such as Asia to North America, at Australia’s expense. “It’s an enormous problem,” Sims said. “It means that if you’ve got fewer shipping lines wanting to come here then you’ve got high freight rates, because those that are coming here will charge more. “And if you’ve got less ships coming here then you’ve got less reliable delivery times and a longer period between delivery times, and that mucks up the ordering system.” Sims said he did not want to take sides in industrial fights between the Maritime Union of Australia and stevedoring companies that have resulted in widespread industrial action, including bans on overtime and working at a higher grade. However, he said it was “a dreadful time on top of everything else for us to be having industrial activity”. “Once the pandemic is over, everything should get back to some sense of normality,” he said. “But we have, I think, a potential continuing problem because we’re continuing to have industrial relations issues that other countries don’t have, where we’ve got ports that have been privatised and they’re not regulated.”“I love being a nurse. Coercion is not consent.” These were the words written in black marker on a cardboard pizza box. The cardboard pizza box that was held aloft by Deni Varnhagen at an anti-vaccination rally in Adelaide. “I love being a nurse and coercion is not consent so it’s pretty self-explanatory,” Varnhagen said. “I’m scared for all of us nurses, we’re all terrified, we love working and want to be back working.” The 29-year-old, based on her status as a dual Crows premiership winner, presumably also loves being an AFLW player. The two vocations do not necessarily have to be conflated, but they do help to paint a picture of Australian sport’s reckoning with the refusal of some athletes to get the Covid vaccine. Varnhagen doubtless loves being a nurse partly because it gives her job satisfaction to care for sick people in the intensive care units she works. The obvious inherent conflict in that statement is that one might wager the vast majority of hospital patients may not consent to being treated by an unvaccinated nurse. Such a situation arguably represents a form of coercion, which is why vaccination has been mandated for South Australia’s healthcare workers and why Varnhagen was one of almost 400 forced to take leave after refusing the jab, according to figures released by SA Health on Tuesday. She also described the Covid vaccine as a “medical experiment”. On this, it should be noted the “experiment” phase of Australia’s approved Covid vaccines has long since passed. The human clinical trials have been done, and the Therapeutic Goods Administration stipulates a high threshold for approval. The real “experiment”, in this context, likely has more to do with her sporting endeavours – and those of her colleagues in this sphere who are also hesitant to take the Covid vaccine. Australian sport is embarking on a clinical trial of its own, one of contractual obligations and interstate logistics. As borders begin to reopen, leagues and clubs are navigating a shift away from biosecure bubbles and towards freer travel but with strict regulations about who is allowed to travel where, on what airlines, and to which stadiums. The AFL has already announced all AFL and AFLW players will need to be fully vaccinated by mid-February or be barred from playing and training. The NRL has not followed suit, but admitted the public health orders of state governments or airlines may force their hand. In Victoria, all professional sportspeople entering a stadium must be vaccinated, which would rule out the handful of players reportedly unwilling to get jabbed. Other state rules could yet mean they are unable to play a significant portion of the season. Paul Gallen, hardly the oracle on weighty subject matter, made this salient point. “If a player doesn’t feel comfortable getting the vaccine then I don’t think they should be made to have it,” the former Cronulla and New South Wales captain said last month. “But if they’re not made to have it and don’t want to have it, they have to face the consequences that come with that.” The players’ union is working with the NRL to develop a policy for handling unvaccinated players from 1 November, when those off-contract will be able to negotiate with rival clubs, but will still be subject to government restrictions due to their vaccination status. Until statewide vaccine mandates were implemented, the Rugby League Players Association expected NRL clubs would employ unvaccinated players. It is an unenviable quagmire for clubs in any code. Already two NBL players have been released from their contracts – New Zealand Breakers guard Tai Webster and Illawarra Hawks import Travis Trice. Before long the A-Leagues and netball seasons will start. The Australian Open is already the subject of much controversy and conjecture. Crows coach Matthew Clarke said on Wednesday he hoped Varnhagen would make the decision to be vaccinated before 19 November, when she is required to have had her first jab to be eligible to play. “She’s continued to engage in the education from the medical team, from the AFL’s medical team and we see that as the opportunity, but ultimately it’s an individual choice,” Clarke told SEN SA. “She’s been training and doing all the work and been training really well. It’s obviously been a challenging period for her, and for all organisations having to confront this new situation.” If Varnhagen refuses to comply with the AFL’s vaccination policy, the Crows will be able to replace her on their list before the sixth season of the competition begins on 6 January. Clarke confirmed every other AFLW player at the Crows will soon have received both vaccine doses. “The club’s [view] is pretty clear,” he said. “We’re really promoting vaccination and we think it’s really important for the community and our industry. My perspective is that all of the medical advice and the health experts inform me that this is a safe and a really effective mechanism to diminish the impact [of Covid-19].” At the protest, Varnhagen wore a white singlet emblazoned with the words “freedom to choose”. In terms of her career as both a nurse and AFLW player, her choice carries clear ramifications. For sporting bodies, the outcomes of their choices are less conspicuous.It is an exceedingly difficult choice. In three months’ time, the Winter Olympics will begin in Beijing. They will be the most politically contentious Games in decades. Fifty or so Australian athletes will join several thousand international competitors in the eye of the storm. Do they speak up, and face the spectre of backlash and sanctions? Or do they remain mute, and complicit in the sportswashing of a regime committing human rights atrocities? Sport has always been political. Those who say otherwise have, at the very least, a poor grasp of history. Ever since the ancient Games began among Greek city states three millennia ago, the Olympics have been imbued with political meaning. On at least two occasions, the site of the ancient Games – at the Altis in Olympia – was invaded as states vied for the political influence that came with hosting the Olympics. Indeed at the 104th Olympiad, in 364BC, the invasion came midway through the final event of the pentathlon. The same is true of the modern Olympics, albeit with less mid-event violence. The founder of the International Olympic Committee, Pierre de Coubertin, had an explicitly political purpose in mind when re-establishing the Games: to foster peace among nations by providing a space for international exchange. It may have been a noble aspiration, but it was a political one nonetheless. This vision turned sour when the Games were co-opted by Nazi Germany at the infamous 1936 Olympics in Berlin. During the Cold War, sport became another political battleground; an East German official once admitted: “Sport and politics cannot be separated any more than one can separate a gymnast from the bars, a swimmer from the water.” “The Olympic Games are not about politics,” wrote current IOC president Thomas Bach last year. IOC vice-president and long-time Australian Olympic Committee chief John Coates recently ruled out any efforts to pressure China over human rights ahead of the Games. “We have no ability to go into a country and tell them what to do,” he said last month. Asked about ongoing human rights violations in China, Coates was insistent: “The situations that you have referred to – the humanitarian ones in China – is not within our remit.” But nations do not spend billions of dollars on international sporting extravaganzas just because they like curling. China is credibly accused of committing crimes against humanity in its treatment of the Uyghur people. The Chinese regime has eroded civil rights and freedoms in Hong Kong and systematically discriminated against minority groups, including in Tibet. As Freedom House noted in its most recent report, “China’s authoritarian regime has become increasingly repressive in recent years”. The Winter Olympics are a fig leaf to shroud these actions, a potent platform for soft power projection. China is not unique in using sport in this way – sportswashing has a long history (Russia has been a major proponent, hosting the 2014 Winter Olympics and 2018 World Cup, while in 2017 Turkmenistan, often labelled the North Korea of Central Asia, hosted the Asian Indoor Games). By lending its credibility to Russia, Turkmenistan and now China, the IOC cannot disclaim the political consequences – the mass detention of the Uyghur people is hardly outside its “remit”. Even on issues firmly within its remit – such as press freedom, which is enshrined in the Olympic Charter – the IOC is found wanting. On Tuesday, the Foreign Correspondents’ Club of China accused the local organising authorities of blocking access and harassing foreign journalists. Given the ongoing detention of a Chinese-Australian journalist, the rapid departure of the last remaining Australian correspondents last year and China’s explicit hostage-taking, Australian media intending to travel to Beijing in February will be facing significant risk. Whenever I write about the intersection between sport and politics, I receive extensive criticism – it is probably the most fraught topic I cover. Disagreement takes two forms. There is frequent whataboutism – how can you criticise China, or Saudi Arabia, for sportswashing, given Australia’s own human rights failings? As one tweeter asked, should we boycott the Brisbane 2032 Games? But there is a qualitative difference between Australia’s well-documented human rights shortcomings – offshore detention of refugees, a failure to address Indigenous disadvantage – and the arbitrary detention of up to a million people on the basis of their ethnicity. Equally, calling out the latter does not mean excusing the former. The other critique, most salient as the Winter Olympics loom, is why we should expect anything more than silence from our athletes. In the context of Formula One – a sport which holds races in a number of countries led by repressive regimes – one commenter offered: “Daniel [Ricciardo] is a driver, he is not a political/human rights expert.” Most Winter Olympians will have trained for years with a singular focus on the 2022 Games; many may quite reasonably wish to keep their head down and focus on the sport. But athletes have long used their voice for good. Perhaps the most famous Olympics image in history, from the 1968 Games, saw Tommie Smith and John Carlos raise their fists on the podium; Australia’s Peter Norman wore an Olympic Project for Human Rights badge in solidarity. The global sporting movement’s Black Lives Matters advocacy is a more recent example, as is sporting support for climate action. Athletes may not necessarily be human rights experts. But they can read. And the evidence on human rights violations in China is extensive and damning. All of which means that, in the months ahead, Australia’s Winter Olympians will be forced to make a difficult choice. It is an invidious position to be in – one forced upon them by the IOC, which in my view has abdicated moral responsibility. Speak up about human rights abuse in China, and the IOC’s silence and arguable complicity? Or stay silent and be accused of complicity themselves?”For the first time in a long time the prospect of rising interest rates is back on the table. But while the Reserve Bank suggests we still have to wait a while yet, the housing market has already begun to cool from the absurd levels of earlier this year. But the cooling comes too late for those hoping for better housing affordability. Tuesday’s Reserve Bank announcement was watched with great interest as economists and investors knew the RBA needed to adjust its position of targeting a 0.1% rate for Australian government bonds. The Reserve Bank does not normally target rates for government bonds, but when the pandemic hit in March 2020 it announced a 0.25% target rate for government three-year bonds, and then in November last year it announced a new target of 0.1% in line with the cash rate. It all worked well until last week, there were strong moves in the market off the back of the inflation figures that lifted the yield for government two-year bonds up near 0.7%: If the graph does not display please click here Investors were betting in large amounts that the Reserve Bank, following solid inflation figures, was about to tighten monetary policy and the first thing it would do would be to drop the 0.1% target. And when the Reserve Bank failed to intervene to keep the rate down, it became clear the 0.1% target was no more. On Tuesday the RBA made it official. And so now all the talk is about interest rates and when they will again rise, because clearly they must at some point. Right now the market is anticipating a rate rise to 0.25% by the middle of next year – well ahead of the previous timetable set by the RBA of not before 2024: If the graph does not display please click here But while the market might be getting excited about a possible five (!) rate rises by early 2023, the Reserve Bank governor, Philip Lowe, would like everyone to take a long cold shower. He told media after Tuesday’s rate decision that “it is still entirely plausible that the first increase in the cash rate will not be before ... April 2024”. However he also suggested that, given the improved inflation and economic condition, “it is now also plausible that a lift in the cash rate could be appropriate in 2023”. But that was about as much as he was prepared to shift. He told the audience that “the latest data and forecasts do not warrant an increase in the cash rate in 2022.” While investors and speculators are all excited about the inflation rate, the RBA remains very much focused on wages. Lowe reiterated his often stated position that “for inflation to be sustainably in the [2%-3%] target range, wages growth will have to be materially higher than it is now”. He suggested that “this is likely to take time. The board is prepared to be patient.” But while signs of interest rates rising appear still to be a while away, home buyers seem to have already begun to retreat. The latest housing lending data released on Monday showed falling owner-occupier home loans for the fourth consecutive month. The annual growth of housing finance is now well down on the peak of May – if still relatively high: If the graph does not display please click here The slowing of growth is evident across all states – most notably in Western Australia where annual growth has fallen from a crazy 160% in May to 23%: If the graph does not display please click here This all suggests that while house price will continue to rise, it might not be as severe as was anticipated three months ago: If the graph does not display please click here Any suggestions the Reserve Bank – or even banks themselves – might begin to raise home loan rates will also serve to temper house prices. But even if prices are to stabilise, what we have seen already is a massive decrease in housing affordability. Since the pandemic began, the average home loan in Victoria and New South Wales has gone up by over $100,000: If the graph does not display please click here In NSW, the average home loan is now around $765,000 – that is a 40% increase on the average of $540,000 five years ago. In that time average male full-time earnings in NSW have risen only around 15%. It is clear the Reserve Bank is beginning to tighten monetary policy, but an interest rate rise still appears more than a year away – despite what the market is betting. While the prospect of rising rates and the end of government subsidies might be taking the heat out of the housing market, it will be too late for many. The difficulty of affording a home is now greater than it was before the pandemic, and unless prices actually fall, it will remain so for a long time to come.I’ll be honest, being on the internet can feel a little like an obligation to me. I’m far from an early adopter of new technology, and when I finally do, things tend not to go well. From accidentally splitting my share house bills in foreign currencies, to then accidentally adding a zero or two when splitting those same share house bills (leaving my housemates and I in crippling debt to each other), technology and I are not natural friends. But this doesn’t mean I don’t see something funny every now and then, forget where I saw it, then spend 12 hours trying to remember how I found it in the first place in order to show a friend. So, here are the funniest I could find. And if you don’t like them, just think of other funny things you’ve seen on the internet, then imagine that I saw them once, but couldn’t find them to share with you. Anyway, here goes. 1. John Farnham advertises Rundle Mall As someone who grew up in Adelaide, everything about this ad rings true to my memories of Rundle Mall. From the Morris dancers and barely concealed sexual harassment, right through to the impromptu John Farnham concerts where John throws his hat in the air one bar too early only to have it magically reappear in his hand so that he can throw it again, on cue this time. (Although, I believe this ad was released in 1984, so the suggestion an impromptu John Farnham concert would attract that big a crowd, before the release of You’re the Voice, does rather stretch credibility. What was the crowd coming for? His cover of The Rain in Spain from his rightly unlistened-to 1976 album Johnny Farnham Sings Hits from the Movies? Just can’t trust advertisers, can you?) 2. Lucy Gichuhi just … walks away I write comedy about politics for a living, and I absolutely agree with people who say that we need politicians with less media training. If only because the senator-for-South Australia-for-five-minutes, Lucy Gichuhi, is the result. I have never before seen someone so clearly say the word “help” without actually using those four letters. As a piece of theatre, I’m not sure if it’s the way she holds up her hand, or just seems to take forever to walk through a door, that makes this so funny. In fact, from now on, when politicians want to avoid answering a question, rather than give a tortured non-response, they should be forced to make as awkward an exit as possible, just like the former senator did. 3. Irish farmers have lost their sheep At least that’s what I think is happening. I watched this a few times to make sure I wasn’t watching some BBC sketch from the 80s. And while it’s sad that these sheep have gone missing, to be fair to the sheep, they might not have completely understood where they were meant to be going. 4. No. Turn it off. No! I used to find this video plain funny until I realised I identify way too much with the mother. I am unfamiliar with Ms Minaj’s oeuvre, I would also find it unpleasant (though not because of any moral objection to her lyrical content, more just that I tend only to be familiar with singers whose careers started well before I was born), and I would definitely be unable turn off whatever personalised jukebox was playing that racket. 5. Thanks Ron Every couple of months, a friend sends me this out of the blue and I collapse all over again. I’ve never seen an entire relationship summed up in six seconds. 6. Climate change raises temperature of hot mics This video is one of the best in the category of “politician doesn’t realise microphone is on” (with all due respect to Gordon Brown’s comments about a sweet old lady being a bigot) for a number of reasons. Not only is this three dudes having the least exciting pre-meeting banter ever, but the look of pant-shitting fear at the end of the video is a sight to behold (and entirely relatable for a comedian who’s occasionally told a joke and also wished it hadn’t been picked up by a microphone). 7. America explain! If I tried to explain this video, I feel I would have missed the point. 8. Election Twitter This dates back to the 2020 US presidential election and absolutely sums up how I was feeling during that period (and probably will feel in future elections). Also, I just love the song. Which is how I justified watching this over and over instead of doing work. 9. Leprechaun sighting There is something about local news cameras that is catnip for frustrated actors who want one last shot at the big time, and this video delivers. From the witness sketch of the leprechaun, to a passing motorist speculating it’s not a leprechaun but a drug addict (although I see no reason to think a leprechaun couldn’t also become addicted to drugs and hence don’t feel this precludes the original claim it is a leprechaun, your Honour) almost every line is better than the last. And as someone with an Irish grandfather, this feels like history to me. 10. Taste.com’s cob-session If you want to understand the depths to which Australian culture can sink, and how devastatingly awful food in this country would be without wave after wave of migration, gaze upon this list of cob loaf recipes and be afraid. I implore you to explore it. Because you’ll see this is not so much a list of recipes, as a list of ideas for ruining social occasions. A bacon and egg cob pie? Why not? Butter chicken in a cob? How nature intended. An hour and 20 minutes to make lasagne soup in a cob? That’s just sensible. After all, carbs are always best served in a carb tomb. And how better to create lifelong trauma for your five-year-old than a fairy bread cob loaf on their birthday? Because yes, there are “dessert cobs”. Honestly, everyone involved in the creation of this list should be forced, from now until the end of time, to have anything they want to eat served in a cob. You want a slice of pizza? It’s going in a cob. You want a single Malteser? That’s in a cob too now. Until eventually they concede that food is rarely improved by being served inside another food. Pat McCaffrie is a comedian and TV writer. You can follow his Twitter or listen to his podcast, A Little KnowledgeHere Out West begins with the grandmother of a newborn baby nicking off with the bub – kidnapping the child from hospital after authorities deemed her daughter unfit to care for it. In an ordinary film, this dramatic event would be a MacGuffin that kickstarts the plot and sets the subsequent storyline in motion, sparking obvious questions such as “what was she thinking?” and “what happens next?” However in this anthology (the opening night film of this year’s Sydney film festival) directed by Fadia Abboud, Lucy Gaffy, Julie Kalceff, Ana Kokkinos and Leah Purcell, working from scripts by eight Australian writers, it is not so much the start of a narrative but a loose connective tissue binding short and disparate vignettes. The film-makers ignore the aforementioned questions and instead introduce us to people living in western Sydney, moving between them in a ‘day in the life of’ style, where we encounter these characters in generally dramatic circumstances but soon say goodbye to them also, rarely to return. The “west” in the title refers to the geographical context and in being so set, Here Out West is more diverse than most films, capturing people from various backgrounds and featuring not one, two, three but nine languages: English: Arabic, Bengali, Cantonese, Kurdish, Tagalog, Turkish, Vietnamese and Spanish. The first time the film pivots away from the aforementioned nan (Genevieve Lemon) and her companion – an eight-year-old Lebanese neighbour named Amirah (Mia-Lore Bayeh) – it switches to the hospital security guard, Jorge (Christian Ravello), in a section called Everything Changes that captures snapshots of his life, including his fondness for poetry. This transition suggests the film’s structure of interconnected lives will hinge on the hospital, rather than other anthologies hooked to a type of situation (like the TV show It’s a Date), a common theme (the kinky feature comedy The Little Death) or different sides of a large and multi-faceted event (the ABC TV series Fires). As the film progresses, however, the stories tend to have less relevance to the hospital, and only rarely return to that quasi-MacGuffin involving the grandma. The various characters, all of whom are crafted thoughtfully and brought to life with strong performances, include mixed-race woman Ashmita (Leah Vandenberg), who is attending her father’s deathbed; Kurdish refugees Keko (De Lovan Zandy) and Xoxe (Befrin Axtjärn Jackson), who hope to one day start a music school; the Audi-driving and Hugo Boss-wearing 22-year-old Tuan (Khoi Trinh), who wants to become a big player in corporate Sydney; and hardworking Filipino nurse Roxanne (Christine Milo). Here Out West was conceived in part as a way of fostering new talent: an incubator to nurture emerging writers. Each of these writers (Nisrine Amine, Bina Bhattacharya, Matias Bolla, Claire Cao, Arka Das, Dee Dogan, Vonne Patiag and Tien Tran) shows promise, but are limited by the format. The production of an anthology is tough to master due to its fragmented structure. Anthological works often have a stop/start rhythm, returning the experience to a clean or clean-ish narrative slate at the culmination of every episode, rather than creating a cumulative effect. This is especially evident in anthology feature films, which have much tighter running times per individual tale than TV. In Here Out West for instance there is no ability to ground viewers for 30 or 40 minutes in the lives of various people, like in Fires, before moving us on. This film has eight chapters to cover in 101 minutes, which inevitably cuts stories short and clips performances. Sometimes this limited space creates a desire to be short, sharp and snappy, but pace-wise Here Out West goes the other way – rarely rushing anything. There is an admirable tenderness in the way the various directors and screenwriters find the humanity in their characters quickly, probing them for attitudes, emotions and worldviews. It is no surprise that the stories based in and around the hospital work particularly well, given hospitals are obviously associated with drama: the place where most of us are born, many of us die, and where we are drawn to in times of sickness. The 2013 adaptation of Tim Winton’s The Turning is an example of an anthology picture that does achieve an impressive cumulative effect – its various vignettes dancing between styles and stories but taking on an expanding quality, as if the film itself were alive: shifting, changing, evolving. The joins between the stories in Here Out West are sometimes elegantly executed – when for instance Ashmita bumps into Robi (Arka Das), a character from a previous vignette, and asks him to translate her father’s dying words. But the film comes across more as a number of parts rather than the sum of them. This is a drama of modest qualities, more adept at painting pockets of time in the characters’ lives rather than self-contained (or thematically related) narratives.Several years ago I was contacted by an ex girlfriend who informed me I am the biological father of her 21 year old daughter, the middle of her three children. She was my first serious girlfriend but we split up whilst still young. Our paths crossed several years later and we had a brief affair. Unbeknownst to me she became pregnant through this liaison but kept the matter a secret and remained with her husband who unwittingly raised the child as his own. My ex immediately regretted telling me and insisted I take this information to my grave. Whilst I have respected her wishes, I feel extremely frustrated with the situation and would like to meet and get to know this woman who doesn’t know I exist. I am married (16 years) and have a young daughter of my own. My wife is aware of this situation and fully supportive. Eleanor says: As I see it, your dilemma here is about whether to tell the truth. It doesn’t sound like you’d be able to get to know this young woman any other way. That’s a very hard decision to make. Usually when we make choices we think about which outcome we prefer – but here, it’s almost the opposite. You can’t make a decision out of an attachment to a particular outcome. It can’t be about whether you’d like a happy relationship with this young woman – because you can’t rule out that she’d want nothing to do with you. It can’t be about whether your ex should have told you – because exposing deceit now won’t mean she was honest then. It can’t be about getting closure – because you might find it just makes people angrier. There are so many open futures here that the only thing this decision is “about” is whether you’re willing to risk all of them. That makes the focal length of the choice very short. It’s poker rules: you make the best choice you can with the information you have, not claiming to know how things will turn out. Sometimes when I’m stuck in a situation like that it helps to hear what someone else would do, set out almost like a closing argument. Being the listener seems to take the pressure off being the decider. I’ll try to do that for you now – I’ll tell you what I’d do, with the hope that it’ll help you run a resonance check. I stress I don’t offer this as an answer. I offer it so you can test whether you’d be proud to inhabit this kind of reasoning. I wouldn’t tell. Here’s why: yes, her mother made a hurtful decision, and two or three more after that. But that’s done now, set in the resin of time. Reaching out might just be one more hurtful decision. It would mean she had to decide how to feel about a stranger while processing that her mother had an affair and deceived her. It would be a gamble on whether her parents’ marriage would survive, meaning this 21 year old – who didn’t choose any of this – might face a crisis while her support system was in a crisis of its own. Since I wouldn’t be able to guarantee that the world I’d force her into is better than the one she’s currently in, I’d be making that decision unilaterally. That wouldn’t feel fair. So I’d try not to be pulled by the outcome I desperately wanted, or by how wildly unfair it is that I even have to make this choice. I’d try to do the least risky thing. It would feel unspeakably tragic to do that. It would cost me one of life’s most beautiful things. I might even vent the steam of my fury at my ex so my pain had somewhere to go, or even upload my data to a DNA tracing website so that if my child ever went looking she’d be able to find me. But I’d try not to confuse my protest at the situation for an answer about how to resolve it. Sometimes other people’s bad choices leave us with nothing but bad options. I hope it helps to test whether that’s the kind of person you’d feel OK about being. Whatever your answer, I think that’s the way to make this choice: when we can’t make decisions on outcomes, we can ask what kind of reasoning we’d like to shine out from our actions. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service hereAaron Rodgers has tested positive for Covid-19 and will miss the Green Bay Packers’ game with the Kansas City Chiefs on Sunday, according to multiple reports. His exact vaccination status remains unclear. The meeting with the Chiefs would have seen arguably the two most talented quarterbacks in the NFL, Rodgers and Patrick Mahomes, face each other. Instead, the Packers will be led by Jordan Love, the man Green Bay controversially drafted in 2020 as the 37-year-old Rodgers’ long-term successor. Rodgers’ exact vaccination status is unknown but in August he told reporters he was “immunized”. However, NFL Network’s Ian Rapoport reported that does not necessarily mean Rodgers is vaccinated against Covid-19. Rapoport added that Rodgers has been following protocols for unvaccinated players around the Packers facility. “You know, there’s a lot of conversation around it, around the league, and a lot of guys who have made statements and not made statements, owners who have made statements,” Rodgers said when asked about his vaccination status in August. “There’s guys on the team that haven’t been vaccinated. I think it’s a personal decision. I’m not going to judge those guys. There are guys that’ve been vaccinated that have contracted Covid. It’s an interesting issue that I think we’re going to see played out the entire season.” The NFL has different rules for when players can return after testing positive for Covid-19, depending on their vaccination status. If Rodgers is, as reported, unvaccinated then he would need to stay away from the team for a minimum of 10 days, meaning the earliest he could return would be on 13 November, one day before Green Bay’s game against the Seattle Seahawks. Asymptomatic vaccinated players can return as soon as they provide two negative tests 24 hours apart. Vaccinated players displaying symptoms must provide two negative tests 24 hours apart and become asymptomatic. The Packers have had several issues with Covid in the past few weeks. On Tuesday, Green Bay practice squad quarterback Kurt Benkert tweeted that he had Covid-19. The Packers were without star Davante Adams for last week’s victory over the Arizona Cardinals after he tested positive for Covid and his fellow wide receiver Allen Lazard also missed the game after he was deemed a close contact of Adams. The team’s defensive coordinator, Joe Barry, has also been absent due to Covid protocols. Despite those problems, Green Bay are on a seven-game win streak and have the best record in the NFC (7-1) along with the Cardinals and Los Angeles Rams. Rodgers had been enjoying another vintage year and has thrown 17 touchdowns and only three interceptions.On Tuesday morning, activists dressed in the red jumpsuits familiar to viewers of the dystopian Netflix series Squid Game strike posed for the assembled media on the south bank of the Clyde, directly opposite the Cop26 conference centre.Across the river and further into the city centre later on Tuesday, Anne Thoday was squatting on the pavement on St Vincent Street next to her surdo drum as a thick line of police prevented Extinction Rebellion protesters from moving towards the conference centre. “I think there are a lot of grandparents involved,” said the 59-year-old social worker, who arrived from Derbyshire on Sunday. “This Cop really does feel like the last chance to turn things around. I’m not feeling very hopeful but I still felt compelled to come here.” This modest gathering – about 100 protesters – was typical of a smaller-than-expected protest presence so far at Cop26. No one is quite sure why, although anxiety about coronavirus is certainly playing a part. Activists argue, however, that it is also the result of exclusionary structures that go well beyond concerns about Covid transmission. Joe Karp-Saway, of Global Justice Now, said people had been put off by Covid, “but also the huge cost of travel and accommodation to Glasgow and miscommunication from the UK government and UNFCCC [the United Nations framework convention on climate change], which means there are fewer civil society groups from the global south.” He noted that these early days were just the start of actions that would be spread across the fortnight, as well as the larger mobilisations planned for this weekend when up to 100,000 people are expected to march in Glasgow, and similar demonstrations will take place across the UK and around the world. The XR activists moved off again carrying a pink lettered banner reading: “How many Cops to arrest climate chaos?” When they arrived outside the venue later in the afternoon, the police closed the Clyde Arc, preventing protesters from continuing their march but also stopping other visitors who needed to get to events around the green zone across the river. The walk to the nearest open footbridge and back would take at least an hour. Inside the conference centre, Fatima Ibrahim, of Green New Deal Rising, was finding it hard to share Boris Johnson’s cautious optimism about the summit. There was frustration and weariness among activists, she said. “People are tired of rhetoric and false promises.” The policing seemed heavy-handed to her. “I’ve not seen protesters greeted by police in the same way at previous Cops, while civil society is locked out of spaces within the blue zone.” For those who made it across the river, youth and indigenous activists had gathering for speeches and another photocall, holding up illuminated letters spelling out “End Climate Betrayal”. In her speech, Mitzi Tan, a convener of Fridays For Future for the Philippines, sounded angry – the leaders aren’t in there, she gestured across the river, they are in front of her, she told the small crowd, to hearty cheers. The mood among activists was angry, the 24-year-old from Manila agreed afterwards. “It’s only been the second day but I’ve already heard so many excuses.” Having arrived in Glasgow on Sunday, she had been attending back-to-back events and meetings. “I have no sense of time,” she laughed, admitting she’d started taking vitamin D supplements “because I miss the sunlight so much”. It was as important to be in Glasgow to build networks as to protest, she said. “One of the best feelings is meeting people from across the globe and hugging each other, because we’ve been organising together online for a year and some of us have never met in person.”On Wednesday morning Ibrahim and her team challenged the UK chancellor, Rishi Sunak, about why there was no mention of the climate in his recent budget, as he walked through the conference blue zone. His team demanded that they be removed before he addressed the plenary. For Green New Deal Rising this fortnight is also geared towards training up new activists: it will welcome 100 young people from across the UK to its hub at a warehouse in the east end of Glasgow. While the immediate momentum is building up to the weekend’s marches, “really what we are working towards is how to keep [leaders] accountable after 12 November”. At lunchtime on Wednesday, Extinction Rebellion convened again for a protest against corporate green-washing in the city centre. As the drums boomed out, activists remarked on the swelling crowd of 300 or more, suggesting protest numbers were increasing as the week progressed. Meanwhile, outside the conference hall, indigenous activists were converging after a march from Glasgow Green. Txai Surui, the daughter of a tribal chief from the Brazilian Amazon, had delivered an eloquent appeal to the conference on Monday, telling delegates: “The Earth is speaking. She tells us that we have no more time.” The 24-year-old has been wearing the bird feather headdress made for her by her father and uncle, fashioned “for going into battle” she said. Looking ahead to the weekend’s marches, she urged people around the globe to participate. “Everybody should go to these marches, to show the power and strength of all the people in this fight. This is going to be a moment for us to send a message that they cannot do whatever they want, because the power is with the people.”The Conservative MP Owen Paterson has escaped suspension from the Commons for 30 days, and a possible byelection, after the government intervened at the last minute to pause the process and review the watchdog that investigates wrongdoing in parliament. The former cabinet minister was found to have committed an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules during meetings and conversations with the Food Standards Agency and the Department for International Development while he was being paid more than £100,000 by two firms – Randox and Lynn’s Country Foods. However, an amendment to the motion to suspend him – proposed by the former Commons leader Andrea Leadsom – was backed by Boris Johnson, and whips told Tory MPs they should vote for it too. The amendment was passed by 250 votes to 232, with 13 Tories opposing it and 98 either abstaining or given permission to be away from parliament. The MPs who voted against the amendment included the former chief whip Mark Harper, the ex-cabinet secretary Simon Hoare, and William Wragg, a member of the 1922 Committee executive. The amendment means a new committee will be created, chaired by the Tory backbencher John Whittingdale, to look into changing the process under which MPs are investigated so that it is more considerate of “natural justice” by, for example, giving them the chance to appeal. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, said: “We would expect the independent process to be followed and not changed after the verdict – it’s one rule for them, and one rule for the rest of us.” Paterson claimed he was acting as a whistleblower to raise concerns about milk and bacon standards, and that 17 witnesses whom he wanted to give oral evidence were not able to do so. However, several Tory MPs – including ministers – told the Guardian that Paterson was “clearly over the line” and “guilty as sin”. The standards committee said the witnesses Paterson offered had their written evidence taken into account, and that their attempts to prove his actions were well-intentioned were not relevant to the facts about which rules he broke. The passing of Leadsom’s amendment means a committee chaired by Whittingdale, with four other Tory MPs, three from Labour and one from the SNP, will be set up and make recommendations about overhauling the standards commissioner role by 3 February 2022. Chris Bryant, a Labour MP and chair of the standards committee, said the move would “be dismantling the rule on paid advocacy which has been around in some shape or form since 1695” and that the public would view it as parliament having “licensed cash for questions”. “It is the very definition of injustice that one should change the rules or the process at the very last moment, and to do so for a named individual, which is what the amendment does today,” he said. Peter Bottomley, a Conservative and the longest-serving MP, said he would oppose Leadsom’s amendment. In a heated debate on Wednesday, he said: “We chose the system we are now using. If we want to consider changing it, we do it in a proper way instead of considering it in the way we are now.” Aaron Bell, a Conservative MP from the 2019 intake, expressed a similar view. He said: “Reform can only work if it’s across the house, and by bringing [Leadsom’s] amendment today it looks like we’re moving the goalposts.” Leadsom said she was not “stitching anything up” and that her amendment was not about “whether Paterson is innocent or guilty” but the process used to investigate him. Jacob Rees-Mogg, the leader of the Commons, earlier said that Patterson’s wife taking her own life last summer was “a greater punishment than any House of Commons committee could inflict”. He quoted from Shakespeare on “the quality of mercy”, closing his remarks by saying: “The system must provide justice, tempered by mercy, for mercy is essential to justice.” The Labour MP Jess Phillips asked him if “he would be standing here today making these changes if it were a Labour MP involved?” Rees-Mogg told her: “The answer is yes, I would have no hesitation if I thought an honourable member opposite had not had a proper process.”The virus that causes Covid-19 does not infect human brain cells, according to a study published in the journal Cell. The findings will raise hopes that the damage caused by Sars-CoV-2 might be more superficial and reversible than previously feared. The study contradicts earlier research that suggested the virus infects neurons in the membrane that lines the upper recesses of the nose. This membrane, called the olfactory mucosa, is where the virus first lands when it is inhaled. Within it are olfactory sensory neurons (OSNs), which are responsible for initiating smell sensations. They are tightly entwined with a kind of support cell called sustentacular cells. In the new study, Belgian and German researchers claim that the virus infects sustentacular cells but not OSNs. “That is just a critical distinction,” said the senior author Peter Mombaerts, who directs the Max Planck Research Unit for Neurogenetics in Frankfurt, Germany. “Once you believe that olfactory neurons can be infected, there is a quick route into the olfactory bulb and then you’re in the brain already.” The olfactory bulb, at the front of the brain, is where neural input about odours is first processed. If the virus penetrated this structure it could theoretically spread to deeper brain regions where it could do lasting damage – especially since, unlike OSNs, most neurons are not regenerated once lost. But if the virus only infects the sustentacular cells, then the damage could be less long-lasting. Both pathways could explain the olfactory dysfunction that afflicts an estimated half of all Covid-19 patients. In one in 10 of those, the loss or change of smell is long-term, perhaps permanent. Mombaerts says this could be the result of support for the OSNs breaking down, even if they themselves are not infected. They may function below par, or stop functioning altogether, until the sustentacular cells regenerate. The group has not looked at other neurological symptoms of Covid-19, such as the fatigue and “brain fog” that accompany long Covid. Nobody doubts that the central nervous system is affected by the disease; the debate concerns whether these effects are due to the virus infecting neurons or some more indirect mechanism, such as an inflammatory response in the blood irrigating the brain – with different implications for prognosis and treatment. The findings are likely to prove controversial because of the difficulty of studying molecular events unfolding in the moments after infection. Earlier studies made use of animal models, clusters of neural stem cells grown in a dish, and postmortem tissue taken from small numbers of Covid-19 patients. The present study is the largest in Covid-19 patients to date, and it deployed a novel technique for capturing those early events. Laura Van Gerven, a neurosurgeon at the Catholic University of Leuven in Belgium and another of the paper’s senior authors, adapted a form of skull base surgery to remove tissue from the olfactory mucosa and bulb of Covid-19 patients within about an hour of their death. In 30 of the patients, the researchers were able to detect that the virus was still replicating – meaning the patients had died in the acute, contagious phase of the disease. “It is unquestionably the most thoroughly done bit of work on human postmortem olfactory Covid tissue,” said Stuart Firestein, a neurobiologist at Columbia University in New York City. But Firestein said the results did not shed much new light on how Covid-19 causes olfactory dysfunction. “They do not show any OSNs as being damaged or there being fewer of them, or the OSNs near infected sustentacular cells as being different in any way from those not near infected cells,” he said. Debby Van Riel, a virologist at Erasmus University in Rotterdam, the Netherlands, also praised the study’s rigour, but said the authors’ claim that Sars-CoV-2 does not infect neurons was “pretty bold”. In only six of the 30 patients was the virus detectable in the olfactory mucosa itself. “Overall the numbers are thus really low to make any strong conclusions,” she said. But even if the study isn’t the last word on Covid’s brain effects, it does indicate that those dire early reports weren’t either. If its conclusions are borne out, those experiencing Covid-related anosmia or parosmia can be reassured that the virus has not infected their brains, and that future therapies targeting the understudied sustentacular cells could alleviate or cure their condition.The online casino Sky Vegas offered free “spins” to recovering addicts during the industry’s annual Safer Gambling Week, prompting concern that the messages could trigger relapses. The UK’s Gambling Commission is investigating the incident, which has emerged in the same week that Sky Vegas’s parent company, Flutter, boasted of its improved safer gambling measures. It comes as the UK government finalises proposals to reform the way the industry is regulated, which could include a crackdown on advertising and marketing. The incident, for which Sky Betting and Gaming has apologised, meant people who had voluntarily barred themselves from playing slots and online games such as roulette received promotional emails. One email, sent on Tuesday, carried the subject line: “Take a peek at what your mystery bonus is.” It read: “Here at Sky Vegas, we love the unexpected. That’s right. Simply opt in, spend £5 and claim your 100 free spins. The best part? Whatever you win is yours to keep – that’s the fun in fair!” The promotional message featured graphics of slot machines and the slogan: “Entertainment like no other”. The messages were sent to people who had opted out of receiving direct marketing. They also went to recovering gambling addicts who had signed up to “self-exclude” from online casinos and sports betting sites. About 218,000 people have signed up with the industry-wide self-exclusion scheme, Gamstop, after a 25% surge during the Covid pandemic. Under the conditions of holding a licence of offering gambling products, operators must remove self-excluded people from any marketing communications. Sky Betting and Gaming has breached these licence terms before. In 2018 it was fined £1m for the transgressions, including sending promotional material to 50,000 customers. Flutter, which also owns Paddy Power and Betfair, said on Tuesday that its financial results had suffered because it had tightened safer gambling controls. Recovering addicts said the messages, inviting them to gamble in order to receive bonuses, put them at risk of relapse. Adam Peck, a playwright who lives in Bristol, received the message despite having signed up with Gamstop, and said he tried to bet as a result. “I thought if I’m receiving promotional material then my self-exclusion might not be working. I tried to access my account and get my password reset,” he said. “They shouldn’t be targeting anyone, let alone people who’ve told them they have got a problem with gambling and it could be triggering. That it’s happened during Safer Gambling Week is perverse.” Another former gambler, who asked not to be named, received the email despite having opted out of direct marketing from Sky Vegas in 2018 and later having his account closed by the company, after he revealed he was struggling with addiction. He said seeing the advert after almost three years in recovery had hit him hard mentally, adding: “I worry that it may have caused others to relapse back into gambling.” The incident is acutely embarrassing for the industry because it comes during Safer Gambling Week, an annual initiative during which operators proclaim their attempts to protect addicts and vulnerable people. The industry has also been at pains to point to improved ethics as the government prepares to publish proposed changes to how the industry is regulated. The former Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith said the “utterly shocking” incident showed the industry could not be trusted to improve safer gambling protections voluntarily. “People who are trying to stop and make sure they don’t get sucked deeper into the vortex of debt are targeted. It’s outrageous. It shows us that self-regulation doesn’t work any longer for them. “How often is this happening? Can they ensure it doesn’t happen again? This is very dangerous, we’re talking about people’s lives.” Sky Betting and Gaming said: “We sincerely apologise to those who have mistakenly received Sky Vegas promotional communications and for the distress this may have caused some recipients. “We are treating this matter extremely seriously and are thoroughly investigating how this happened as a matter of urgency.” A Gambling Commission spokesperson said: “We’ve been made aware by members of the public that Sky Bet have sent promotional emails to self-excluded customers yesterday. We do not expect this of our operators and we will be looking into how this has happened.” A spokesperson for Gamstop said: “We were extremely disappointed to learn that some Gamstop users were inadvertently sent promotional communications from Sky Vegas as this goes against the principles of self-exclusion and customer protection. “We will be discussing the matter with the operator and look forward to the outcome of the urgent investigation which it has announced.”Two Labour peers have demanded greater parliamentary scrutiny of police plans to use surveillance cameras mounted on drones after it emerged that forces across England and Wales could deploy the technology. Shami Chakrabarti, the former head of the civil rights advocacy group Liberty, has tabled an amendment to the police bill that would require the home secretary to approve the use of new “weapons, surveillance equipment or investigatory technology”. The amendment was due to be discussed on Wednesday night. Last week the Guardian reported that police forces were seeking information about drone-mounted cameras capable of filming high-quality live footage from 1,500ft (457 metres) away, prompting civil liberties concerns. The former Labour cabinet minister Peter Hain, who is backing the amendment, said he wanted to ensure that parliament could scrutinise the use of such technology, rather than leaving it as “a matter for exclusive police discretion”. He raised concerns about the role of private companies supplying the technology and warned that high-powered drones could be used to target legitimate protesters. The Home Office has said the use of drone-mounted cameras could allow 46 police forces in England and Wales to reduce the noise and carbon emissions created by helicopters carrying out surveillance during operations. Lord Hain said this aim “should not be a reason to duck the necessity for proper accountability and scrutiny”. He pointed to successive revelations from an inquiry into the behaviour of undercover police officers as reason to be wary of allowing forces to acquire and use surveillance technology without ministerial oversight. “Without accountability, how do we know that drone-based surveillance is not being targeted on illegitimate purposes like police undercover officers most certainly were?” he said. The National Police Air Service (NPAS), which provides air support to 46 police forces, has asked companies for information about systems that offer “airborne imaging” and “air-to-ground communication”. The callout, on a government outsourcing website, states: “The imaging systems are intended for use on BVLOS (beyond visual line of sight) remotely piloted aircraft systems: ‘drones’.” The NPAS told potential bidders that the systems should be capable of transmitting live, high-quality images even in low light, using “electro-optical” or “infra-red” systems. It said this would enable officers to pick out detail such as “facial features”, clothing and vehicle registration plates from a distance of between 500ft and 1,500ft.Keir Starmer says Labour will boycott the commission set up to overhaul the parliamentary sleaze system, after MPs voted to protect the Conservative MP Owen Paterson from suspension over lobbying claims, calling it a “complete and utter sham”. Boris Johnson threw his weight behind an amendment tabled by former leader of the house Andrea Leadsom, which halts Paterson’s punishment until a new cross-party committee, chaired by John Whittingdale, examines the standards system. But the Labour leader has said his party will not participate in the committee, throwing into doubt whether the plan can proceed. In an article for the Guardian, he accused the Conservatives of “wallowing in sleaze”, comparing the situation to an employee of a company found to have misused their position, where “instead of slinging them out, their mates at the company decided to exonerate them and shut down the HR department instead. “Instead of trying to sort things out, we have a government that wants to stitch things up,” Starmer said. “Their plan is to permanently weaken the structures that hold MPs to high standards. They’ve appointed their own man to oversee the process – a Tory MP who not long ago was the prime minister’s wife’s boss – and gifted themselves a majority on a committee to set the new rules. “It would be laughable if it wasn’t so serious. The Labour party won’t have anything to do with this complete and utter sham process.” Despite a significant Tory rebellion in the face of a three-line whip, the amendment passed by 250 votes to 232, after a highly charged debate in the House of Commons. Johnson earlier insisted he was against paid lobbying, saying he was supporting the Leadsom amendment on the grounds of “natural justice”. “The issue in this case which involves a serious family tragedy is whether a member of this house had a fair opportunity to make representations in this case, and whether as a matter of natural justice our procedures in this house allow for proper appeal” The 30-day suspension was recommended after Paterson was found to have repeatedly breached rules on paid lobbying, approaching the government on behalf of two firms that were paying him £100,000. Chris Bryant, the chair of the Commons standards committee, warned Paterson that if Leadsom’s amendment passed, his name would become “a byword for bad behaviour”, and made clear that he had had the opportunity to make his case repeatedly.The number of leatherback turtle nests found along some south Florida beaches reached record numbers this year, surprising biologists. The 79 nests laid by endangered turtles along beaches in Broward county this year is nearly double the previous record, according to the South Florida SunSentinel. The previous record was 46 in 2012, and the record low for leatherback nests was 12 in 2017. “It’s difficult to say why Broward county saw such an increase in leatherback nesting this season,” Stephanie Kedzuf, a Broward county biologist who specializes in sea turtles, told the newspaper. Leatherback turtles are the largest in the world and are the only turtle species that lacks scales and a hard shell. Instead, they have tough, rubbery skin and typically crawl on to beaches at night and dig holes to lay their eggs in the sand. When the turtles hatch, they race towards the ocean while avoiding predators such as crabs and birds. Despite having the widest global distribution of any reptile, leatherback turtles are rapidly declining in various parts of the world. According to the National Marine Fisheries Service, leatherbacks’ global population has declined 40% over the past three generations, with the Pacific leatherback being most at risk. Major risk factors include fishing gear, which can entangle the turtles, degradation of nesting habitats, vessel strikes, climate change and ocean pollution that can cause leatherbacks to ingest fishing lines, balloons, floating tar or oil and other discarded materials. That said, despite being unable to pinpoint exact reasons behind leatherbacks’ nesting this season, marine life researchers in the past year have pinpointed several theories behind the increase. Covid-19 restrictions that have kept humans and harmful waste off beaches have been shown to have a beneficial effect on the number of leatherbacks in Florida. “The chances that turtles are going to be inadvertently struck and killed will be lower,” said David Godfrey, the executive director of the Sea Turtle Conservancy, to the Guardian last year. “All of the reduced human presence on the beach also means that there will be less garbage and other plastics entering the marine environment. Ingestion and entanglement in plastic and marine debris also are leading causes of injury to sea turtles,” he added. This year’s nesting season ran from 1 March to 31 October. During the season, 2,795 nests of sea turtles of all species were recorded along Broward county beaches, the SunSentinel reported. Associated Press contributed to this reportThe Rothermere family has made an offer to take the publisher of the Daily Mail, i and Metro private in a £3.1bn deal, in a move that will end a 90-year run as a publicly listed company on the London Stock Exchange. The family, which founded the Daily Mail in 1896 and listed parent company Daily Mail and General Trust in 1932, has tabled a 255p per share offer valuing the newspaper business at £850m including debt. The Rothermere’s Jersey-registered holding company Rothermere Continuation Ltd (RCL) initially proposed a 251p offer in July for the 64% of DMGT it did not already control, provided a number of preconditions were met. In August, DMGT completed the first of the preconditions, selling the insurance risk business RMS to the credit rating agency Moody’s for £1.4bn. The second precondition was cleared when the online used car seller Cazoo made its $6bn stock market debut in New York. DMGT owns a 17% stake in Cazoo, worth about £1bn (£745m). On Wednesday, DMGT said that shareholders will also receive a 568p a share special dividend, a 17.3p a share final dividend and 0.58 shares in Cazoo, worth a total of £2.28bn. Combined with the 255p a share offer, the overall deal to take DMGT private is £3.1bn. The third precondition was reaching agreement with DMGT’s pension trustees which has resulted in a £412m payment into its three main schemes. “The sale of RMS and the Cazoo initial public offering have delivered excellent shareholder returns, but inevitably DMGT is now a considerably smaller group of businesses, with significantly greater exposure to consumer media,” said Jonathan Harmsworth, the fourth Viscount Rothermere, who is the chair of DMGT. Majedie Asset Management, one of DMGT’s largest shareholders controlling 4.6% of the company’s class A shares, said that the business is worth at least twice the price offered. “The offer for the residual businesses is substantially below what we believe is a fair and reasonable valuation,” said Chris Field, fund manager at MAM. “Our appraised valuation estimate of only the largest businesses within DMGT materially exceeds double the current offer price of 255p. We strongly urge shareholders not to accept the offer.” Lord Rothermere’s RCL holds all of the vote-bearing shares in DMGT’s two-tier stock structure, which means that the deal is not at risk of being blocked when the deal is put to a shareholder vote. “We believe the terms of our offer to be fair, particularly bearing in mind not only the existing level of debt within DMGT at a time of increasingly difficult market conditions, but also the restrictions imposed on the operation of the business as part of the settlement with the pension trustees,” said Rothermere. DMGT was founded by Harold Sidney Harmsworth, the first Viscount Rothermere, in 1922. He set up the Daily Mail with his brother Alfred in 1896, and subsequently launched the Daily Mirror. Harmsworth, 53, Harold’s great-grandson, has led the business through huge technological change as print newspapers have had to refocus their business models in the digital age. MailOnline, launched in 2003, has grown to be one of the world’s most popular English language news sites. The publisher of the Daily Mail has been reorganising the business through disposals and targeted acquisitions of its own in recent years, having bought the New Scientist magazine in a £70m deal in March, as well as the i newspaper in a £49.6m deal two years ago. The company has made £1.2bn from disposals in recent years of its stake in the property portal Zoopla, the education business Hobsons and the energy data firm Genscape. When DMGT is taken private it will leave Reach – the parent company of the Mirror, Express and Star national titles, and regional publications such as the Manchester Evening News – as the only major UK newspaper group remaining as a publicly listed company on the London Stock Exchange.Germany’s health minister, Jens Spahn, has warned that his country is going through a “massive” pandemic of the unvaccinated. “The pandemic is far from over,” said Spahn, a member of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU). “We are currently experiencing a pandemic of the unvaccinated, which is massive. There would be fewer coronavirus patients on intensive care units if more people would let themselves be vaccinated.” In the last week several German clinics have raised alarm about rising numbers of patients with Covid-19 on the wards. On Wednesday authorities reported 2,220 patients in intensive care beds, the highest number since the start of June. Over the last seven days 666 people have died from the virus in Germany, slightly more than in the same week a year ago, before the start of the vaccination drive and the arrival of the more infectious Delta variant. For now the number of fatalities is rising less steeply than it did during the previous three coronavirus waves in the country. The head of Germany’s disease control agency, Lothar Wieler, described the recent rise in infection rates as frightening. “The fourth wave is developing in exactly the way we feared, because not enough people have received the vaccine,” said Wieler, who is president of the Robert Koch Institute. The percentage of the German population fully vaccinated against Covid-19 has in effect flatlined for the last month at 66%, a lower rate than in other western European states such as France, Italy, Spain and the UK. Surveys suggest those who have refused a jab so far are unlikely to change their mind. A number of high-profile people such as the Bayern Munich footballer Joshua Kimmich and the former Die Linke chairperson Sahra Wagenknecht have recently made public that they have declined to be vaccinated. Unlike many of its southern European neighbours, Germany has not made vaccination mandatory for some professional sectors, such as care for elderly people, and on Wednesday Spahn reiterated that there were no plans to do so in the future. Instead, the health minister pointed to recent numbers from Israel as evidence that governments could get on top of a fourth wave of the pandemic by quickly administering booster shoots to those who had received their vaccinations more than six months ago. “A booster shot can make a real difference,” he said. However, Israel has a much higher percentage of the population already vaccinated, estimated at above 80%. In Germany’s federalised system, health authorities in each of the 16 states are responsible for setting up infrastructure that would allow vaccines to be administered en masse. Many of the vaccine centres set up at the start of the year have been in standby mode since September and would need to hire or train new staff to be reactivated. Leif Erik Sander, a physician at the department of infectious diseases and respiratory medicine at Berlin’s Charité hospital, said on Wednesday that about 30 million people in Germany were already or would soon be in need of a booster shot, but vaccinations were only happening at a rate of about 150,000 people a day. “It’s fairly easy to calculate that at this rate we wouldn’t be able to immunise these groups in time for this winter,” Sander said.A secretive investor court system poses a real threat to the Paris climate agreement, activists have said, as governments taking action to phase out fossil fuels face a slew of multimillion-dollar lawsuits for lost profits. New data seen by the Guardian shows a surge in cases under the energy charter treaty (ECT), an obscure international agreement that allows energy corporations to sue governments over policies that could hurt their profits. Coal and oil investors are already suing governments for several billions in compensation for lost profits over energy policy changes. For example, the German energy company RWE is suing the Netherlands for €1.4bn (£1.2bn) over its plans to phase out coal, while Rockhopper Exploration, based in the UK, is suing the Italian government after it banned new drilling near the coast. “It’s a real threat [to the Paris agreement]. It’s the biggest threat I am aware of,” said Yamina Saheb, a former employee of the ECT secretariat who quit in 2018 to raise the alarm. “The Paris agreement … means that we need to decarbonise in the current decade before 2030,” said Saheb, also a co-author of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s report on mitigation. She has estimated that foreign investors could sue governments for €1.3tn until 2050 in compensation for early closure of coal, oil and gas plants – a sum that exceeds what the EU hopes to spend on its green deal in the next decade. As compensation to companies is paid by public funds, governments would have less money to pay for new technology to make buildings, transport and industry greener. Saheb argued these payments could endanger the green transition. “It’s impossible to do everything,” she said. Separate analysis of the treaty shared exclusively with the Guardian showed a 269% increase in cases in 2011-20 compared with the previous decade. “We are going to see in future many more cases,” said Lucía Bárcena, of the Amsterdam-based Transnational Institute, who compiled the data. Since 2013, two-thirds of the cases have been brought against western European governments. “The energy charter treaty … has no cohesion at all with [EU] climate policies,” Bárcena said. “Trade and investment agreements are binding on states, which means if they break the contract then they have to pay huge amounts of money, while there is no other mechanism that binds countries to the goals that they are setting at Cop26. There is a big asymmetry.” Representatives from the ECT’s 54 members are meeting next week for a ninth round of talks on modernising the treaty. Signed in 1994, the treaty was intended to protect western companies investing in the oil- and gas-rich countries of the former Soviet Union. Only foreign investors, rather than domestic ones, can use the system, prompting longstanding complaints of privileged access. Campaigners now fear it could stymie the green transition. “We obviously have to get out of the fossil field quite quickly and the energy charter treaty is in the way because it protects fossil fuels,” said Cornelia Maarfield, a senior trade and investment policy coordinator at the Climate Action Network Europe. “Our main concern is that once governments start taking decisions to phase out coal, gas and oil, they will run into difficulties with the investment protection chapter of this agreement.” Germany’s RWE is suing the Netherlands for €1.4bn after the Dutch government decided to close all coal-fired power plants by 2030, including RWE’s Eemshaven plant, which began operating in 2015 with an expected life-span of 40 years. RWE said it supported the energy transition in the Netherlands, and “the only issue is therefore the fact that the coal ban law does not provide for adequate compensation”. Another German utility, Uniper, is reported to be seeking between €850m and €1bn for the early closure of its Maasvlakte coal-fired power plant near Rotterdam, which opened in 2016. The company declined to confirm the damages it was seeking, saying: “Uniper is convinced that shutting down our power plant in Maasvlakte after only 15 years of operation would be unlawful without adequate compensation.” The London-listed Rockhopper is suing Italy after MPs in 2016 reintroduced restrictions on drilling for oil and gas within 12 nautical miles of the coast. Rockhopper, which has never revealed the size of its claim, said in September it was suing for “very significant monetary damages on the basis of lost profits” after the Italian government rejected its oil exploration plans on the Ombrina Mare project in the Adriatic Sea. Rockhopper said: “The Italian government issued licences and encouraged significant investment in oil and gas exploration based on this platform. Clearly it is not equitable to change the rules halfway through. It is also important to note that Italy continues to produce significant quantities of oil and gas within 12 miles of the coast.” Investors are known to have filed 142 cases against governments since the ECT came into force in 1998. But these are only the known cases. Even the ECT’s Brussels-based secretariat acknowledges it does not have a complete picture, because investors are not obliged to reveal legal action under the ECT. Urban Rusnák, the secretary general of the Energy Charter Secretariat, rejected the view that the treaty would hamper governments getting out of fossil fuels, saying it did not proscribe energy policy. “The treaty does not ban the governments [from stopping fossil fuels] There is nothing like automatic punishment.” He suggested governments could quit fossil fuels without disputes under the ECT if they took a smart approach. “If the government is clever enough and they care about their investment climate, they can manage around,” he said. Rusnák, who grew up in communist Czechoslovakia, stressed the importance of the ECT in upholding the rule of law. “Some recent requests of climate activists to ban all fossil fuels without any compensation are coming very close to what happened in Czechoslovakia … when the regime in 1948 decided to expropriate all industries for a good reason of social justice,” he said. “My point here is not about individual cases. It’s about the system. Either we as a western civilisation really believe what we have agreed: we have to honour our agreements, and if conditions change we have to sit down and negotiate how we will get out of it.” Neither did he agree with a proposal by NGOs that EU governments should quit the ECT en masse. “It is legally possible but the consequences are dire,” he said, referring to a 20-year sunset clause that meant signatories remained bound for two decades. “Please be serious about the reform … Otherwise you will be locked in a treaty that you don’t like for 20 years.” Saheb argues the treaty is beyond reform because central Asian member states will veto any weakening of protection for fossil fuels. “The EU countries should withdraw altogether as one,” she said. “If we withdraw altogether we could agree to cancel this clause and then we could move on with our energy transition.”The energy charter treaty (ECT) was signed in 1994 to protect the interests of western investors pouring money into the oil- and gas-rich nations of the former Soviet Union. Entering into force in 1998, the treaty generated few cases and even less attention. That changed in 2014 when investors in the energy firm Yukos were awarded a record $50bn payout after a tribunal found that Vladimir Putin’s government had expropriated their assets to prevent Yukos’s then chief executive, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, from entering politics. The European court of human rights reached a similar verdict in the same week. Khodorkovsky was arrested at gunpoint in 2003 and spent a decade in a Siberian jail on charges widely seen as politically motivated. He was not party to either compensation claim. The Russian government, which never completed its ratification of the ECT, is yet to compensate investors. While the Yukos case grabbed attention, damages sought and awarded under the ECT are usually much smaller. Most of the ECT’s 54 members are in Europe, the Balkans and central Asia, although Turkey, Japan and Australia are also among the signatories. The EU used to champion the treaty but increasingly finds it problematic. During the first 15 years of the treaty, 89% of cases involved companies suing governments in central and eastern Europe and central Asia. But that has shifted: since 2014 more than two-thirds (68%) of ECT cases concern EU companies suing EU governments. Nearly one-third of cases involve Spain, as investors seek compensation for a change in renewable energy subsidies enacted in 2013. The EU’s top court ruled in 2018 that arbitration clauses common to 200 investment agreements, including the ECT, were not applicable in intra-EU disputes. But the legal implications are unclear and activists remain fearful that the ECT could delay the phase-out of fossil fuels, threatening goals to limit global heating. While the ECT secretariat highlights the public information on its website, critics say the system is a black box. Hearings happen in private and investors are not obliged to reveal the damages they are seeking. The court has decided in favour of the investor in 49% of cases, and in favour of the defending state in 39% of cases, according to the Transnational Institute. All of these rulings are made behind closed doors. But other vital cases on the world’s energy future may be completely unknown. The ECT secretariat in Brussels has counted 142 cases under the treaty since the first in 2001, but the true number is certainly higher. Investors have no obligation to disclose the existence of a case, even to the ECT secretariat.Harrods plunged £68m into the red last year after pandemic lockdowns halved its revenues, according to recently published accounts, and the luxury department store is now facing a strike by dozens of restaurant workers. During a year in which visitor numbers to London plummeted and stores had to close for weeks at a time, the Knightsbridge institution, which first opened its doors in 1849, has reduced staff numbers and ditched a dividend to its Qatari owners. The company, whose owners collected £125m in the year to January 2020, said it was unlikely to pay another dividend for two more years. Harrods was bought by Qatar Holding, the investment arm of Qatar’s sovereign wealth fund, in 2010 for an estimated £1.5bn. The company blamed government-imposed high street lockdowns for its difficulties and said it had more than halved spending to just under £45m while it reduced the number of staff by 145 to just under 4,000. United Voices of the World, which represents waiters and chefs at Harrods, said it was balloting members about a strike in Christmas week after demanding pay be raised to a minimum of £12 an hour, from just over £9 an hour at present. It said unrest was partly prompted by a heavy workload for staff after job cuts. Petros Elia, the general secretary of UVW, said: “Our members work in the most famous luxury department store in the world, and yet they are paid poverty wages whilst generating millions of pounds in profit for their bosses . Our members are not willing to tolerate this any longer.” On Wednesday night, a Harrods spokesperson said: “Alongside the wider hospitality industry, Harrods has faced an extremely difficult 18 months, with long periods of closure that have entirely removed our ability to operate as normal. However, throughout this, our absolute priority has been the welfare of our staff and safeguarding as many jobs as possible. “We are constantly reviewing our pay policies to ensure they are in line with industry best practice and as well as base salary, Harrods employees receive generous overtime, 100% service charge (minus a minor admin fee) and benefits package.” Harrods cut jobs last summer after the chief executive, Michael Ward, said a slump in tourist numbers and the need for social distancing was having “a huge impact on our ability to trade”. A note in the company’s accounts published this week said the Covid pandemic had been a “significant challenge” for the business, which had put the majority of staff on furlough during the enforced store closures. However, there was a rise in online sales over the period. Harrods said its import costs had increased by £500,000 as a result of extra administration and taxes, while the removal of duty-free shopping for travellers in January this year was likely to hit trade from tourists. The company said it had extended the terms of a £620m loan and a £200m credit facility repayable in April next year by 18 months. In a statement issued after the accounts were published, Harrods said they reflected the “devastating” impact of the pandemic on business, but healthy cash reserves and strong growth before the pandemic had helped the retailer “weather the storm that was to come”. “We have a robust programme that will return the business to strength, and whilst we know recovery will take time, the early signs are very positive. We have seen a huge return to demand for luxury and expect strong sales figures as we head into the peak Christmas trading season.” The company said it was planning more outlets for its H beauty store across the UK and a continued investment and presence in China.The British government has played down hopes of a breakthrough in a row with France over post-Brexit fishing licences, despite European perceptions of a “constructive” spirit and “positive dynamic”. The French transport minister, Jean-Baptiste Djebbari, said he had spoken to his UK counterpart on Tuesday evening. “The spirit is a constructive one,” he said, noting that French fishers had been granted 49 more licences on Monday. But a UK government spokesperson said the Brexit minister, David Frost, would “reaffirm our existing position” when he meets France’s Europe minister, Clément Beaune, in Paris on Thursday to discuss the issue. Tensions could be eased, however, by a French court ruling on Wednesday that a British scallop dredger seized by French authorities last week could leave immediately with no requirement to pay a €150,000 (£127,000) deposit. The rancorous dispute over French fishing rights in the six to 12-mile zone from the UK shore and around Guernsey and Jersey has helped take British-French relations to a post-Brexit low. The European Commission sounded a more optimistic note. “Officials from the UK, France, Jersey and the commission have been meeting for the past two days,” a spokesperson said on Wednesday. “These talks have allowed us to chart the way forward on several aspects and have created a positive dynamic aiming at a solution.” The spokesperson said technical talks would continue on Wednesday, including with some officials from Guernsey. The talks “have allowed for better understanding of the outstanding issues, which have been impeding quicker progress and we hope that the positive engagement on all sides will soon translate into concrete results,” they said. UK government sources said they were going to the meeting on Thursday with a “solutions focus” but cautioned against expecting any big breakthrough. While not ruling out progress, they said they did not anticipate all the issues would be resolved at the Paris meeting. A UK government spokesperson said Lord Frost’s response to Beaune would reaffirm “that vessels must provide the relevant evidence if they want to receive a license [sic] to fish in our waters – and that our licensing criteria and methodology remains unchanged”. They added: “We remain open to considering new evidence and will continue to talk to the French government, EU commission and Jersey authorities, as we have been doing for months.” Only days ago the dispute had threatened to tip into a trade war. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, announced that talks would continue on Monday as he stepped back from a threat to impose full customs checks on UK goods and ban UK boats entering some French ports from 2 November. Beaune then invited Frost for an “in-depth discussion over the difficulties in applying the agreements between the EU and the UK” in Paris on Thursday. Beaune said last week that the “language of strength … seems to be the only thing this British government understands”. The two men clashed on Twitter over the weekend, both setting our their claims as to why the other side was in breach of the post-Brexit trade agreement. Frost said the UK government had granted 98% of fishing licence applications and was acting in good faith to meet its obligations. He said that if the French threats were implemented, the EU would be in breach of the post-Brexit trade and cooperation agreement (TCA). Beaune countered that more than 90% of licences had been granted for the EU as a whole, but the missing ones were all French. “After 10 months, when such a significant amount of licences, targeting one country, is missing, it’s not a technical issue, it’s a political choice and a breach of the TCA,” he said. Under the trade agreement, French fishers can continue to fish around the Channel Islands and six to 12 miles off the UK shore until 2026 as long as they obtain a licence from British authorities. To receive that licence they must provide evidence of having fished in those waters between 2012 and 2016, but Britain and France have disagreed over the kind of evidence required. France says the requirement for GPS data is unfair on small boats, which do not have the equipment. The UK government says it determines the evidence required, while stressing there is no deadline to submit proof to get a licence. Jersey said it had granted the 49 licences issued on Monday on a temporary basis. The prime minister’s official spokesperson said the government was keen to discuss the Northern Ireland protocol with Beaune. Asked what success would look like at Thursday’s talks, he said: “We are seeking substantive changes to the protocol with the EU. These changes are necessary because the protocol as it’s currently being enforced is extremely damaging to the people of Northern Ireland and the businesses therein.” He insisted relations between the UK and France remained friendly. The UK and EU are deadlocked over revising the Northern Irish protocol, the Brexit agreement that kept the region in the EU single market and customs union to prevent a land border. Frost is due to meet the European Commission vice-president Maroš Šefčovič for further talks on Friday, as both sides try to settle the issue before the end of the year.Imagine for a moment that someone senior at your place of work was found to have been getting paid hundreds of thousands of pounds to act on behalf of outside interests. Imagine another person was found to have sexually harassed a junior member of staff. Now imagine if, rather than slinging them out, their mates at the company decided to exonerate them and shut down the HR department instead. I think we know what we’d call it: sleaze, a cover-up, a company not fit for purpose. But today that is precisely what the government did. Tory MPs voted to let off one of their own, Owen Paterson, after he was found by the independent standards committee to have broken lobbying rules. Two days earlier, they had allowed Rob Roberts, a Tory MP who was found to have abused his power by committing sexual misconduct, back into their party. That the Tories are yet again wallowing in sleaze comes as no surprise. From the pathetic attempts to defend Dominic Cummings when he breached lockdown to David Cameron’s rebirth as a super-lobbyist, this government has always chosen to lay down with the dogs. The blase manner in which it acts, the Trump-like attempts to fix the system to its own benefit, the complicity of those who justify and enable it, shows that it is now, inevitably, covered in fleas. I am sick of people skirting around calling this out for what it is: corruption. Paterson was receiving money from a private company to ask questions on its behalf. Roberts was found to have made repeated and unwanted sexual advances toward a young staffer. Both of them should be gone – neither are fit to serve as MPs. Their continued presence in the Tory party is scandalous. It will further undermine public faith in politics at a time when we should be trying to restore decency and honesty. But the rot starts at the top. We have a prime minister whose name is synonymous with sleaze, dodgy deals and hypocrisy. This is the man who allows his ministers to breach with impunity the codes that govern public life; who thinks it should be one rule for him and his chums, another for everyone else. With his every action he signals to his MPs: do what you like. There are no consequences. He will be wrong on that last point, though. Because eventually, politicians who thumb their nose at decent people get found out – and voted out. Last week, the prime minister was pontificating on why the Roman empire collapsed. He notably failed to mention that one of the main factors was that the people grew tired of the arrogance and corruption of their rulers. More than a decade ago, I led the prosecution of MPs over their expenses. I was struck then by the hubris of those who assumed they could never be caught and how quickly it caused public anger to escalate. I am reminded of that again today, as Tory MPs enrich themselves while putting up taxes for working people already facing spiralling energy bills and prices in the shops. There are a number of simple things that could be done to clean up politics, which I believe would command overwhelming public support. If I were prime minister, I would ban anyone who holds ministerial office from selling themselves to companies that want to write legislation in their own interests. It is an absurd situation that shouldn’t be allowed. You can choose to be a lawmaker or a lobbyist – you can’t be both. I would introduce a truly independent anti-corruption and anti-cronyism commission, to ensure we never again see a situation where Tory MPs gorge their donors on billions of pounds of taxpayer money, as they did during the Covid crisis. And I would improve transparency around public spending and government contracts through a new Office of Value for Money. But instead of trying to sort things out, we have a government that wants to stitch things up. Its plan is to permanently weaken the structures that hold MPs to high standards. It has appointed its own man to oversee the process – a Tory MP who not long ago was the prime minister’s wife’s boss – and gifted itself a majority on a committee to set the new rules. It would be laughable if it wasn’t so serious. The Labour party won’t have anything to do with this complete and utter sham process. What we need now is to restore public faith in our democracy, not cynically exploit it. Because long after this government has gone, we will still be living with the consequences of its flagrant disregard for honesty and accountability in high office. The sooner we get on with cleaning up our politics, the better. Keir Starmer is the leader of the Labour partyHugo Lloris has called for unity and commitment in the Tottenham dressing room as he urged his teammates to seize the opportunity of working under Antonio Conte. The captain wanted to look ahead and there is little doubt that the arrival of Conte as the manager has energised the club after the damp squib that was the 17-game tenure of Nuno Espírito Santo. Spurs face Vitesse at home in the Europa Conference League on Thursday night and the club remain confident that Conte’s work permit will come through in time for him to take charge. It had not been processed by close of business on Wednesday. As Lloris spelled out what he wanted to see in terms of attitude – returning time and again to the key themes of players taking responsibility; each and every one of them giving their all in every training session – it was easy to wonder whether he felt the needed standards had slipped of late. Nuno was sacked on Monday, in the wake of Saturday’s 3-0 home loss to Manchester United, a game that saw the Spurs support turn not only on the Portuguese manager but the chairman, Daniel Levy, and some of the players. Nuno’s time at the club was marred by poor results and lacklustre performances and, inevitably, there were disaffected members of the squad. “As players, we need to demand more from each other,” Lloris said. “We need to show more responsibility for the club and fans. It is time to believe again in ourselves. We want energy from everyone at the club, everyone in the changing room and we want to go together in the right direction. “There is a new philosophy of work but again we need the commitment of everyone and we need the excitement of everyone. It is a great opportunity to work under one of the greatest managers of the last few years. But when you have the opportunity, you have to take it. You have to give your best. And all together. “Every training session matters. It’s related to performance at the weekend and we need to be more demanding of each other in every single session. Bring intensity. Bring focus 100% every day.” Lloris was asked whether the players had to take responsibility for Nuno’s failure. “Of course, we have to share the responsibility,” he said. “When it does not work, it does not belong only to one person or two or three with the staff. It belongs to everyone. Now it is a new chapter and with passion, with emotion, with demands, we need to increase our level individually to help the team to get better.”In the 1960s the American psychiatrist Aaron Beck, who has died aged 100, created cognitive behavioural therapy. It came as a revelation, as it enabled some patients with anxiety or other mental health conditions to be treated in just 12 sessions without years of protracted psychoanalysis. Beck posited that people have “automatic thoughts” – deeply held assumptions colouring their mental state. He held that anxiety and other feelings stem from distorted thinking, but this can be challenged and transformed. To convince the psychiatry establishment, he ran a randomised controlled study in the 70s. This was the first of its kind, and showed cognitive behavioural therapy beating the leading drug in helping people with depression. In 1994, with his psychologist daughter, Judith, Beck set up the Beck Institute for Cognitive Behavior Therapy in Philadelphia to train and mentor therapists and advance the technique. More than 2,000 studies have verified CBT’s efficacy and it has branched out from its original use for depression and anxiety to treat addiction, eating disorders and many other mental health issues, as well as pain and even schizophrenia. It is used all over the world and is a mainstay of NHS mental health treatment. Beck’s theories grew out of dissatisfaction with the prevailing approach to psychological treatment in the 50s. He had trained as a psychoanalyst and followed the ideas of Sigmund Freud, who believed depression stemmed from repressed anger. However, Beck’s research into the dreams of depressed people – Freud considered dreams “the royal road to the unconscious” – found otherwise. Beck found one depressed man’s dream, for example, that he was at a formal dance wearing two left shoes, revealed, far from being angry, he was as depressed and sad in his dreams as when awake. From 1954 Beck worked in the department of psychiatry at the University of Pennsylvania and would see patients for psychoanalysis. They would arrive week after week to lie on a couch and free associate – voice thoughts that randomly came into their head – as Freud believed mental disorders could be resolved by exploring long-buried memories. Beck became restive and sceptical about the role of the therapist: “The idea was that if you sat back and listened and said ‘Ah-ha’, somehow their secrets would come out.” In 1960 he had a momentous insight. He asked one of his psychoanalysis patients, who was talking about her sexual encounters, how she felt telling him this and was astonished when she said she felt anxious, as no doubt she was boring him. He discovered she thought she bored everybody, which made her feel anxious and led her to engage in racy exploits to appear more attractive. Beck found such “automatic thoughts” and low self-esteem were common, with many patients convinced they were unlovable or worthless, and these thoughts fuelled their depression or anxiety. So could their mood lift if you altered their thinking? A pragmatic man who enjoyed finding solutions, Beck abandoned the formal psychoanalytic approach and started to offer patients alternative ways of thinking, for example suggesting to a man who said he was unloved as his wife did not say goodbye when she left the house that there might be an alternative explanation. He encouraged his patients to monitor their thoughts, avoid over-generalising and to test their assumptions in “homework” (for example to see if they could manage a social occasion without drinking). Over the next decades therapists adapted the basic approach of cognitive behavioural therapy to suit different conditions from depression to panic attacks, eating disorders, insomnia, addiction and pain. In his 70-year career Beck wrote or co-wrote around 600 papers and 25 books, and developed classification systems to measure symptoms of specific disorders and to assess suicide risk. Working well into his 90s, his most recent project was “recovery-orientated cognitive therapy” to help people manage schizophrenia. Aaron Temkin Beck (known as “Tim”) was born in Providence, Rhode Island, the youngest of three surviving children. His parents, Elizabeth (nee Temkin) and Harry Beck, a printer, were Russian-Jewish immigrants. At the age of eight he broke his arm and developed septicaemia, spending a month in hospital. From this time he became phobic about blood and injury, feeling anxious if he smelled ether. However, he learned to manage his anxiety by focusing his mind elsewhere and realised there was a connection between thoughts and feelings. After gaining an English degree (1942) at Brown University, Rhode Island, Beck studied medicine at Yale University. He originally chose to specialise in neurology, but changed tack to psychiatry and trained in psychoanalysis at the same time. After military service, in 1954 he joined the department of psychiatry at the University of Pennsylvania, where he combined research with seeing patients. In 1992 he was made professor emeritus at the university and in 1994 set up his not-for-profit institute to train mental health professionals. He was awarded the Albert Lasker award (2006) in recognition of his work in shaping modern psychotherapy. In 1950 Beck married Phyllis Whitman, a lawyer who became the first female judge in the superior court of Pennsylvania, and the couple had four children. An avid tennis player, he played into his 80s. He is survived by Phyllis, their children, Roy, Judith, Daniel and Alice, 10 grandchildren and 10 great-grandchildren. • Aaron Temkin Beck, psychiatrist, born 21 July 1921; died 1 November 2021My father, Ronnie Noble, who has died aged 84, was a removal and maintenance man for most of his working life. His gift was that he was able to live each day in a gentle, compassionate way, full of joy in nature, comedy, children, walking and the theatre. Born in Hackney, east London, he was the son of Violet (nee Pugh), a cleaner, and Albert Noble, a stoker. He grew up in a terrace house with his parents, sisters, brothers, nephews, nieces and the odd canary. Going to a local secondary modern school meant that, like many of his peers, he was not given the educational opportunities that his curious mind deserved. For more than 30 years he worked for the Ministry of Defence and the government Property Services Agency in the city of London. He met Barbara Pope at a dance and they married in 1962. Three years later they had me. They were both determined that all the doors should be open to me that were firmly shut for them. Ronnie’s successes should not be measured in medals, awards, great deeds or career achievements, but in the loving relationships that he built. A Laurel and Hardy and Jacques Tati fan, he saw the absurdity in everything around him. An instinctive socialist, he was puzzled and amazed by life – not least the nonsensical nature of war, poverty and injustice. He was a lifelong Guardian reader; no page went unread. In 1993 he was made redundant when the Property Services Agency was privatised. He did temporary work for a year and then retired. During his working life Ronnie was exposed to asbestos. Like 2,500 people in the UK each year he was diagnosed with mesothelioma. He lived his last year with increasing difficulty, but without the anger that his exposure to this disease inspired in the rest of us. The UK has the worst asbestos related illness statistics in Europe. He is survived by Barbara, me, his granddaughter, Edie, and five nephews and nieces.As 25,000 Cop26 delegates flood Glasgow, like the rain we ordered to welcome them to the largest political gathering ever held in the UK, the global spotlight falls on us – the hosts. If anything, the “dreich” weather (we create words for rain in the same way Inuits do for snow) is an authentic experience for them. Let’s hope they brought their waterproofs. Glasgow is a game of two halves, much like in the sport that divides its Rangers fans from its Celtic supporters. On one side, it’s a jewel of Victorian architecture, a fashion hub, a progressive, diverse ecosystem of boutique coffee shops, designer cocktail bars and other abundant displays of what, for many of us, makes quintessential modern Scotland. And in the other lineup – social inequality, food poverty, homelessness, an obesity crisis and drug deaths soar to record levels. So were Glaswegians looking forward to Cop? Yes and no, or aye and naw, depending who you ask. The event is located at the SEC in Finnieston, a conference centre that is home to Scotland’s biggest music concerts and events. At this time of year, it is usually gearing up for panto but instead, the Cop26 mascot Bonnie the seal is the only costumed icon on display. Away from the conference centre, however, Glasgow is transforming into Edinburgh during the fringe, swapping street performers for protesters. While the 2014 Commonwealth Games saw the peaceful hosting of competitive sports teams from 71 different countries’ teams, Cop26 looks a bit like threatening to turn into Squid Games plus road closures. My mother grew up in what she calls “the slums of Glasgow” – a place called Bridgeton which sounds a lot like Bridgerton but is a world away from elite Victorian balls and classically performed Ariana Grande tracks. Machete gangs, she said, roamed the streets and police rarely ventured into these communities. You don’t have to step back in time to see the evidence of that period; the legacy lives on. Social class divisions are entrenched in Scotland, and very visible in Glasgow. My family moved to Bearsden, a wealthy suburb where life expectancy for men is 12 years greater than the deprived community of next-door Drumchapel, just two miles away. The pandemic fuelled this division and many are now asking why, just a few months on from being told they were unable to visit family and friends, go to the football or travel abroad, we are opening our home to thousands of visitors when the “tree huggers” could have done it on Zoom. Cop has also raised for some the unwelcome spectre of lockdown. Some 100,000 vehicles use the Clydeside Expressway every day but it has been closed for 23 days before and during the conference. It snakes along the Clyde, bypassing the West End rush-hour traffic and connecting drivers to the busiest motorway in Scotland – the M8. Even on foot it’s proving problematic to get around, with some residents denied access to their properties while world leaders dine in nearby restaurants. We feel a wee bit left out: people are still wondering how you get tickets or even if they are allowed to go. Not that everyone has somewhere to stay. Thousands of delegates are struggling to find accommodation in a city that’s a hotbed for homelessness. One apartment in the well-to-do Kelvingrove district has been rented for £103,000 for 12 nights. At that price, foreign dignitaries and heads of state might find themselves bunking on sofa beds across the city. Imagine having António Guterres on your futon in Easterhouse. It’s a shared bathroom, Antonio, chop chop. This in a city with the highest rate of homeless households in Scotland. Just two months ago, a housing crisis for returning students hit the headlines. The lack of available and affordable rentals turned freshers’ week into a damp squib. Private rents in Glasgow are up 46% in a decade, creating a bonanza for landlords. As hotels and Airbnbs inflate their prices to record levels, the people of Glasgow have been asked to open their hearts and homes to visitors for the 12-day event, with the Human Hotel Network securing hosts for about 600 delegates. Many locals find the greed inexcusable, while others wonder if the royals could do their bit and offer the spare rooms at Balmoral. Glasgow is friendly, welcoming and warm (in spirit, if not in weather) so we might not be polishing the nice silverware and washing our curtains, but visitors can expect us to greet them with a smile. We have a fierce belief in social justice and a strong sense of community. The city unites in times of crisis. During the Clutha helicopter crash in 2013, people ran towards the scene, pulling injured revellers to safety. A year later, when a lorry collided with pedestrians in the city centre, killing six and injuring 15, Glasgow fell silent as thousands attended vigils for the victims. And in 2007, the city’s response to a terrorist attack at Glasgow airport made headlines, when baggage handler John Smeaton tackled and restrained the bombers and was dubbed a hero. Thirty-two years ago, the city banded together to battle against the poll tax. Our response caused such uproar it forced change. The city is capable of mobilising for the greater good. Rain or no rain, we won’t waste the opportunity to showcase the best we have to offer – the people of Glasgow. Zara Janjua is a writer and comedianA former adviser to Mark Zuckerberg has said democracy “may never recover” if Facebook does not change and has called for misuse of users’ data to be labelled as unethical as child labour. Roger McNamee, an early investor in Facebook who has become a staunch critic of the business, said revelations from whistleblower Frances Haugen have created an opportunity for change at Zuckerberg’s social media empire. If Haugen’s testimonies and documents do not force reform by hitting the company’s profits, then democracy would suffer, he said, adding: “If it doesn’t then democracy and our ability to make our own choices may never recover.” Speaking at the Web Summit in Lisbon, McNamee repeated a recent demand that the extraction of user data and using it to manipulate consumer behaviour should be made as unethical as child labour. “Extracting the essence of our humanity in data form and then using it to manipulate our behaviour is as unethical as child labour and it should be banned the same way that child labour was banned,” he said. Facebook generates its income from advertisers, who are able to target specific demographics and consumers because the company has built up profiles of its users through their online activity. Facebook’s parent company, Meta, which also owns the Instagram photo-sharing app and the WhatsApp messaging service, made $86bn (£63bn) in revenues last year. Nearly 2 billion people use Facebook every day. Haugen has claimed in testimony, while also citing internal company documents, that Facebook manipulates user behaviour through algorithms that tailor what users see, particularly in promoting divisive content. Meta has denied it does this and that advertisers would shun a company that promotes extreme content. Speaking at the summit via video link on Tuesday, Nick Clegg, Meta’s VP of global affairs, said Facebook’s content was largely “babies, barbecues and barmitzvahs”. McNamee, who co-founded investment firm Elevation Partners, said Haugen had approached whistleblowing like a product launch by disclosing company documents anonymously, then revealing her identity on TV and appearing in front of US senators before embarking on a wider publicity campaign, alongside Congress releasing the document cache to a consortium of news organisations. “She is the first person ever to perceive that you could do whistleblowing like a tech product announcement, a tech product rollout,” said McNamee. “I would argue that the way she did her whistleblowing was the most effective product rollout since the original iPhone … And I just tip my hat to her. Simply brilliant.” McNamee said the pacing of her revelations, which first appeared in the Wall Street Journal before she stepped into the public eye on the 60 Minutes TV programme, was akin to the film Jaws. “They don’t show you the shark at the beginning of the movie. There is a nice buildup and the anticipation makes the appearance of the shark more effective.” He added: “The impact of that … literally stopped the conversation and restarted it in a profound way.” McNamee added that he was still willing to talk to Zuckerberg. He started advising Zuckerberg in 2006 but stopped three years later when he cited ambitions to reach 1 billion users, which McNamee thought too aggressive. “I would like to help him get this right,” said McNamee. Another senior Meta executive defended the company against Haugen’s revelations on Wednesday. Speaking to the Web Summit via video link, Chris Cox, Meta’s chief product officer, said the debate created by the document leaks had raised an “important set of questions” but the ensuing furore had “lost track” of the multibillion dollar sums that Meta invests in keeping its users safe.Prince Andrew could face civil trial in the US over alleged sexual abuse at the end of 2022, a judge said on Wednesday. Speaking at during a phone conference with lawyers in New York, US district judge Lewis Kaplan said he anticipates a trial date of “somewhere in the September to December period of next year”. The development came after Andrew’s lawyers attacked his accuser, Virginia Giuffre, in legal filings over the weekend, accusing her of seeking a “payday” at Andrew’s expense and referring to accusations that Giuffre was a “sex kitten”. Giuffre’s civil lawsuit alleges she was forced to have sex with Andrew when she was 17 years old. Andrew denies the accusations. During Wednesday’s hearing David Boies, Giuffre’s lawyer, said he expected to call “eight to 12” witnesses for the trial. He said “obviously the parties” involved would be deposed. Boies told Kaplan that “there are two people in the United Kingdom” where he may require the judge to issue letters rogatory – a formal request to the judiciary of a foreign country – to secure their testimony. Andrew Brettler, representing Andrew, said he was also likely to call eight to 12 witnesses. Giuffre, 38, filed the lawsuit against Andrew in August. She accused Andrew of sexually abusing her at the home of socialite Ghislaine Maxwell in London and at properties owned by the disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. Andrew, the Duke of York, has not been charged with crimes and has vehemently denied the accusations. Andrew, 61, was criticized this week for his lawyers’ aggressive tactics against his accuser. “Giuffre has initiated this baseless lawsuit against Prince Andrew to achieve another payday at his expense and at the expense of those closest to him,” Brettler said in a court filing on Friday. In a statement given to Newsweek Sigrid McCawley, a lawyer representing Giuffre, said the team had been “humbled by Virginia’s bravery”. “On the subject of money, let’s be clear: the only party to this litigation using money to his benefit is Prince Andrew,” McCawley said. Before any trial, Giuffre and Andrew would submit to questioning under oath by opposing lawyers by next July 14. Maxwell goes on trial in Manhattan on 29 November on charges she helped recruit and groom three underage girls for Epstein to abuse, and engaged in sex trafficking of a 14-year-old girl. She has pleaded not guilty to eight criminal counts, and has been jailed in Brooklyn since her July 2020 arrest. Epstein killed himself at age 66 in a Manhattan jail in August 2019 while awaiting trial on sex trafficking charges, in what a medical examiner called a suicide. Reuters contributed to this reportToo many people believe the Covid-19 pandemic is over, England’s deputy chief medical officer has said, adding that he is worried that increasing numbers of deaths show “the infection is now starting to penetrate into older age groups”. Speaking to the BBC on Wednesday morning, Prof Jonathan Van-Tam said: “I personally feel there are some hard months to come in the winter and it’s not over. “I think a whole range of behaviours, including the use of face coverings, but generally the caution that people take or don’t take in terms of interacting with each other – that is going to be a big determinant in what happens between now and the kind of darkest months of the winter.” The warning came as the UK recorded 41,299 further Covid cases on Wednesday along with 888 additional hospital admissions and 217 deaths from the virus. Over the past seven days there have been 1,141 Covid deaths in the UK, a rise of 13% on the week before. The pandemic was “running quite hot” in the country, with rates of coronavirus infections higher than in most of the rest of Europe, Van-Tam said. “And, of course, it’s of concern to scientists that we are running this hot this early in the autumn season.” Deploying one of his trademark metaphors, Van-Tam said the UK was at “half-time in extra time” in tackling Covid. He added: “I think the final whistle in terms of – I can’t predict it – but my personal view is that we’ve got a few more months to run, and I think we’ll be in a much calmer set of waters by spring. “But I think, until then, caution, be very careful, this is not quite over and vaccines, boosters, [are] really important.” Although hospital admissions had slowed, and the numbers in hospital were going down, Van-Tam said “we have to just wait and see a bit longer” to be sure this was not a pause before another escalation in numbers, or merely a sign that the situation was beginning to stabilise at a high rate. Contrary to Van-Tam’s comments, publicly available data shows the numbers of Covid patients in hospital has risen every day since 23 October. He said the overall fall in case numbers reflected the ebb of a large wave among teenagers. “But my worry is that the deaths are increasing and that shows that the infection is now starting to penetrate into those older age groups,” he said. “And that’s why the really key thing is that if you are called for your booster, if you are called for your flu vaccine, please go and get them – this could be really very important this winter, it is not the time to be complacent.” Wearing face masks was useful, “but they are probably most useful when used in combination with other things”, and particularly if others felt uncomfortable without them or if authorities asked a person to do so, Van-Tam said. He conceded it was unrealistic to wear them while sat around a table enjoying food or drink with friends, but that people should “wear masks when mobile, and use them as you’re entering and exiting the premises”. “And then, finally, you’ve got the kind of very high-mobility, high-interaction venues such as clubs and here you can see it would be very socially inhibiting to wear face masks,” he said. “I think if the epidemiology gets worse in the UK that on its own would not be enough in those kinds of venues.”Claims by Iran’s Revolutionary Guards (IRGC) that they thwarted a US attempt to capture Iranian oil on a tanker in the Sea of Oman are untrue, US officials have said. According to reports in Iranian media – released on the eve of the anniversary of the Iranian seizure of the US embassy in Tehran in 1979 – the US navy interdicted an Iranian oil tanker on 25 October and intended to transfer the oil to a second tanker, but the the IRGC navy intervened by boarding and taking control of the first tanker. “With the timely and authoritative action of the Guards’ naval forces, the US terrorist navy’s operation to steal Iranian oil in the Sea of Oman failed,” the elite unit said in a statement published by Iranian state media. US officials said the Iranian account was untrue and there had been no American attempt to seize a tanker. The officials said that in reality Iranian forces had seized a Vietnamese-flagged oil tanker last month and two US navy ships, backed by air support, had monitored the situation, but did not try to interdict the vessel. The tanker was named as Southys, and one of the US destroyers as USS The Sullivans. The US said they watched Iranian forces “swarming, boarding and seizing the vessel and take it to Iranian waters.” If the American account is true, it is unclear why the Iranians would seek to board a vessel taking Iranian oil for export clandestinely towards Asia. Some Iranian social media accounts claimed Iran was seeking vengeance on the ship’s captain for previously cooperating with the US over clandestine Iranian oil exports. Iran is under US sanctions that forbid it from exporting oil to anywhere other than Iraq, although in practice the sanctions regime has regularly been circumvented. The Iranian reports, which painted the IRGC in a heroic light, may have been timed to coincide with the embassy seizure anniversary – an event marked by state-sponsored demonstrations. An eight-minute video posted by the Guards showed masked gunmen from the IRGC landing on the deck of a ship by helicopter as dramatic music played. At a minimum, the alleged episode underlines the instability in the Gulf and the chance of a conflagration if the oil embargo continues and is heavily policed by the US. Iran is on the cusp of announcing the date on which it is due to return to talks in Vienna over the future of the nuclear deal it signed with the US, EU and others in 2015. Some hard line websites in Iran said the announcement might come late on Wednesday. Donald Trump took the US out of the deal and started imposing sanctions on Iranian oil exports in 2018. Iran responded by dropping some of its commitments to the deal and increasing uranium enrichment. Iran has been under intense pressure from Russia, a natural ally, to stop delaying the return to the talks. Powerful elements in Iranian politics do not want the talks to restart, seeing them as a blind alley. They believe Iran can withstand further US sanctions, build up trade with the east and develop its own nuclear programme free from UN inspectors. In a tweet on Sunday the chair of the Tehran Chamber of Commerce, Masoud Khansari, said Iran’s oil exports to China had “drastically dropped” in the first seven months of the current Iranian calendar year, which began on 21 March. According to Khansari, in the first seven months of 2021 Iran exported just $11m of crude oil to China, compared with $9.5bn in 2018. Iran says its use of middlemen in oil exports means it is not falling foul of the sanctions regime. The head of the UN nuclear inspectorate, Rafael Grossi, has admitted that restrictions on the work of his inspectors by Iran at its nuclear sites mean his staff are now operating under a dense cloud. In an attempt to unlock the talks, Joe Biden has given an undertaking to rejoin the 2015 deal if Iran stays in compliance. Biden met Boris Johnson, Angela Merkel and Emmanuel Macron at the G20 summit on Saturday to discuss the matter. The four leaders urged the Iranian president to seize the opportunityto prevent a “dangerous escalation”. In a statement, they said: “This will only be possible if Iran changes direction. We urge President [Ebrahim] Raisi to seize this opportunity and act in good faith so that negotiations can urgently find an outcome. It’s the only safe way to prevent a dangerous escalation that would be in no country’s interest.”Few people today would claim not to sympathise with the suffragettes – but this wasn’t true at the time. When parliament debated women’s struggle for the vote in 1914, Lord Robert Cecil – later a recipient of the Nobel peace prize, who was in fact supportive of women’s suffrage – declared that “suffragist outrages” were a “very serious evil” with the aim of “anarchy”. There was only one solution “to prevent them from committing crimes”, he said: “deportation”. When Reginald McKenna, then home secretary in HH Asquith’s Liberal government, offered four options to deal with them – letting them die (“That is, I should say, at the present moment the most popular, judging by the number of letters I have received”); deportation; treating them as “lunatics”; or giving them the franchise – his fellow parliamentarians laughed uproariously at each. The suffragettes, it should be said, did not sit around singing kumbaya, and were far more militant than contemporary protest movements in Britain. They committed arson, including the burning of several private homes – with five resulting deaths –and smashed up art galleries and museums. They attempted to destroy Glasgow’s aqueduct and attacked churches. Targets for bombing included the extremely busy street outside the Bank of England, although the device was defused, while a train driver was nearly killed by another bomb. Damned at the time as terrorists and anarchists, the militants are today seen sympathetically by history. As the cheerful “soldiers in petticoats” in Disney’s Mary Poppins predicted: “Our daughters’ daughters will adore us, and they’ll sing in grateful chorus: ‘Well done, Sister Suffragette!” Why? Because the consensus is that the evil the suffragettes fought – the suppression of women’s basic democratic rights – was greater than any evil the suffragettes themselves were responsible for. Eyes often roll when any movement is compared to the suffragettes, but the injustice that Insulate Britain confronts – the existential threat posed to humanity by the climate emergency – surely belongs in the same pantheon of struggles. Given the scientific consensus is that we face devastating consequences unless more radical action is taken, almost everyone respects the group’s cause, quite unlike the suffragettes at the time: it is their tactics that are contested. As someone with a socialist perspective, there is much to sympathise with in the objections. Protest is supposed to target those with wealth and power: in the case of the climate emergency, that would mean focusing on the 100 companies responsible for 71% of global emissions, and the failures of the ruling Conservatives, who have received £1.3m from fossil fuel interests and climate sceptics since 2019. Insulate Britain target motorways which, statistically speaking, are largely used by ordinary citizens, including working-class people travelling to underpaid and undervalued jobs. A “just transition” is supposed to promote the idea that placing the global economy on a sustainable footing must not be achieved on the backs of poor people. Is glueing one’s face to motorways rather than the doors of Shell’s headquarters consistent with this demand? All movements are told that they are protesting the wrong way by detractors who often pretend to be sympathetic to their aims. The suffragettes were victims of this narrative, as was the civil rights movement in the US – Martin Luther King was denounced for inciting “hatred and violence”. Gay rights and feminism were similarly denounced for their supposed counterproductive aggression and militancy. If only they could be more polite, less disruptive, less in your face then maybe people would listen! Unfortunately strategies which, by definition, are more easily ignored are, well, ignored. When Extinction Rebellion protesters stormed the UK’s largest oil refinery last week, the presence of two national Olympians did not win them as much media attention as the motorway blockers. If, therefore, you believe that millions of lives are imperilled and we are running out of time to do something about it, which modern science treats as an indisputable fact, is it not rational to settle on the tactic that raises the most attention? How will a human race facing severe consequences of the climate crisis in 30 years, which are far more disruptive than today’s temporarily blocked motorways, look back at protesters doing something, anything, to raise the alarm? Indeed, it is striking that Extinction Rebellion was unpopular, according to the polling back in their 2019 heyday. But surveys also revealed something else: that public concern about the environment surged to record levels after they began protesting. The very presence of – yes, inherently annoying – protests forced a conversation about an otherwise neglected issue, making people care more about it. Public anger is also easily misdirected. Fury in recent weeks has been focused on ambulances delayed by protesters, though no one has been reported dead because of Insulate Britain. Yet where was the comparable outrage about a patient who died in an ambulance outside Addenbrooke’s hospital in Cambridge because it was too busy to cope? It is far easier to excite anger against the bogeyman of the disruptive activist than focus on the years of underfunding the health service, and a pandemic mishandled by Britain’s government. If politicians were taking sufficient action to stave off climate calamity, and the media were more effective at building pressure on those in positions of power to act, then citizens would not be risking lengthy prison sentences by shutting down public infrastructure. That’s where the frustration should really lie. Our house is burning: should ire be focused on those pouring on the petrol, or on the tactics of those yelling “fire”? So yes, just like the suffragettes with their far more extreme tactics, Insulate Britain is profoundly unpopular – and yet everyone today pretends that they would have been on the side of the window-smashing soldiers in petticoats. • Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist“Interspecies art experiment”, “erupt into crazy colours”, “string theory”, “algorithm” (Art for bees: ‘mad-looking’ installation suits pollinators’ tastes, 3 November). Here in Yorkshire we just plant stuff that flowers at different times. Seems to work. Eileen Poore Sheffield • Willie Walsh comments approvingly on the role of air freight in distributing Covid vaccines (‘Not trying to mislead’: airlines chief defends industry’s net zero pledge, 29 October). For some reason he neglects to say anything about the role of air travel in spreading the Covid virus in the first place. Martin Staniforth Leeds • Boris Johnson’s claim that “there’s a great wisdom in the British people” (Cop26: Boris Johnson ‘cautiously optimistic’ about reaching 1.5C deal, 2 November) is plainly false; we elected him. Geoff Booth Knebworth, Hertfordshire • Well, last year’s trend is back in Cardiff! Just seen on my long walk three men over 65 wearing shorts! It’s cold here; they look ridiculous. Especially as the person they were with was wearing a winter coat. Sue Walters Cardiff • Raspberries on 29 October in north London (Letters, 29 October)? Here in our garden in north-west Surrey we were picking figs on 1 November. William Burgess Egham, Surrey • We are still picking raspberries in Cheshire. Is this an example of levelling up? Ray Hodson Congleton, Cheshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.