Britain’s employers are offering bonuses of up to £2,000 to recruit Christmas workers amid fears over staff shortages disrupting the festive season. Research from the jobs website Adzuna showed there are currently 26,307 seasonal job vacancies ahead of the pivotal Christmas shopping period, almost double the 13,668 at the same point a year ago. Reflecting severe staff shortages caused by Covid and Brexit, the number of seasonal job vacancies is more than a quarter higher than the 20,488 recorded in 2019, before the start of the pandemic. According to the analysis of more than 1.2m job postings from the Adzuna website, which is tracked by government statisticians for early signals from the jobs market, employers are gearing up to hire an army of more than 130,000 additional staff this winter to meet a rush in demand for goods and services. Adzuna said there were more than 1,300 job openings advertising a Christmas bonus, including rewards of up to £2,000 for Amazon seasonal warehouse workers, bonuses of £1,000 for DPD warehouse night sorters, and payments of £500 for new recruits at Ocado, AO.com and Hand Picked Hotels. It said that Tesco was looking for the most seasonal staff, with 871 job vacancies still open across the UK out of a total 30,000 additional temporary positions at the retailer this winter. Delivery company Hermes still has 740 vacancies, and Royal Mail 200, to handle deliveries after a boom in online shopping during the pandemic. With shortages of lorry drivers and warehouse staff causing shortages on the high street ahead of the festive season, the figures come amid concerns over potential disruption in the run-up to Christmas. Representatives from the hospitality, retail and logistics sectors told MPs on the Commons’ environment, food and rural affairs committee on Thursday that they hoped Christmas could still pass smoothly despite a chronic lack of staff, severe disruption to deliveries and rising costs. Kate Nicholls, chief executive of UK Hospitality, said the supply chains for pubs, hotels and restaurants were “nowhere near resilient”. She said about 20% of deliveries were being disrupted, leading to food and drink coming through at the wrong times and at higher prices. “We will deliver as good a Christmas as we are able to but not as good as we would want to,” she said. Tom Southall, policy director of the Cold Chain Federation, which represents the refrigerated logistics sector, said shortages of lorry drivers and warehouse staff were affecting deliveries and could lead to shortages on supermarket shelves. “Christmas as usual? Probably not. How that will manifest itself, there may be gaps on the shelves as we’ve seen over the past few months,” he said. Ben Broadbent, a deputy governor of the Bank of England, told the committee that shortages of workers would push up wages in some sectors, with potential to feed through into higher levels of inflation. Although saying that he expected the impact of labour shortages to fade as Covid disruption to the economy dissipates, he said higher wages would be “inevitable” in some sectors. “If you don’t have any more people and they’re very specialised, in the end – short of some labour-saving technology – the output in that sector will be limited. And the means by which that will be limited will be higher wages and prices,” he said. The research from Adzuna showed the highest number of job openings were in sectors where labour shortages are currently most acute; in retail, logistics and warehousing. Andrew Hunter, co-founder of Adzuna, said that employers were having to work harder than ever to fill seasonal openings this year amid a shortage of staff across the country. “That’s visible in the number of Christmas jobs still lying open, which is twice as high as last year.” He said that large companies with flex in their budgets were pushing to fill gaps in their temporary Christmas workforce using bonuses, but that smaller firms might struggle to compete. “The Christmas season is critical for many businesses’ bottom lines, and if they can’t solve their worker shortages soon, it could be damaging both for companies and consumers,” he said.The special effects studio co-founded by Sir Peter Jackson, which has brought blockbusters including Lord of the Rings and Game of Thrones to life, has been sold for more than $1.6bn, in the latest blow to New Zealand’s film and TV industry. The cash and shares deal, which will see Weta Digital sold to US-based video game company Unity Software for $1.63bn, comes less than three months after Amazon made the shock decision to move its $1bn-plus development of a small screen adaptation of JRR Tolkien’s Lord of the Rings (LOTR) from New Zealand to the UK after shooting just one series. The US-listed Unity said the visual special effect tools created by Weta Digital, which has built characters and scenes from film spanning Avatar, LOTR, Wonder Woman and Planet of the Apes, will now be “democratised” and put in the hands of “millions of creators and artists around the world”. “Weta Digital’s tools created unlimited possibilities for us to bring to life the worlds and creatures that originally lived in our imaginations,” said Sir Peter, chairman and co-founder of Weta Digital. “Together, Unity and Weta Digital can create a pathway for any artist, from any industry, to be able to leverage these incredibly creative and powerful tools.” Unity said the technology behind Weta’s award-winning work, including creating the effects behind Gollum as well as effects for hits including Black Widow and The Suicide Squad, will now be integrated into its platform to “shape the future of the metaverse”. “We are thrilled to democratise these industry-leading tools,” said John Riccitello, chief executive of the US-listed Unity, which saw its share price rise more than 5% on news of the deal. Unity offers software tools to developers to make their games more life-like. Unity was that as part of the deal it would add the Wellington-based company’s 275 engineers to its workforce. Nevertheless, the deal will be seen as something of a blow to New Zealand’s prolific film and TV industry. Weta Digital’s visual special effects and animation teams will continue to exist as a standalone entity and will become Unity’s largest customer in the media and entertainment space. WetaFX, which employs about 1,700 staff, will remain majority owned by Jackson. Jackson co-founded Weta in 1993 to produce digital special effects for the film Heavenly Creatures. Shareholders include his wife, Fran Walsh, chief executive Prem Akkaraju and Napster founder Sean Parker.During Melbourne’s first lockdown, Jeanette Nkrumah started spending a lot of time on TikTok. At first the videos she saw on her “For You” page – the personalised home screen that appears whenever a user opens the app – weren’t particularly compelling. But as she started spending more time there, the recommendations improved. “The content just got really good. I started texting it to my friends and housemates. Eventually I started posting it on my Instagram stories for everyone to watch.” Unlike other social media apps, TikTok allows users to easily save videos directly to their phones, with a watermark. Dr Belinda Barnet, a senior lecturer at Swinburne University of Technology, says this feature helps “lead to their content going viral and bleeding onto other platforms”. “It’s not just a basic feature of TikTok,” she says, but rather a design decision to make “content … more readily shareable”. When Nkrumah started watching and saving videos, her mental health was worse than it had been in a long time. Her first set of videos posted to Instagram resulted in a flood of positive messages from friends. Initially, she feared her friends would skip right past them, so the reactions felt particularly affirming. Nkrumah kept the uploads going. “A friend messaged me saying I should call it Top of the Toks, and it’s just grown from there. Now I post my curated, themed dumps every Monday night.” Nkrumah doesn’t make her own TikToks. Instead, she curates them based on her mood or world events. Her Monday night Instagram uploads aren’t just a ritual for her – her account has become one of my favourite places on the internet. Sharing moments Like Nkrumah, I downloaded TikTok after about a year of watching its videos on other platforms. Unlike her, I never made it past the initial stage of training my algorithm. I found it difficult to sustain myself on the app. The reward of eventually getting fed the right content, versus the time I was spending watching things that weren’t interesting, just didn’t add up. It made more sense to me to go back to where I’d first started watching TikToks: other people’s Instagram stories. I valued the taste and sense of humour of people I already followed more than the algorithm’s experiments on me. Plus, when I watched the videos friends posted, I got a deeper insight into who they were. It made me feel more connected to them. Barnet has noticed this trend. She says TikTok videos are “extremely good at capturing a moment”, and can compel others to “share that feeling or moment on another platform.” Content aggregators on social media are nothing new. New media empires have been built on finding and surfacing viral content. It can even be a profitable endeavour. On YouTube, you’ll find compilations of Vines, Snapchats and TikToks with millions of views, with money changing hands with every advertisement that plays alongside them. Sophia Smith Galer, Vice World News reporter and TikTok content creator, says while content aggregators should be seeking permission from original creators to re-share, aggregation isn’t always done by the books. “If you don’t care about rights or anything, you can grab a whole bunch of videos and upload them onto a monetisable channel and create ads.” YouTube has a takedown process for copyrighted work, and state “short videos you compiled from other social media websites” are not eligible for monetisation. Smith Galer – who has been approached by aggregators seeking to license her content – says “some people do obey the laws of the internet”, but infringements still happen. “I’ve seen my videos up on other people’s YouTube channels and I haven’t given them permission to use it.” She says TikTok compilations, in particular, are everywhere at the moment because that is the video platform setting the most trends right now. It offers “meme culture done in an extremely engaging way”. “[TikTok] has high content density. Every second is full of so many different things – audio, visuals, captions – that are trying to get all these different emotions out of you.” Amber Akilla, a DJ and creative director who also curates Tiktok “dumps” on Instagram, agrees. “The amount creativity I see on TikTok never ceases to amaze me,” she says. On her TikTok page, she mostly posts original videos, while on Instagram, she mostly shares content from her For You page. Akilla sees Instagram as geared more towards “aspirational” content, while TikTok is more “relatable”. “I didn’t see people talking about how we relate to one another, friendships, relationships – things that I’ve always been interested in – on Instagram, so when I saw it on TikTok it was really validating.” Her own videos are simple – she holds up her phone and talks straight to camera about her interests. But the TikToks she shares to her Instagram audience are absurd, chaotic, and often – in internet parlance – “cursed”. She posts them not because she agrees with the videos, but to get a reaction. “I still think Instagram is a better tool for communicating directly with people,” Akilla says. While Akilla shares her curations to thousands of people, Nkrumah shares it on a private account, that only her real-life friends follow. Sharing TikToks that other people have made, but that nonetheless feel personal to her, has been a safe way of expressing how she feels. “It’s nice to be able to share these things in a public space and make others feel less alone,” she says.That’s all from me, Samantha Lock, for today’s blog. In the meantime you can follow along with all Covid developments here. Catch you on our next Covid blog shortly. If you have any suggestions or ideas feel free to contact me via Twitter at @Samantha__Lock or email samantha.lock@theguardian.com France pushes to accelerate update of Covid-19 booster shots for elderly and vulnerable citizens. President Emmanuel Macron said a third injection would be made available to those aged 50-64 from early December. Anyone over 65 who was vaccinated more than six months ago will need to get a booster shot by mid-December for their “health pass” to remain valid, Macron said. Covid cases surge in Greece with a record of 8,613 new cases in the last 24 hours - the highest since the pandemic began. Cases have more than doubled in less than a fortnight. Virus deaths in Russia hit daily record of 1,211 Covid-19 deaths, the highest daily death toll in the pandemic, and 39,160 new cases. Russian president Vladimir Putin ordered many Russians last month to stay off work between 30 October and 7 November. Latvia, one of the least vaccinated countries in the European Union, is facing its most severe outbreak of Covid-19 yet. The World Health Organization has warned there could be shortfall of up to two billion syringes in 2022, which threatens to hamper vaccine efforts globally is production does not improve, AFP reports. Loved ones reunite at US-Mexico border as Covid travel restrictions lifted. UK health secretary says staff must be fully jabbed by April 2022 or risk dismissal raising concerns 32,000 care home staff and tens of thousands of NHS workers could quit. Daily Covid-related deaths in the UK rose above 250 again, with 262 reported on Tuesday. Covid-19 patients in Singapore who remain unvaccinated by choice will have to pay for their hospitalisation bills from 8 December, the government has ruled. Pfizer asks FDA to approve Covid booster shots for all US adults. Older Americans and other vulnerable groups have had access to a third dose of the Pfizer and BioNTech vaccine since September but the Food and Drug Administration has said it would move quickly to expand boosters to younger ages if warranted. Moderna also applied for European authorisation of its Covid-19 vaccine in children aged 6-11 years, weeks after it delayed a similar filing with US regulators. The European Union drugs regulator is set to authorise the use of two monoclonal antibodies to treat Covid-19 patients in coming days, two EU sources told Reuters, in its first approvals of such therapies. The US will buy another $1 billion worth of the Covid-19 pill made by Merck &amp; Co Inc and partner Ridgeback Biotherapeutics, the companies said on Tuesday. Canada authorised the use of Pfizer/BioNTech’s vaccine as a booster shot for people 18 years of age and older. Pfizer asked US regulators to allow boosters of its Covid-19 vaccine for anyone 18 or older, a step that comes amid concern about increased spread of the coronavirus with holiday travel and gatherings. Older Americans and other groups particularly vulnerable to the virus have had access to a third dose of the Pfizer and BioNTech vaccine since September. But the Food and Drug Administration has said it would move quickly to expand boosters to younger ages if warranted. Pfizer is submitting early results of a booster study in 10,000 people to make its case that it’s time to further expand the booster campaign, AP reports. While all three vaccines used in the US continue to offer strong protection against severe Covid-19 illness and death, the shots’ effectiveness against milder infection can wane over time. Pfizer’s new study concluded a booster could restore protection against symptomatic infection to about 95%, even as the extra-contagious delta variant was surging. Side effects were similar to those seen with the company’s first two shots. Daily cases of coronavirus were on Tuesday at their highest since the pandemic began in Greece in February last year, as hospitals started to buckle under the pressure of rising infections. Greece notched up a record of 8,613 new Covid-19 cases in 24 hours, the National Organisation of Public Health said, after cases more than doubled in less than a fortnight. Forty-six people died of the disease on Tuesday, after 65 a day earlier. The north of the country, where inoculation rates are lower than in other regions, has been worst hit in recent days. In the second city Thessaloniki, management at a key hospital fighting Covid said it was overwhelmed with patients. Nikos Kapravelos, head of the emergency department at the Papanikolaou Hospital, at the weekend warned against a new spike similar to during the second wave in November last year. Health authorities on Friday made Covid passes mandatory for open-air restaurants and cafes, as well as indoor public spaces. Face masks are still mandatory indoors and at large outdoor gatherings. A very good morning to you all from a rainy start over here in Sydney, Australia. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you all the Covid headlines from around the world for the next short while. First up, a few numbers out of Australia. The state of NSW recorded 216 new local cases and three deaths over the past 24 hours. Victoria has recorded 1,003 new Covid-19 cases today, with 14 people infected with the virus dying in the last reporting period. Country-wide, 81.09% of the population aged over 16 are fully vaccinated. Following up from our earlier post (21.09 GMT) on fears tens of thousands of UK medical staff quitting over April 2022’s vaccine mandate, my colleague Clea Skopeliti spoke to three NHS workers on the policy. (Some names have been changed.) “We should be setting the example to patients” Tom, a 41-year-old physiotherapist in Leeds, received his booster jab last weekend and believes health workers have a responsibility to set an example for their patients. “When I initially qualified I was expected to be vaccinated against diseases like hepatitis – it seemed like a perfectly reasonable thing to do, given that we’re regularly seeing vulnerable members of society,” he says. He reasoned that while existing health workers will not have known about a Covid vaccine requirement before they took on the job, the profession requires adaptability “when the healthcare environment changes … [which] obviously Covid has done on a massive level”. “It’s good to encourage people to protect themselves” Mary, a 29-year-old junior doctor in a hospital in the East Midlands, is fully vaccinated and, while broadly in favour of compulsory vaccinations, wishes the issue could be approached differently. “I’m of the opinion that it’s good to encourage people to protect themselves,” she says, but as the issue of transmission among vaccinated people still remains, there should be “more clarity for the reasons behind it”. “We respect patients’ choices, why doesn’t that apply to us?” Anne, a student nurse in Yorkshire who has not had the vaccine over concerns about potential side effects, is against the mandate. The 20-year-old, who is on placement at a hospital, says she “suffers anxiety every day” in case she’s confronted by vocal staff about her choice. “There will be a large number of people who feel like me but wouldn’t stick their heads over the parapet,” she says. The New York Times has published an illuminating report on the bitter dispute between Moderna and the US National Institutes of Health over Covid vaccine patent rights. The NIS, a public biomedical research agency, says three of its scientists co-designed with Moderna scientists the genetic sequence for the Covid vaccine to produce an immune response. Moderna says they did not. Talks to resolve the dispute have rumbled on for over a year. The US government may decide to take Moderna to court. The implications are potentially huge: If the agency scientists are co-named on the patent, “the federal government could have more of a say in which companies manufacture the vaccine, which in turn could influence which countries get access,” The Times reports. It would also secure a nearly unfettered right to license the technology, which could bring millions into the federal treasury. The fight comes amid mounting frustration in the US government and elsewhere with Moderna’s limited efforts to get its vaccine to poorer countries. The company, which has not previously brought a product to market, received nearly $10 billion in taxpayer funding to develop the vaccine, test it and provide doses to the federal government. It has already lined up supply deals worth about $35 billion through the end of 2022. Read the full report here. Here’s a longer write-up from Angelique Chrisafis in Paris of our earlier live post (19.59 GMT) – on President Emmanuel Macron’s acceleration of France’s Covid booster jab roll-out. Macron has called for an acceleration of Covid-19 booster shots for elderly and vulnerable people in France and announced that many citizens will need a third vaccination for a valid health pass from next month. In a televised address, the French president said “the pandemic is not over” and warned of the emergence of a fifth wave of infections in Europe, citing a significant rise in cases in the UK and Germany. He said the incidence rate of Covid infections in France had also recently risen. In a speech from the Élysée Palace – his ninth televised speech to the nation since the start of the pandemic – Macron said mask-wearing would be maintained in schools, and social distancing and mask-wearing in enclosed public spaces must continue. He said vaccination would be stepped up, adding: “To those not yet vaccinated: get vaccinated. Get vaccinated to protect yourselves. Get vaccinated to live normally.” Although 75% of French people have received two doses of vaccine, the campaign to administer a third booster shot six months after the first has not been quickly taken up by those who are eligible. A third dose is currently available to those aged over 65 or with medical conditions that make them vulnerable, such as heart or respiratory problems. But only about half of those eligible have booked a third injection. In the UK there are fears 32,000 care home staff and tens of thousands of NHS workers could quit after the health secretary said staff must be fully jabbed by April 2022 or risk dismissal. While 90% of NHS staff have been inoculated with two shots of a Covid vaccine, about 103,000 have not. Health secretary Sajid Javid appeared to disclose to MPs when making the announcement about the NHS that, with Thursday’s deadline for care home staff imminent, as many as 32,000 of them have still not yet been jabbed. Other countries including France, Italy and the US have already made vaccination compulsory, he added. Some hospitals in the US have recently fired small numbers of employees after they refused to get immunised. The union Unison, which represents both NHS and care home staff, said there would be “dire consequences” for care homes from Javid’s “draconian approach”. Read my colleague Denis Campbell’s full report here. A cargo of 793,900 Covid vaccine doses arrived in the Phillipines from the German government today, completing a 1.6 million dose donation through the Covax programme. The World Health Organisation said over 28.77 million doses had been delivered to the Phillipines via its Covax programme so far. The Philippines has jabbed at least 64,947,366 shots in arms. “Assuming every person needs two doses, that’s enough to have vaccinated about 30% of the country’s population,” Reuters’ Covid tracker estimates. WHO Director-General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus welcomed the donation on Twitter. Poland reported 13,644 new Covid cases on Tuesday, reported by local media Polskie Radio. Infections have ticked upwards for over a month. This time last week, the country has a seven-day average of 7,504 new infections a day. Poland also recorded 220 new Covid deaths in the last 24 hours. Last Tuesday the seven-day average was 81 deaths a day. New cases continue to be driven by Mazowieckie province, including the capital Warsaw, which saw 2,823 new positive results. There are 11,019 people in Polish hospitals with Covid and a further 381,895 people are quarantining. French President Emmanuel Macron announced that from 15 December, a valid Health Pass will require a Covid booster jab for the over-65s and vulnerable groups, in a move that seemed to signal a third shot will be required in future to fulfil vaccine mandates. Macron said in a televised speech that the rise in Covid cases and hospitalisations was alarming, calling on all citizens to get vaccinated as soon as possible, Reuters reported. “Get vaccinated. Get vaccinated to protect yourselves. Get vaccinated to live normally,” he said. Daily Covid-related deaths in the UK rose above 250 again today, with 262 reported. Here’s that rise in context. As you can see, daily deaths have climbed gradually since July, and have regularly been above 100-a-day since late-August. France registered 12,476 new confirmed Covid infections on Tuesday, the highest level since 8 September, health ministry data showed. The total number of cases now stands at 7.23 million and the sliding seven-day average of new infections rose further to over 8,700. The closely watched incidence rate - the number of new infections per week per 100,000 people - rose further to 91, the highest since mid-September and now nearly double the official alert level of 50. The government uses the incidence rate to decide on regional and national lockdown measures. In dozens of French departments, children again have to put on masks in school as the incidence rate in their area is above the national average. The president Emmanuel Macron is due to address the nation on the coronavirus situation around 7pm GMT (8pm Paris time). Morocco will end a night curfew aimed at combating the spread Covid that it introduced in March 2020 starting from Wednesday, it said on Tuesday, after a fall in cases from the peak during the summer. Morocco has administered more coronavirus vaccine doses than any other African country, inoculating 24 million people out of a population of 36 million, and has imposed a vaccine pass for travel and access to public places. As we mentioned here earlier, AstraZeneca is to create a new vaccines unit as the Anglo-Swedish drugmaker plans for the future of its coronavirus shot beyond the pandemic. The company said the reorganisation would bring together people who had previously been based in different parts of the business, and will be dedicated to the Covid-19 vaccine and tweaked versions to deal with new variants of Sars-CoV-2. Here is my colleague Jasper Jolly’s story: Here is a recap of some of the main developments from today: Canada authorised the use of Pfizer/BioNTech’s vaccine as a booster shot for people 18 years of age and older. The UK reported another 33,117 coronavirus cases and a further 262 deaths. Northern Ireland’s health minister announced a public consultation on a proposal for compulsory Covid and flu vaccination for new health and social care workers. Robin Swann said requiring existing staff to get jabbed could be counterproductive and could further destabilise a workforce that is already severed depleted. AstraZeneca is to create a new vaccines unit as the Anglo-Swedish drugmaker plans for the future of its coronavirus shot beyond the pandemic. The company said the reorganisation would bring together people who had previously been based in different parts of the business, and will be dedicated to the Covid-19 vaccine and tweaked versions to deal with new variants of Sars-CoV-2. Story here. Russia said the nationwide workplace shutdown it ended this week had helped turn the tide on a wave of Covid cases, even as officials reported the largest one-day death toll of the pandemic so far. As all but a handful of Russia’s 80-plus regions ended a “non-working” period from 30 October to 7 November that was ordered by the president Vladimir Putin, the government coronavirus taskforce reported a record one-day death toll of 1,211. Many regions that have lifted the workplace shutdown will now require visitors to present a QR code on their mobile phones when visiting cafes, restaurants or shopping centres to prove they have been vaccinated or previously had the virus. All 1.4 million NHS staff in England will have to be vaccinated against Covid by next spring if they want to keep their jobs, Sajid Javid confirmed to MPs. The health secretary has decided to press ahead with making jabs compulsory despite health unions and some doctors’ organisations voicing strong opposition. The move means that about 100,000 frontline personnel who have not yet had both doses of Covid vaccine will have to get jabbed or face dismissal. Story here + roundup of countries around the world that have brought in vaccine mandates here. More than 75,000 excess deaths have taken place in private homes in England and Wales since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, according to analysis of Office for National Statistics data by PA. A total of 75,474 excess deaths in homes in England and Wales were registered between 7 March 2020 and 29 October 2021, according to the analysis. Of this number, just 8,824 - or 12% - were deaths that involved Covid-19. France’s public health authority recommended people under 30 be given Pfizer’s Covid vaccine when available instead of Moderna’s jab, which carried comparatively higher risks of heart-related problems. The Haute Autorite de Sante (HAS), which does not have legal power to ban or license drugs but acts as an adviser to the French health sector, cited “very rare” risks linked to myocarditis, a heart disease, that had shown up in recent data on the Moderna vaccine and in a French study published on Monday. A group of hospitals in the Netherlands called for the government to take new measures to stem rising Covid cases, saying they are “heading straight for a healthcare disaster” with neither space nor staff to handle more patients with coronavirus. In a letter to Mark Rutte’s government, the five hospitals in southern province of Limburg said: “We are heading straight for a healthcare disaster and the whole system is becoming jammed. We’re convinced the rest of the Netherlands will be following us shortly.” As we’ve reported today, the UK has become the latest country to introduce Covid vaccine mandates after the government announced all NHS workers would need to be jabbed by next spring. Here is a useful rundown of the vaccine mandates introduced around the world: Canada has authorised the use of Pfizer/BioNTech’s Covid vaccine as a booster shot for people 18 years of age and older, Health Canada said in a statement. The clearance of the booster shot, which can be taken at least six months after the primary regimen, would help people get additional protection against the coronavirus at a time when the Delta variant has spurred a surge in cases and hospitalisations. The US Food and Drug Administration has already authorized Covid-19 vaccine booster doses from Pfizer/BioNTech and Moderna Inc for people aged 65 and older, those at risk of severe disease and those who are exposed to the virus through their work. Johnson &amp; Johnson’s booster shots have also been cleared in the United States for all individuals 18 years of age and older. Just 0.1% of the coronavirus tests taken to enter the Cop26 climate summit have resulted in positive results, Scotland’s deputy first minister has said. In a Covid-19 statement in the Scottish Parliament, John Swinney revealed the level of test positivity among Blue Zone pass holders as of 5 November. All entrants to the central area of the climate conference must show proof of a negative lateral flow Covid-19 test, unless exempt, on each day they enter the site. Swinney said the testing measures were part of a “comprehensive and exceptional package of mitigation measures” designed to reduce the risk of coronavirus spreading among the approximately 30,000 people due to attend Cop26 and the wider community. He added: “However, we are only just past the midpoint of the conference and we continuing to monitor the situation carefully. We will provide a further update following the conclusion of Cop26, unless there is a need to do so at an earlier opportunity.” The latest figures for the whole of Scotland show a 12% positivity rate, with 2,233 new cases of Covid-19 reported on Tuesday. You can follow live updates from Cop26 here: The UK has reported another 33,117 coronavirus cases and a further 262 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the government’s dashboard. This compares to 32,332 cases and 57 deaths reported in the 24 hour-period prior. Northern Ireland’s health minister has announced a public consultation on a proposal for compulsory Covid-19 and flu vaccination for new health and social care workers. Robin Swann said requiring existing staff to get jabbed could be counterproductive and could further destabilise a workforce that is already severed depleted. But he insisted no option was off the table and said he had “great sympathy” for the view that patients should only be treated by fully vaccinated staff. The minister said making vaccines compulsory for new recruits to the health service would be a “significant development” and needed careful consideration. He said there was not a predetermined outcome to the public consultation exercise as he urged people to make their views known. The announcement comes after the UK government announced that frontline NHS staff in England will need to be vaccinated against coronavirus. Workers in England will have until April next year to get both Covid-19 jabs. Earlier, Stormont’s deputy first minister Michelle O’Neill said making vaccinations compulsory for frontline healthcare workers in Northern Ireland would raise human rights concerns. O’Neill has said she would consider any proposal for compulsory vaccines for health staff but stressed she would favour a voluntary approach. The World Health Organization has warned there could be shortfall of up to two billion syringes in 2022, which threatens to hamper vaccine efforts globally is production does not improve, AFP reports. The shortages are the result of Covid-19 vaccine campaigns, with billions more syringes than normal being used worldwide, badly denting global supplies. Lisa Hedman, the WHO’s senior advisor on access to medicines and health products, said that as the supply of Covid-19 vaccine doses increases, the supply of syringes needs to keep pace. “We are raising the real concern that we could have a shortage of immunisation syringes, which would in turn lead to serious problems, such as slowing down immunisation efforts,” she told reporters on Tuesday. “Depending on how the vaccine uptake goes, it could be a deficit of anywhere from one billion to two billion.” More than 7.25 billion Covid vaccine doses have been administered globally, according to an AFP tally. That’s nearly double the number of routine vaccinations given per year - and twice the number of syringes required. Hedman said one serious result of a shortage could be delays in routine vaccinations, which could have a public health impact “for years to come” if a generation of youngsters miss out on normal childhood vaccinations. Shortages could also lead to the unsafe practice of reusing syringes and needles. Hedman said any constraint on syringe supply could only be worsened by export restrictions and transportation problems. She urged countries to plan syringe needs well in advance to avoid hoarding and panic buying situations. Hedman added that “efforts are being made to reduce that risk to zero in terms of the actual number that we could be short”. Unvaccinated Bayern Munich star Joshua Kimmich is one of five players in Germany’s national football squad having to quarantine after one tested positive for coronavirus, the German federation (DFB) said Tuesday. Another Covid-positive player, Niklas Suele, is fully vaccinated and currently asymptomatic, added the DFB. Fellow Bayern teammates Kimmich, Serge Gnabry and Jamal Musiala as well as Karim Adeyemi of RB Salzburg, have been asked to isolate because they are close contacts of his, even though they have tested negative, DFB chief director Oliver Bierhoff said. “This news, coming so close before the final World Cup qualifiers, is bitter for the coaching team as well as for Die Mannschaft,” said Bierhoff. The latest high profile case comes as Germany is fighting a surge in new infections, with its seven-day Covid rate striking a new record on Tuesday. It also puts the spotlight again on Kimmich, who had sparked a fierce debate in the country last month when he revealed he opted not to get vaccinated, because of “personal concerns”. It even prompted the interior minister Horst Seehofer to urge him directly to rethink his position as “vaccination is the main weapon in the fight against the pandemic”. Kimmich appears to be in the minority as more than 90% of footballers and backroom staff in Germany’s top two leagues are vaccinated, according to figures released last month by the German Football League (DFL). AstraZeneca is creating a separate division for vaccines and antibody therapies to be led by senior executive Iskra Reic, the drugmaker said on Tuesday, as it builds focus on its Covid shot and development of coronavirus treatments. Reuters in July reported that the Anglo-Swedish company was exploring options for its vaccine business and expected to have greater clarity on the matter by the end of 2021. Russia said the nationwide workplace shutdown it ended this week had helped turn the tide on a wave of Covid cases, even as officials on Tuesday reported the largest one-day death toll of the pandemic so far. All but a handful of Russia’s 80-plus regions on Monday ended a “non-working” period from 30 October to 7 November that was ordered by the president Vladimir Putin, the toughest nationwide restriction since the early months of the pandemic. The health minister told a televised government meeting on Tuesday that the increase in the number of patients receiving medical care had slowed last week for the first time since the beginning of August, though he said it remained “quite high”. “Undoubtedly, the fall is due to the … non-working days, the regional measures. These measures have turned the tide, and it is very right that a number of regions – five regions – have decided to extend the regime of days off,” said Mikhail Murashko. He said there were 1.36 million people under various kinds of medical supervision or treatment for Covid. The government coronavirus taskforce reported a record one-day death toll of 1,211 and reported 39,160 new cases in the last 24 hours, down from a peak of 41,335 on Saturday. In Moscow, the mayor Sergei Sobyanin said this coming week would be crucial for the capital and that it would be clear by the end of it what measures needed to be kept on. He said he hoped the situation would be more or less stable. Many regions that have lifted the workplace shutdown will now require visitors to present a QR code on their mobile phones when visiting cafes, restaurants or shopping centres to prove they have been vaccinated or previously had the virus. The UK justice secretary, Dominic Raab, has defended the MP and former attorney general Geoffrey Cox for working for a month in the British Virgin Islands (BVI) during lockdown. Earlier this year, Cox earned more than £150,000 in his second job as a lawyer advising the Caribbean tax haven in relation to corruption charges brought by the Foreign Office. Full story here: And live UK politics updates from my colleague Andrew Sparrow here: Moderna Inc on Tuesday sought conditional marketing authorisation with the European Medicines Agency for use of its Covid vaccine in children in the age-group of six- to 11 years, Reuters reports. The vaccine was authorised for use in teens aged 12 to 17 by the European Union in July, but several countries including Sweden have paused its use for people aged 30 and younger due to rare heart-related side-effects. The drugmaker sought US authorisation of its vaccine for use in teens in June and is awaiting a decision by the US Food and Drug Administration. “This marks our first submission for the use of our vaccine in this age group,” said Stéphane Bancel, the chief executive of Moderna, adding the company will submit the data to other regulatory agencies around the world. The UK’s Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, has tested positive for Covid. He is self-isolating and experiencing mild symptoms, the Great Yarmouth MP wrote on Twitter. Within a year since February 2020, the UK’s pandemic response – and Randox’s role in it – became a matter of public scrutiny, not least due to the company being named in a lobbying scandal involving the Conservative MP Owen Paterson. My colleague Rob Davies examines how the healthcare firm went from a one-man-band operation to winning £500m in government Covid contracts: The eastern German state of Saxony may have ordered tough curbs on the unvaccinated to push them to get the Covid-19 jab, but shop assistant Sabine Lonnatzsch, 59, is unmoved. The new rules are “discriminatory” because they are “pushing the unvaccinated further into a corner”, she tells AFP, adding that she won’t change her mind about getting inoculated – she just won’t go to restaurants or events any more. “I’ve had corona cases in my family and in my eyes it is nothing more than a bad flu,” she says. With Covid infections rocketing in Germany, Saxony this week became the first to largely exclude unvaccinated people from indoor dining, cinemas and bars. The rules, likely to be emulated by other states in the coming weeks, are designed not only to reduce the spread of Covid but also to encourage more people to get inoculated. But Lonnatzsch is not the only one resisting the jab in the town of Radeberg in Bautzen district, which has one of the lowest vaccination rates in the country, at 45.7%. The clothing store No 1 Mode where she works has a sign in the window that lets customers know that all are welcome – regardless of vaccination status. Across the town square, the co-owner of Cafe Roethig also has no plans to get the vaccine. Like many people in the region, Carola Roethig, 58, is “not convinced” by the jab because “it was developed in such a short space of time”. The district of Bautzen has one of the highest incidence rates in the country at 645.3 cases per 100,000 people, but Roethig is not worried about catching the virus. The new rules are “definitely bad for business,” she says at the cafe’s bakery counter, which is lined with untouched fresh cakes, tarts and iced donuts. “Many of our customers are not vaccinated, so we are losing income, because fewer people are coming in,” she says. The rules are also bad for her personal life. “I’m not allowed to go to a restaurant in the evening and have a nice dinner with my husband. I don’t think it is right.” Outside the cafe, 40-year-old Susan feels the same. “Nothing would convince me” to get the jab, she says, without giving her last name. “I see no sense in it because [vaccinated people] can still get the disease and infect others.” The new rules come as new infections surge in Germany, with the national incidence rate reaching 213.7 cases per 100,000 people over the past seven days on Tuesday – a record since the pandemic began. The political parties looking to form a coalition government after September’s election have so far ruled out compulsory vaccinations and general lockdowns to tackle the surge. With 67% of the population fully jabbed, ministers say encouraging more people to get vaccinated is key to bringing the numbers down. In neighbouring France, more than 74% are fully vaccinated, and in Spain the figure is more than 77%. German health experts have named a target rate of 85%. However, in a recent a Forsa survey carried out for the health ministry, 65% of unvaccinated respondents declared there was “no way” they would take a Covid jab and 23% were “reluctant”. Outside Radeberg town hall, a modest queue of people formed for a vaccination event organised to encourage more people to get the jab. Kitchen assistant Mirmirza Kabirzada, 36, had previously hesitated but with the numbers rising so dramatically, “now I realised this is very important,” he says. Intensive care nurse Nicole Wieberneit, 39, is waiting in line to get her booster. She is optimistic that the new rules will encourage more people to get vaccinated. “When it becomes about the freedom to travel, to go out to eat, I think more people will come forward. Freedom is very important to people in Saxony,” she says. All 1.4 million NHS staff in England will have to be vaccinated against Covid by next spring if they want to keep their jobs, Sajid Javid will confirm to MPs on Tuesday. The health secretary has decided to press ahead with making jabs compulsory despite health unions and some doctors’ organisations voicing strong opposition. The move means that about 100,000 frontline personnel who have not yet had both doses of Covid vaccine will have to get jabbed or face dismissal. Many of them are women who are or hope to become pregnant or who are from a minority ethnic background. Javid considered bringing in the new requirement before this winter, but opted to delay it until what is thought likely to be April 2022 after warnings that doing that sooner would exacerbate NHS understaffing by triggering an exodus of key personnel at the time when the health service is under its greatest pressure. The minister believes that, while some NHS staff may leave, making jabs mandatory will drive up vaccination rates by prompting refuseniks to finally get vaccinated in the same way that has already occurred with care home staff, who have to be immunised by this Friday or risk losing their job. While some care home workers are quitting rather than getting jabbed, vaccination rates in that sector have risen sharply since Javid announced in June that he was making it compulsory. He believes the change will enhance patients’ safety by making them less likely to contact Covid in healthcare settings from an NHS worker. The latest official statistics show that about 90% of NHS staff have already had two doses. In all 1,303,605 of the 1,452,256 NHS staff in England (89.8%) had received both jabs by 24 October, according to the NHS’s electronic staff record. Read the full story here: Earlier, we reported that there are between 80,000 and 100,000 NHS workers in England who are unvaccinated against coronavirus, according to Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents England’s NHS trusts. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that as well as the risk of workers infecting colleagues, patients and visitors, there is also a risk to the health service if large numbers of staff leave as a result of mandatory vaccination. More than 75,000 extra deaths have taken place in private homes in England and Wales since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, new analysis shows. Extra deaths - known as “excess deaths” - are the number of deaths above the average for the non-pandemic years of 2015-19. A total of 75,474 excess deaths in homes in England and Wales were registered between March 7 2020 and October 29 2021, according to PA news agency analysis of data from the Office for National Statistics (ONS). Of this number, just 8,824 - or 12% - were deaths that involved Covid-19. Deaths in private homes have been consistently well above the 2015-19 average since April 2020. Even during recent months, when almost all lockdown restrictions have been eased across the country, the figure has typically been between 700 and 900 a week. More than 10,000 excess deaths in private homes have been registered in England and Wales since the start of August. This compares with around 5,000 excess deaths in hospitals and 1,400 in care homes over the same period. The figures show there are still many more people than usual dying in their own homes. Analysis published earlier this year by the ONS found that, while the majority of deaths due to Covid-19 in England and Wales in 2020 happened in hospitals and care homes, many deaths from other causes, such as breast cancer and prostate cancer, happened in private homes of people who - in a non-pandemic year - may have typically died elsewhere, such as in hospital. Deaths from diabetes in private homes were 60% higher in 2020 compared with the average for 2015-19, while those from chronic rheumatic heart disease and Parkinson’s disease were both up 66%. For dementia and Alzheimer’s disease, deaths were up 65%, with increases of 44% and 37% for prostate cancer and breast cancer respectively. Separate ONS figures published on Tuesday show that a total of 10,987 deaths in all settings were registered in England and Wales in the week to 29 October. This was 1,228 above the five-year average. Covid-19 accounted for 859 (70%) of these excess deaths. It is also the 17th week in a row that deaths have been above the pre-pandemic average. The number of Covid-19 deaths is still well below levels seen at the peak of the second wave of the virus, however. In the week to January 29, 8,433 deaths involving coronavirus were registered in England and Wales - around 10 times the number registered in the most recent week. A nine-day-old baby girl is one of the youngest people in the UK to have died after testing positive for Covid-19. Ivy-Rose was born 14 weeks prematurely, which her grief-stricken mother, Katie Leeming, is convinced was down to her becoming so sick nine days after contracting Covid while pregnant. Leeming had not been vaccinated against Covid, and doesn’t want to to tear herself apart by thinking about what might have been if she had done things differently. A family friend has organised a GoFundMe fundraiser towards funeral costs and expenses for Ivy-Rose. The i paper has the awful story. Related: Why pregnant women need clearer messaging on Covid vaccine safety The story highlights how much more still needs to be done to improve messaging around Covid vaccination for pregnant women. Guidance from medical organisations, such as the Royal College of Midwives is that women who are pregnant should get vaccinated. The NHS advice is that pregnant women can get vaccinated but that it is preferable for them to have the Pfizer or Moderna vaccines as they have been more widely used during pregnancy in other countries and no safety concerns have been identified. Related: ‘Get the vaccine’: family of Covid victim’s plea to pregnant women Oralia Perez waited nervously and excitedly on the US side of the border from Mexico for the chance to hug her sister and mother for the first time in almost 20 months. One minute after midnight east coast time, ie the first moments of Monday – which was still Sunday night, 10.01pm local time, in El Paso, west Texas, where she was – the US government lifted pandemic restrictions on non-essential cross-border travel for those who are vaccinated. As soon as the deadline passed, Oralia’s sister, Guadalupe Perez, and their mother, Lorena Hernandez, were among the first to rush by foot across one of the international bridges linking Mexico and the US, and in the late fall chill and the darkness, they flung themselves into each other’s arms. The last time the three had been together was February 2020. “As soon as we found out they were being allowed to pass, we couldn’t wait for today,” Oralia said. “They were very difficult months.” Hernandez said she had been afraid the authorities would decide yet again it wasn’t time to reopen the border. But having crossed successfully she stroked Oralia’s hair and beamed. The women repaired for the night and on Monday morning they had a celebratory breakfast together at the American chain staple, International House of Pancakes (Ihop), in El Paso. Then they went shopping, thrilled to be back in each other’s company, Oralia told the Guardian. The US temporarily limited inbound border crossings from Canada and Mexico to only “essential travel” from 21 March 2020. Restrictions were extended again and again, finally coming to an end at the start of this week. Read the full story here: France’s public health authority has recommended people under 30 be given Pfizer’s Comirnaty Covid vaccine when available instead of Moderna Inc’s Spikevax jab, which carried comparatively higher risks of heart-related problems. The Haute Autorite de Sante (HAS), which does not have legal power to ban or license drugs but acts as an adviser to the French health sector, cited “very rare” risks linked to myocarditis, a heart disease, that had shown up in recent data on the Moderna vaccine and in a French study published on Monday. “Within the population aged under 30, this risk appears to be around five times lesser with Pfizer’s Comirnaty jab compared with Moderna’s Spikevax jab,” HAS said in its opinion published on Monday. The decision in Paris came after regulators in several other countries, including Canada, Finland and Sweden, had also taken a more defensive stance on Spikevax over heart-related safety concerns affecting younger people. The European Union’s drug regulator last month approved Moderna’s booster vaccine for all age groups over 18, at least six months after the second dose. The European Medicines Agency earlier this year said that it had found a possible link between the very rare inflammatory heart condition and Covid vaccines from both Pfizer’s and Moderna’s vaccines. However, according to the EMA, the benefits of both mRNA shots in preventing Covid-19 continue to outweigh the risks, the regulator said, echoing similar views expressed by US regulators and the World Health Organization. France’s HAS said that its recommendation, which would apply regardless of the vaccine’s use as a first, second or third “booster” dose, would be valid until more scientific findings on the matter are known. For persons aged over 30, however, the authority explicitly recommended the use of the Moderna vaccine, saying its effectiveness was slightly superior. More than four in 10 adults in England who were hesitant about getting a coronavirus vaccine have since been vaccinated, figures suggest. Forty-four per cent of people previously hesitant have since been jabbed, while 55% remained unvaccinated, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said. It found hesitancy was highest in younger people, but this group was more likely than hesitant older adults to have since taken up an offered vaccine. Two-thirds of those now vaccinated said they had been motivated by wanting restrictions to ease and life to return to normal. More than half of those who remained unvaccinated said they were worried about potential side-effects. Before approval, the vaccines underwent a rigorous testing process to pass standards of safety, quality and effectiveness set by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). Reports of serious side-effects, such as allergic reactions, have been rare, and no long-term complications have been reported, the NHS says. For its Covid-19 Vaccine Opinions Study, the ONS followed up with 2,482 adults who had reported vaccine hesitancy when originally surveyed between 13 January and 8 August. These are people who had declined a vaccine (25%) or who said they were unlikely (33%) or unsure (42%) about getting a jab. This period saw a decline in vaccine hesitancy, from 10% to 3% of all adults. Uptake was highest among those who were unsure (60%) and lowest among those who had initially declined a jab (21%). Forty-six per cent of 18- to 29-year-olds had since been vaccinated, which the ONS said can partially be explained by a higher percentage being “undecided and open to change”. There were lower rates of hesitancy in older people, but a smaller percentage (19%) of those aged 70 and over had since been vaccinated. A smaller proportion of clinically extremely vulnerable (CEV) adults who had displayed hesitancy were now vaccinated (16%) compared with non-CEV adults (42%). Among CEV adults and adults aged 70 and over who had shown hesitancy, a large proportion had declined a vaccine (68% and 62% respectively). Fewer vaccine-hesitant disabled people had since been vaccinated compared with non-disabled adults – 34% versus 46%. The ONS said this suggests that disabled adults were more likely to have “deep rooted concerns”. While there were higher rates of hesitancy among black adults compared with white adults, uptake in these groups was similar. Overall, out of those who remained unvaccinated, 58% were worried about potential side-effects, long-term effects of the vaccine (54%) and not thinking that the jab was safe (32%). Fifty-five per cent said they thought the vaccine had been developed too quickly. A group of hospitals in the Netherlands has called for the government to take new measures to stem rising Covid cases, saying they are “heading straight for a healthcare disaster” with neither space nor staff to handle more patients with coronavirus. Covid infections in the Netherlands, as in other parts of Europe, are approaching all-time highs despite adult vaccination levels around 85%. Last week, prime minister Mark Rutte’s government announced new measures to slow the spread of the virus, two months after scrapping social distancing rules. Steps included the reintroduction of face masks in stores and broader use of the country’s proof-of-vaccination “corona pass”. However, cases have continued to rise and the Netherlands’ Institute for Health (RIVM) is due to release new infection figures later on Tuesday that may pass the previous all-time high of 12,997 cases reported on 20 December. In a letter to Rutte’s government, the five hospitals in southern province of Limburg said: We are heading straight for a healthcare disaster and the whole system is becoming jammed. We’re convinced the rest of the Netherlands will be following us shortly. They urged fresh measures including beginning immediately with booster vaccination shots for elderly and vulnerable patients. Rutte’s government has said it will offer booster shots to patients over the age of 60 once six months has passed since they were fully vaccinated. His government is due to announce whether it will take fresh measures at a news conference scheduled for Friday. Leo fled his hometown in southern Mexico after his uncle was murdered by gang members and he received death threats. Earlier this year, he, his wife and their two children headed to the US-Mexico border hoping to claim asylum. After months of waiting, he hoped he would finally get his chance on Monday. But even as US borders opened, they remained closed to asylum seekers. When Leo, 23, and his family approached the port of entry in Nogales, Mexico with his and his wife’s vaccination cards in hand, they were told by a border official they could not enter and seek asylum. “I feel dispirited and sad,” Leo, who asked his last name not be published for fear of reprisals from the gang he fled, told Reuters. President Joe Biden “is just continuing the same policies of Donald Trump”, he said. Biden has kept in place a controversial US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) order, first implemented by his predecessor in March 2020, that allows migrants to be immediately expelled without an opportunity to seek asylum. The Biden administration has said the CDC’s order, known as Title 42, remains necessary to prevent the spread of Covid-19, as asylum seekers are processed in crowded settings at the border. Any foreign national attempting to enter the United States without proper documentation will be subject to expulsion regardless of vaccination status, according to the Department of Homeland Security. Advocates have criticised the Biden administration’s continuation of the expulsion policy as borders reopen. The idea that a vaccinated asylum seeker is more of a risk than a vaccinated tourist is laughable, said Noah Gottschalk, global policy lead with Oxfam America, one of the advocacy groups suing the Biden administration to overturn the Title 42 order. Gottschalk said the exclusion of vaccinated asylum seekers strengthens the group’s argument that the policy isn’t about public health. In September, a federal judge ordered the Biden administration to stop expelling family units – parents or legal guardians arriving with their children – under the Title 42 order. The administration appealed, and a higher court put the judge’s ruling on hold as the case moves forward. Last month, more than 1,300 medical professionals signed letters to the CDC urging it to end the border expulsions order, saying it lacked epidemiological evidence to justify it and put migrants at risk. New York-based nonprofit Human Rights First has documented more than 7,600 kidnappings and other attacks on migrants stuck in Mexico who were blocked from entering the US since Biden took office in January. Leo has been working in construction to pay rent in Nogales, but he says his earnings are not enough to support his family. “They abuse you because they know you are not from here, they pay you what they want,” he said. He is also worried about his children getting hit by a stray bullet when gunshots ring out at night. The US State Department recommends Americans reconsider travel to the Mexican state of Sonora, where Nogales is located, due to crime and kidnapping. “We were fleeing a place that was dangerous,” said Leo. “And here it is the same.” Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS trusts, said he was expecting a UK government announcement on a deadline for mandatory vaccination for NHS staff today. He said there are between 80,000 and 100,000 NHS workers in England who are unvaccinated against coronavirus. Unison head of health Sara Gorton said it is wrong to “leap to the law” by bringing in mandatory vaccination instead of trying to persuade NHS workers to get jabbed. More than four in ten adults in England who were hesitant about getting a coronavirus vaccine have since been vaccinated, figures suggest. Some 44% of people previously hesitant have since been jabbed, while 55% remained unvaccinated, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said. Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister, has defended UK prime minister Boris Johnson’s appearance at a hospital yesterday at times without a face mask, which was the subject of much criticism on social media. Raab said “In any clinical setting, you follow the rules that are applied there.” The website of the hospital Johnson visited states that visitors must wear masks at all time. In New Zealand an unusually large protest gathered steam in central Wellington today when about 2,000 people, some threatening violence, rallied against vaccine mandates and lockdowns. Protests took place across the country with some participants waving large Trump flags. Attacks on both police and reporters were also documented. Ukraine registered a record 833 coronavirus-related deaths over the past 24 hours Thailand plans to reopen its borders to workers from neighbouring Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos, a government official said today, in a bid to ease a labour shortage that is hurting its export and tourism-dependent economy. Covid-19 patients in Singapore who remain unvaccinated by choice will have to pay for their hospitalisation bills from 8 December, the government has ruled. India could resume deliveries of Covid-19 shots to global vaccine-sharing platform Covax in a few weeks for the first time since April. It would end a suspension of supplies that has hurt the vaccination efforts of poorer countries. Residents of a city in China that borders Russia have been offered major cash rewards for tips on the continuing Delta outbreak, with local officials declaring a “people’s war” on the virus. China has broadened its definition of close contact in the latest drive to control the further spread of the virus during winter. The new methodology says that people who happen to be in the same area at the same time as an infected person for a short period of time may be asked to get a test or quarantine In the United States, there is a renewed campaign to vaccinate rural Americans due to the stark difference in Covid-19 cases and deaths among those living in less-populated areas compared with towns and cities. In Australia a Carlton AFL player is refusing to have his Covid-19 vaccinations before the club’s pre-season training. That is it from me, Martin Belam, today. Lucy Campbell will be here to pick up the baton shortly. More than four in 10 adults in England who were hesitant about getting a coronavirus vaccine have since been vaccinated, figures suggest. Some 44% of people previously hesitant have since been jabbed, while 55% remained unvaccinated, the Office for National Statistics (ONS) said. It found that hesitancy was highest in younger people, but this group was more likely than hesitant older adults to have since taken up an offered vaccine. Two thirds of those now vaccinated said they had been motivated by wanting restrictions to ease and life to return to normal. Jemma Crew, PA’s social affairs correspondent write that more than half of those who remained unvaccinated said they were worried about potential side effects. For its Covid-19 Vaccine Opinions Study, the ONS followed up with 2,482 adults who had reported vaccine hesitancy when originally surveyed between 13 January and 8 August. While there were higher rates of hesitancy among black adults compared with white adults, uptake in these groups was similar. Overall, out of those who remained unvaccinated, 58% were worried about potential side effects, long-term effects of the vaccine (54%) and not thinking that the jab was safe (32%). Some 55% said they thought the vaccine had been developed too quickly. A Carlton Australian Football League player is refusing to have his Covid-19 vaccinations before the club’s pre-season training. It is understood the unnamed player is the only Blue who hasn’t agreed to be vaccinated. He would be the first AFL player to refuse his jabs. The news comes after Adelaide announced last Friday their dual AFLW premiership defender Deni Varnhagen would go on to their inactive list because she will not have her Covid-19 jabs. The Blues and the AFL would not comment, with Carlton’s AFL players officially starting their pre-season under new coach Michael Voss later this month. Read more here: Carlton AFL player refusing to get Covid vaccine ahead of pre-season training A total of 859 deaths registered in England and Wales in the week ending 29 October mentioned Covid-19 on the death certificate, according to the Office for National Statistics (ONS). This is up 8% on the previous week and is the highest number since the week to September 24. PA Media note that a total of 167,367 deaths have occurred in the UK where Covid-19 was mentioned on the death certificate, according to the ONS. The highest number on a single day was 1,484 on 19 January. In the United States, there is a renewed campaign to vaccinate rural Americans due to the stark difference in Covid-19 cases and deaths among those living in less-populated areas compared with towns and cities. Rural residents are now twice as likely to die from Covid-19 as Americans in metropolitan areas. Yet rural areas tend to lag at least 10% behind metropolitan areas when it comes to vaccination – and this hesitancy is exacerbating already existing health issues. “Rural populations are older, they’re sicker and they’re poorer,” said Fred Ullrich, research analyst at the RUPRI Center for Rural Health Policy Analysis and co-author of a report on Covid’s disproportionate burden on rural communities. Residents of rural areas also tend to have lower rates of insurance, or the insurance they have doesn’t cover as much, which means they may put off seeking care until it’s too late. And they have worse access to healthcare itself – all of which can lead to worse Covid outcomes. As of early October, 42.6% of rural residents were fully vaccinated, compared with 54.5% in metropolitan areas, according to an analysis by the rural-news publication the Daily Yonder. In September, rural areas saw their biggest leap in vaccinations since June before declining again in recent weeks. Even as new cases of Covid have begun falling, rural areas still have an infection rate that is 80% higher than metropolitan areas – and the death rate is still twice as high. Read more of Melody Schreiber’s report here: New vaccine campaigns target rural Americans to address disparities Andrew Sparrow has just gone live with our UK politics blog for the day. I expect he will have enough on his plate with MP’s second jobs and “Tory sleaze” to keep him busy, so I’ll continue to bring you any major UK Covid lines here, as well as coronavirus developments from around the world. Dominic Raab has been pressed again during his media appearances in the UK on when the UK government might introduce a vaccine mandate for NHS staff. On ITV’s Good Morning Britain the deputy prime minister said: Well, we’ve got the contingency plans in place to do that, but you’re right to say it’s a difficult decision. All I’d say is if the consequence of not taking difficult decisions is that more people, particularly more people who are vulnerable either because they’re in hospital, or because they’re in a care home and elderly or with multiple conditions... I think that’s got to be the countervailing and overriding factor, we’ve got to do everything we can to protect those vulnerable, particularly elderly, people or those with multiple conditions. But I think ultimately that we’ve got to make sure that the lives of those people in those vulnerable settings are safeguarded, and that’s a difficult choice, that’s one of the many difficult choices that we’ve got in Government. But I think we’d be getting a lot of criticism if we weren’t taking those difficult decisions, and we were leaving people more and unnecessarily exposed than before. Thailand plans to reopen its borders to workers from neighbouring Myanmar, Cambodia and Laos, a government official said today, in a bid to ease a labour shortage that is hurting its export and tourism-dependent economy. Pairote Chotikasathien, from the Ministry of Labor, said the rules relating to vaccination status for the migrant workers, quarantine procedures and Covid-19 testing will be decided on Wednesday. Reuters report that Thailand’s big exporting industries such as food and rubber production rely heavily on migrant labour. But strict border controls and quarantine rules have virtually halted all labour migration. Pairote estimated the country needed 420,000 foreign workers at this time, mostly in the construction, manufacturing and seafood industries. Many workers left the country as it battled its worst Covid-19 outbreak earlier this year and have not returned. Unison head of health Sara Gorton said it is wrong to “leap to the law” by bringing in mandatory vaccination instead of trying to persuade NHS workers to get jabbed. She told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “We’ve been keen to ensure that what our role is, understanding what people are telling us about the reasons why they have fears, about why they are not convinced by the arguments, and making sure that those people can get access to up-to-date information and access to experts who may be able to help them change their mind.” PA Media quotes her saying: “And we’ve been really keen to be part of that process. So this isn’t about saying that it’s wrong, the vaccination programme is wrong, it’s saying that it is wrong to leap to the law, rather than stick with persuasion, conversation, peer group support to try and increase those rates beyond what is, let’s face it, a really, really high existing level of vaccination amongst NHS staff.” She described any move to bring in mandatory vaccinations as “really risky”, saying that it could have “really, really difficult consequences for the NHS in what we know is going to be a really difficult winter”. China has broadened its definition of close contact in the latest drive to control the further spread of the virus during winter. The new methodology says that people who happen to be in the same area at the same time as an infected person for a short period of time may be asked to get a test or quarantine, according to notices circulating in Chinese press and on social media in recent years. Officials call this method of reducing infection “spacial-temporal overlap”, but the exact definition of it appears to be varying among provinces. In recent days, explainers are being produced by local media outlets to inform the public of how it works in practice. In Chengdu, for example, a “spacial-temporal overlap” contact has to meet two criteria: 1) someone’s phone appeared to be within the same 800-metre spacial-temporal grid as the phone of an infected person for more than 10 minutes; 2) either of the party’s phone has lingered there for over 30 hours in the last 14 days. Chinese media said that Chengdu police had found 82,000 people at the risk of being identified as “spacial-temporal overlap” having deployed this method. These people have now been alerted by the local CDC, reports said. On Tuesday, 62 new cases were reported in the country, making the total number of Covid cases to at least 941 since 17 October. The seven-day average for new cases in Bulgaria has been trending downwards since the beginning of November, suggesting the country’s wave of Covid infections may have peaked. Official figures today show Bulgaria recorded 5,286 positive cases in the last 24 hours. That’s up slightly on the seven-day average, and will no doubt have authorities monitoring the next couple of days very closely. The test positivity rate was 11%. Bulgarian media reported that of 8,516 patients in hospital in total, 723 are in intensive care. Bulgaria, which has a population of 6.9, has the lowest vaccination rate in the EU, with 29.7% of adults having received at least one dose. Chris Hopson, the chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents NHS trusts, said he was expecting an announcement on a deadline for mandatory vaccination for NHS staff today. PA Media quotes him telling BBC Radio 5 Live: “That’s what we’re expecting today – that there will be a mandatory vaccination deadline.” Hopson continued: “But I suspect that come the deadline, whenever it is set, there will still be some staff who are adamant that they don’t want to get vaccinated and that is a very significant risk for the NHS.” Officials from the Department of Health and Social Care have said they are not commenting on speculation over the proposals. Deputy prime minister Dominic Raab refused to be drawn on the issue this morning. He told BBC Breakfast: “I don’t comment on leaked reports about what the government may or may not do, and that’s just not the professional thing for a minister to do.” Three out of four transport staff in London have been subjected to violence at work during the Covid crisis, research by the Rail, Maritime and Transport union (RMT) suggests. RMT said its study of workers in public-facing roles on London Underground and Transport for London rail networks showed they need more support. More than half of staff reported being threatened with physical violence, 28% were racially harassed, 14% reported being spat at or targeted with bodily fluids and 7% had been sexually assaulted, said the union. Three out of five respondents said they believed violence had got worse since the pandemic. Most of the 1,000 workers surveyed said the government’s “mixed messaging” around the lifting of Covid restrictions had made the situation worse for staff. PA Media quotes RMT general secretary Mick Lynch saying: “Life on the front line of London’s transport has got harder and more dangerous for the key workers who have kept the capital moving during the Covid crisis. “I don’t want to hear more condescending ‘thank yous’ from government ministers who are trying to drive down our members’ living conditions while sowing chaos in their shambolic response to the coronavirus. “We need a total sea-change in attitudes toward staff in which we see them as central to rebuilding passenger confidence and to creating a safer working and travelling environment.” There are between 80,000 and 100,000 NHS workers in England who are unvaccinated against coronavirus, Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, which represents England’s NHS trusts, has said this morning. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that as well as the risk of workers infecting colleagues, patients and visitors, there is also a risk to the health service if large numbers of staff leave as a result of mandatory vaccination. PA Media quotes Hopson saying: “The other risk we need to manage is the fact that there is also a patient safety and a quality of care risk if the NHS does end up as a result of this losing significant numbers of staff. “And that’s why we’ve said very clearly that we want the government to work very closely with us to maximise the number of people who take up the vaccination voluntarily before we hit the deadline, to think very carefully about the deadline because clearly we’re about to enter what we think is going to be the most difficult winter for the NHS on record.” He said it is “probably slightly less” than 100,000 staff who remain unvaccinated “because those figures are slightly old and we’ve been working really hard with NHS staff to ensure that they do take up the vaccine”. Hopson added: “Happy to say somewhere between 80,000 and 100,000.” Yesterday, in his first intervention into the Covid crisis since leaving government, former UK health secretary Matt Hancock suggested the date for mandatory vaccinations for NHS staff should be far earlier than the currently mooted April. Dominic Raab, the deputy prime minister, has been on Times Radio this morning defending UK prime minister Boris Johnson’s appearance at a hospital yesterday without wearing a face mask, which was the subject of much criticism on social media. Raab said: “In any clinical setting, you follow the rules that are applied there.” The rules of visiting the hospital, as laid out on the homepage of the Hexham General hospital website, state: When visiting you are reminded to expect: • To wash your hands at the hospital entrance and wear a mask when you enter the hospital. • To wear personal protective equipment (PPE) and observe social distancing. • You should not visit if you feel unwell, have been asked to self-isolate, or believe you may have been in contact with someone who has Covid-19. To be clear, there were pictures yesterday of the prime minister wearing a face mask at some point during the visit, but he did not wear it at all times. India could resume deliveries of Covid-19 shots to global vaccine-sharing platform Covax in a few weeks for the first time since April, two health industry sources have told Reuters. It would end a suspension of supplies that has hurt the vaccination efforts of poorer countries. Krishna N Das reports that based on an informal approval from India, Covax officials have started planning allocations of the Covishield shot for various countries. Covishield is a licensed version of the AstraZeneca shot made by the Serum Institute of India (SII), the world’s biggest vaccine maker. SII has nearly quadrupled its output of Covishield to up to 240m doses a month since April, when India stopped all exports in order to inoculate its own people during a surge of cases. “There will need to be purchase orders confirmed to SII, labelling and packing, export authorisation granted for each of these shipments,” a source told Reuters. “So the first deliveries, assuming the Indian government grants export authorisation, won’t happen until a few weeks from now.” SII CEO Adar Poonawalla told Reuters last month that the company could send 20m to 30m doses a month to Covax in November and December, which would increase to “large volumes” from January once India’s own needs were met. Ukraine registered a record 833 coronavirus-related deaths over the past 24 hours, the health ministry said this morning. The previous high of 793 deaths was on 6 November. Reuters report that the ministry’s data showed 18,988 new infections were reported over the past 24 hours. Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. I’ll bring you any Covid lines that emerge from the early UK media round interviews. Here is the latest picture of the current Covid outbreaks across Europe. Helen Davidson reports from Taipei for us: Residents of a Chinese city bordering Russia have been offered major cash rewards for tips on the continuing Delta outbreak, with local officials declaring a “people’s war” on the virus. Authorities announced the 100,000 yuan ($15,640) rewards for residents in Heihei, in the north-eastern Heilongjiang Province, as its total tally of cases in this outbreak reached 240. “It is hoped that the general public could actively cooperate with the tracing of the virus and provide clues to the probe,” the declaration said. According to state media, officials have urged people in the border city to immediately report any instances of illegal hunting, animal smuggling, or people crossing the border to fish. It also warned of severe penalties for people who intentionally conceal relevant information. China’s health commission reported another 62 locally transmitted symptomatic cases on Monday, and 43 on Tuesday, adding to the more than 940 cases recorded in at least 20 provinces nationally since October, in the country’s worst outbreak since Wuhan in early 2020. The government is committed to a Covid zero strategy, and is deploying an escalating array of measures in its attempts to eliminate the virus from the community again. Read more of Helen Davidson’s report: Chinese city offers cash for clues as Covid outbreak declared a ‘people’s war’ Covid-19 patients in Singapore who remain unvaccinated by choice will have to pay for their hospitalisation bills from 8 December, the government has ruled. Medical bills of all Singaporeans, permanent residents (PRs) and long-term pass holders, other than for those who have tested positive soon after returning from overseas travel, are currently covered by the government. Health minister Ong Ye Kung described the decision not to pay for unvaccinated people infected by Covid-19 an “important signal” to those who are still holding off on getting their jabs. Speaking at a press conference on Monday the minister urged all those eligible to get vaccinated. “Currently, unvaccinated persons make up a sizeable majority of those who require intensive inpatient care, and disproportionately contribute to the strain on our healthcare resources,” the ministry of health said. The new billing measure applies only to those who choose not to be vaccinated despite being medically eligible, and who are hospitalised and are on Covid-19 treatment facilities on or after 8 December, the Straits Times reported, citing the minister. Those who are ineligible for vaccination, such as children under 12 years of age, and those who cannot be vaccinated for medical reasons will continue to have their bills fully covered by the government, the ministry said. Hi it’s Samantha Lock here once again bringing you all the Covid headlines from across the world on your Tuesday. An intriguing story has emerged out of China today where residents in the city of Heihei, in the north-eastern Heilongjiang Province, are being offered major cash rewards for tips on the continuing Delta outbreak. Authorities announced the 100,000 yuan ($15,640) rewards as an incentive as its total tally of cases in this outbreak reached 240. “It is hoped that the general public could actively cooperate with the tracing of the virus and provide clues to the probe,” the declaration said. Meanwhile, in New Zealand an unusually large protest gathered steam in central Wellington today when about 2,000 people, some threatening violence, rallied against vaccine mandates and lockdowns. Protests took place across the country with some participants waving large Trump flags. Attacks on both police and reporters were also documented. Denmark has proposed reinstating the use of a digital “corona pass” to be presented when Danes visit indoor bars and restaurants, as the country is entering a third wave of the Covid-19 pandemic. Bulgaria’s daily Covid deaths rise to record high as the European Union’s least vaccinated country grapples with a fourth wave of the pandemic. A further 334 people died of the virus on Tuesday, the highest daily death toll since the start of the pandemic, Reuters reports. The US welcomes back travellers after an 18-month non-essential travel ban was lifted on Monday. Travellers from 33 previously banned countries are now allowed in, but they must be vaccinated. The US also reopened its land borders with Canada and Mexico. Thousands of anti-vaccination mandate protesters, some threatening violence, gathered in Wellington, New Zealand, on Tuesday. UK prime minister Boris Johnson was seen maskless in Hexham hospital in Northumberland as cases among MPs rise. The UK will begin rolling out Merck’s molnupiravir Covid-19 antiviral pill through a drug trial later this month. UK reports 32,322 Covid cases and 57 deaths. NHS workers in England must be legally required to get Covid vaccinations before the winter. French Covid hospitalisations see highest daily rise since August. The number of people hospitalised because of Covid went up by 156 over the past 24 hours, the highest daily rise since 23 August, to reach a one-month peak of 6,865. New Zealand’s largest city of Auckland will likely end an almost three-month lockdown later this month, prime minister Jacinda Ardern announced. Japan recorded no daily deaths from Covid-19 for the first time in 15 months on Sunday, according to national broadcaster NHK. Singapore and Malaysia will allow quarantine-free travel between both countries for individuals vaccinated against Covid-19. The two neighbours will launch a vaccinated travel corridor between Changi Airport and Kuala Lumpur International Airport from 29 November. It will be “impossible” for Nigeria to meet its target of vaccinating 40% of its population by the end of the year because Covid is not being taken seriously, health experts warn. Fewer than 1.5% of the country’s 206 million population has been fully vaccinated.The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has issued new subpoenas to 10 former Trump administration officials, including senior adviser Stephen Miller. The chair of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, said the officials would be able to shed light on what happened at the White House as the Capitol attack unfolded on 6 January. Joe Biden pitched the benefits of his economic agenda for “ordinary Americans” in an interview with a local Cincinnati news station. The president’s Monday interview with the Local 12 station came three days after the House passed the bipartisan infrastructure bill. Biden celebrated the bill’s passage while downplaying his sinking polling numbers, saying, “I didn’t run because of the polls.” House speaker Nancy Pelosi said the chamber will pass Democrats’ reconciliation package next week. Speaking at a press conference while attending the Cop 26 climate change summit in Glasgow, Pelosi told reporters, “We intend, that is our plan, to pass the bill the week of November 15, as was indicated in our statements that were made at the time of passing the infrastructure bill.” The White House condemned Republican congressman Paul Gosar for tweeting a violent video about Biden and congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. The altered video depicted Gosar striking Ocasio-Cortez with a sword and appeared to attack Biden. “There is no place for any type of violence or that type of language in the political system,” the deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, said. “It should not be happening, and we should be condemning it.” House members have called for an ethics committee investigation of Gosar. New Hampshire Governor Chris Sununu announced he will not run for the US Senate next year. The announcement will come as a major disappointment to Senate Republican leaders, given that Sununu was considered to be the party’s top recruit for the midterms. Trisha Garcia in El Paso: Oralia Perez waited nervously and excitedly on the US side of the border from Mexico for the chance to hug her sister and mother for the first time in almost 20 months. One minute after midnight east coast time, ie the first moments of Monday – which was actually still Sunday night, 10.01pm local time, in El Paso, west Texas, where she was – the US government lifted pandemic restrictions on non-essential cross-border travel for those who are vaccinated. As soon as the deadline passed, Oralia’s sister Guadalupe Perez and their mother Lorena Hernandez were among the first to rush by foot across one of the international bridges linking Mexico and the US, and in the late fall chill and the darkness, they flung themselves into each other’s arms. The last time the three had been together was February 2020. “As soon as we found out they were being allowed to pass, we couldn’t wait for today,” Oralia said. “They were very difficult months.” Hernandez said she had been afraid the authorities would decide yet again it wasn’t time to reopen the border. But having crossed successfully she stroked Oralia’s hair and beamed. The women repaired for the night and on Monday morning they had a celebratory breakfast together at the American chain staple, International House of Pancakes (Ihop), in El Paso. Then they went shopping, thrilled to be back in each other’s company, Oralia told the Guardian. The US temporarily limited inbound border crossings from Canada and Mexico to only “essential travel” from 21 March 2020. Restrictions were extended again and again, finally coming to an end at the start of this week. In El Paso, the city and county authorities, the police department and the federal Customs and Border Protection agency coordinated to oversee the clusters of people eager to cross by foot or car into the US for the first time in almost 20 months. Read more: Gabrielle Canon and agencies: In a victory for the northern spotted owl, the Biden administration has struck down a Trump-era plan that would have removed more than 3.4m acres of critical habitat for the imperiled bird and opened the old-growth forests where it lives to logging. The population of the small chocolate brown owl, which lives in forested areas in Washington, Oregon, and northern California, has been in decline for decades and has already lost roughly 70% of its habitat. Its numbers have plummeted 77% in Washington state, 68% in Oregon, and close to half in California, according to studies by the US Geological Survey, and biologists fear that further habitat reduction would put them on the path to extinction. A controversial decision made by Trump’s interior secretary just five days before leaving office was widely viewed as a parting gift to the timber industry. The Fish and Wildlife Service has since found that there was “insufficient rationale and justification” to reduce the threatened owl’s habitat. Under the new plan, roughly 204,000 acres – approximately 2% of the 9.6m acres designated as habitat for the owls in 2012 – will be made available for development while more than 3m will be restored and protected. The agency claims the exclusion of those lands from habitat designation will enable federal land managers to meet obligations to the logging industry and help limit catastrophic wildfires that continue to threaten forests in the west. Read more: After a series of historic wins across the US last week, Asian Americans will now serve as mayors and city council members in large cities including Boston, Seattle, Cincinnati and New York, signalling the rapid rise in Asian American political power. The victories mark a significant step forward for a diverse community that has seen historically low representation in political offices and in the last two years has borne the brunt of a rising tide of pandemic-driven anti-Asian sentiments. Last Tuesday night, voters chose Boston city councilor Michelle Wu to serve in the city’s top political office. The 36-year-old Taiwanese American who was Boston’s first Asian American city councilor will serve as the city’s first mayor of color. “Growing up, I never ever thought that I would or could or should be involved in politics. I didn’t see anyone who looked like me in spaces of power. We are redefining what leadership looks like,” Wu told reporters. In Cincinnati, Aftab Pureval made history by defeating former Democratic Congressman David Mann, making the 39-year-old the first Asian American to hold the city’s mayoral post. The son of a Tibetan mother and Indian father, Pureval addressed a crowd saying: “Cincinnati is a place where no matter what you look like, where you’re from, or how much money you have, if you come here and work hard you can achieve your dreams.” Meanwhile in Seattle, Bruce Harrell, 69, who is of mixed heritage, is projected to become the city’s first Asian American mayor and second Black mayor. In New York City, five Asian Americans were elected to the city council, the most the council has ever had. The record-breaking group includes the first Korean Americans, first South Asian Americans and first Muslim woman to be elected to the council. Read more: The 10 Trump officials targeted in the latest round of subpoenas reflect a new strategy adopted by House investigators in recent weeks to target aides in Trump’s direct orbit, as well as their aides in turn, who are less able to attempt to claim executive privilege and stonewall the inquiry. Aides such as Molly Michael, the Oval Office operations coordinator, may similarly have learned of information not covered by executive privilege even as the select committee issued her a subpoena as she was involved in sending materials about election fraud at Trump’s direction. The select committee also appears to think Christopher Liddell, a former White House deputy chief of staff around Trump on 6 January, may be inclined to cooperate with the investigation because he “considered resigning on that day but stayed on ‘after a great deal of persuasion’”. Cassidy Hutchinson, the former assistant to the president for legislative affairs, was subpoenaed since she was at the White House on 6 January, along with Nicholas Luna, the personal assistant to Trump, who was also in the Oval Office when Trump that morning told Pence not to certify. The select committee issued an additional subpoena to Kenneth Klukowski, former senior counsel to assistant attorney general Jeffrey Clark, who pressured the then-acting attorney general Jeff Rosen to attest to lies about election fraud, according to a Senate judiciary committee report. Klukowski, the select committee said referring to the report, was involved in drafting a letter that urged certain state legislatures to delay certification of the election. His subpoena comes after Clark refused to comply with an earlier subpoena from the select committee. Read more: The jury at Kyle Rittenhouse’s murder trial on Tuesday watched drone footage that showed Rittenhouse shooting Joseph Rosenbaum at close range during a night of protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last August. The video, zoomed in and slowed down by a forensic imaging specialist, was played as the prosecution finished presenting its case, after a week of testimony in which some witnesses seemed to bolster Rittenhouse’s claim of self-defense. Rittenhouse is a former police youth cadet from Antioch, Illinois. On the night in question he went to Kenosha with an AR-style semi-automatic rifle and a medical kit, in response to a militia that called for protection for businesses against protesters supporting the Black Lives Matter movement. The 18-year-old is charged with two counts of homicide, one of attempted homicide and two of recklessly endangering safety, for firing his weapon near others. He is also charged with possession of a dangerous weapon by a minor, as he was 17 at the time. He has pleaded not guilty. The drone footage shown in court on Tuesday showed Rosenbaum, 36, following Rittenhouse before Rittenhouse suddenly turned and fired his rifle. Rosenbaum was shown to fall as Rittenhouse ran around a car. Dr Doug Kelley, a forensic pathologist with the Milwaukee county medical examiner’s office, said Rosenbaum was shot by someone within 4ft. Rosenbaum’s hand, he said, was “in close proximity or in contact with the end of that rifle”. Kelley said Rosenbaum was shot four times: in the groin, hand and thigh as he faced Rittenhouse and then in the back. Prosecutor James Kraus called that the “kill shot”. Moments later, Rittenhouse, then 17, killed Anthony Huber, 26, who was seen on bystander video hitting Rittenhouse with a skateboard. Rittenhouse also wounded Gaige Grosskreutz, a protester and volunteer medic who carried a gun of his own. On Monday, Grosskreutz told jurors he was armed because he “believe[s] in the second amendment” but that he did not shoot Rittenhouse because “that’s not the kind of person that I am … and definitely not somebody I would want to become”. Read more: That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Maanvi Singh, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has issued new subpoenas to 10 former Trump administration officials, including senior adviser Stephen Miller. The chair of the select committee, Bennie Thompson, said the officials would be able to shed light on what happened at the White House as the Capitol attack unfolded on January 6. Joe Biden pitched the benefits of his economic agenda for “ordinary Americans” in an interview with a local Cincinnati news station. The president’s Monday interview with the Local 12 station came three days after the House passed the bipartisan infrastructure bill. Biden celebrated the bill’s passage while downplaying his sinking polling numbers, saying, “I didn’t run because of the polls.” House speaker Nancy Pelosi said the chamber will pass Democrats’ reconciliation package next week. Speaking at a press conference while attending the Cop 26 climate change summit in Glasgow, Pelosi told reporters, “We intend, that is our plan, to pass the bill the week of November 15, as was indicated in our statements that were made at the time of passing the infrastructure bill.” The White House condemned Republican congressman Paul Gosar for tweeting a violent video about Biden and congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. The altered video depicted Gosar striking Ocasio-Cortez with a sword and appeared to attack Biden. “There is no place for any type of violence or that type of language in the political system,” the deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, said. “It should not be happening, and we should be condemning it.” House members have called for an ethics committee investigation of Gosar. New Hampshire Governor Chris Sununu announced he will not run for the US Senate next year. The announcement will come as a major disappointment to Senate Republican leaders, given that Sununu was considered to be the party’s top recruit for the midterms. Maanvi will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Donald Trump attacked the House select committee’s investigation as politically motivated, after the panel subpoenaed 10 of his former aides. “The Unselect Committee of politically ambitious hacks continues to subpoena people wanting to know about those protesting, on January 6th, the insurrection which took place during the Presidential Election of November 3rd,” the former president said in a statement. Of course, it is not at all accurate to describe the January 6 insurrection as a “protest”. It was a pro-Trump attack on the Capitol that resulted in five deaths. And it is also entirely false to describe the 2020 presidential election as an “insurrection”. Trump has never presented any valid evidence of widespread fraud in the election, which Joe Biden won fairly. One of the Trump administration officials who was subpoenaed by the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection is John McEntee, the former White House personnel director. In his new book, “Betrayal: The Final Act of the Trump Show,” ABC News correspondent Jonathan Karl details how McEntee used his post to enforce White House staffers’ loyalty to Donald Trump and bolster the president’s baseless claims of a stolen election. Karl writes in an excerpt for the Atlantic: McEntee and his enforcers made the disastrous last weeks of the Trump presidency possible. They backed the president’s manic drive to overturn the election, and helped set the stage for the January 6 assault on the Capitol. Thanks to them, in the end, the elusive ‘adults in the room’—those who might have been willing to confront the president or try to control his most destructive tendencies—were silenced or gone. But McEntee was there—bossing around Cabinet secretaries, decapitating the civilian leadership at the Pentagon, and forcing officials high and low to state their allegiance to Trump. When Trump wasn’t happy with the answers he was getting from White House Counsel Pat Cipollone, McEntee set up a rogue legal team. This back-channel operation played a previously unknown role in the effort to pressure Vice President Mike Pence to overturn the vote. Just days before January 6, McEntee sent Pence’s office an absurd memo making the case that Pence would be following Thomas Jefferson’s example if he used his power to declare Trump the winner of the 2020 election. More than anyone else in the White House, McEntee was Trump’s man through and through—a man who rose to power at precisely the moment when American democracy was falling apart. Donald Trump has suffered a series of legal setbacks and more loom, as he wages a court battle to thwart a House committee from obtaining White House records for its inquiry into the 6 January Capitol assault and a new grand jury begins hearing evidence about possible crimes by his real estate firm. Former justice officials and legal scholars say Trump’s long-standing penchant for using lawsuits to fend off investigations and opponents is looking weaker now that he’s out of the White House and facing legal threats on multiple fronts. The list of significant legal setbacks is lengthy for the former president and real estate mogul who has long had a reputation for threatening to sue his foes. Early this year, for example, Manhattan district attorney Cyrus Vance Jr won a lengthy legal fight to obtain Trump’s tax returns, and in July charged two Trump companies and the Trump Organization’s chief financial officer with a 15 year tax fraud scheme, which the companies and the CFO have denied in pleas. On 4 November, a second grand jury was convened by Vance to hear more evidence about the financial practices of the Trump Organization and possibly bring more charges, according to the Washington Post. Read the full report: The new round of subpoenas from the House select committee comes one day after the panel subpoenaed six of Donald Trump’s allies, who were reportedly involved in efforts to block the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s electoral victory. Those subpoenas – which were sent to former national security adviser Michael Flynn and conservative lawyer John Eastman, among others – indicated the committee’s interest in meetings held by Trump associates at the Willard Hotel in the days leading up to the insurrection. The latest round of subpoenas demonstrates that the committee is also interested in what unfolded at the White House as a pro-Trump mob attacked the Capitol. During the select committee’s first public hearing in July, vice-chair Liz Cheney underscored the importance of learning what took place at the White House during the insurrection. “We must also know what happened every minute of that day in the White House – every phone call, every conversation, every meeting leading up to, during, and after the attack,” Cheney said at the hearing. “Honorable men and women have an obligation to step forward.” Here are all 10 of the former Trump administration officials who have just received subpoenas from the House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection: Nicholas Luna, the former personal assistant to Donald Trump. Molly Michael, Trump’s former Oval Office operations coordinator. Benjamin Williamson, former senior advisor to Trump’s chief of staff, Mark Meadows. Christopher Liddell, the former White House deputy chief of staff. John McEntee, the former White House personnel director. Keith Kellogg, the national security adviser to former Vice-President Mike Pence. Kayleigh McEnany, the former White House press secretary. Stephen Miller, Trump’s former senior adviser who is best known for crafting the administration’s widely criticized immigration policies. Cassidy Hutchinson, Trump’s former special assistant for legislative affairs. Kenneth Klukowski, the former senior counsel to assistant attorney general Jeffrey Clark, who refused to answer the select committee’s questions about the insurrection last week. The House select committee investigating the Capitol insurrection has issued new subpoenas to 10 former Trump administration officials, including senior adviser Stephen Miller. “The Select Committee wants to learn every detail of what went on in the White House on January 6th and in the days beforehand,” select committee chair Bennie Thompson said in a statement. “We need to know precisely what role the former President and his aides played in efforts to stop the counting of the electoral votes and if they were in touch with anyone outside the White House attempting to overturn the outcome of the election,” the Democratic chair added. “We believe the witnesses subpoenaed today have relevant information and we expect them to comply fully with the Select Committee’s investigation as we work to get answers for the American people, make recommendations on changes to the law to protect our democracy, and help ensure that nothing like January 6th ever happens again.” The news comes one day after the committee announced it had issued subpoenas to six of Donald Trump’s allies who were reportedly involved in efforts to prevent the congressional certification of Joe Biden’s victory in the presidential election. House progressives are expressing concern about the timing of passing the reconciliation package, after centrists forced a delay of the scheduled vote last week. A handful of centrists in the House Democratic caucus have said they will not support the $1.75tn reconciliation package until the Congressional Budget Office releases its analysis of the bill’s true cost. And the CBO said this morning that it could not provide a date for when the cost estimate of the entire bill will be available, although the agency plans to release calculations about portions of the package this week. Progressive congresswoman Ilhan Omar said of the CBO’s statement, “Translation: Build Back Better act is not gonna happen next week and everyone should have seen that coming when we decoupled the bills.” Omar was one of the six House progressives who voted against the bipartisan infrastructure bill on Friday night because they had previously demanded that the reconciliation package must be approved at the same time. Joe Biden praised former Senator Max Cleland as “an American hero whose fearless service to our nation, and to the people of his beloved home state of Georgia, never wavered”. The president noted that he and Cleland served together in the US Senate for six years, until they both left the chamber in 2009. (Cleland had lost his 2008 re-election bid, and Biden made the move to the White House as Barack Obama’s vice-president.) “He was a man of unflinching patriotism, boundless courage, and rare character,” Biden said of Cleland. “I was proud to have Max by my side. He will be remembered as one of Georgia’s and America’s great leaders.” In case you missed it this morning: Max Cleland, the former US senator from Georgia who lost three limbs in the Vietnam War, died today. He was 79. The AP reports: Cleland died at his home in Atlanta from congestive heart failure, his personal assistant Linda Dean told The Associated Press. Cleland, a Democrat, served one term in the U.S. Senate, losing a 2002 re-election bid to Republican Saxby Chambliss. He also served as as administrator of the U.S. Veterans Administration, as Georgia Secretary of State and as a Georgia state senator. Cleland was a U.S. Army captain in Vietnam when he lost an arm and two legs while picking up a fallen grenade in 1968. For years, Cleland blamed himself for dropping the grenade, but he learned in 1999 that another soldier had dropped it. Cleland’s Senate seat is now filled by Jon Ossoff, who is the first Democrat to hold the position since Chambliss’ victory in the 2002 race. The deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, condemned Republican congressman Paul Gosar over his threatening tweet about progressive congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. “There is no place for any type of violence or that type of language in the political system,” Jean-Pierre said at the daily White House press briefing. “It should not be happening, and we should be condemning it.” Gosar has been widely criticized for tweeting a video depicting him striking Ocasio-Cortez with a sword. The tweet also appeared to show Gosar threatening Joe Biden. Twitter attached a hateful conduct warning to the tweet, and House members have now called for the ethics committee and law enforcement to investigate Gosar over the incident. House speaker Nancy Pelosi has echoed calls for an investigation, and she urged Republican leader Kevin McCarthy to do so as well. Pelosi said in a tweet, “Threats of violence against members of Congress and the president of the United States must not be tolerated. [McCarthy] should join in condemning this horrific video and call on the ethics committee and law enforcement to investigate.” A reporter asked the deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, about how the funds from the bipartisan infrastructure bill will be distributed. Jean-Pierre would not get into specifics, saying that the distribution of funds will be determined by the transportation department, the department of energy and the department of commerce, among other government agencies. While she would not go into specifics, Jean-Pierre said, “Transparency is going to be key here.” It’s also worth noting that Joe Biden has not yet actually signed the bill, as he is waiting to do so until Democratic lawmakers return to Washington. (The House and the Senate are out of session this week.) While emphasizing the importance of expanding access to affordable broadband, commerce secretary Gina Raimondo acknowledged it would take time to see the benefits of the funding from the infrastructure bill. Raimondo said many infrastructure projects in the US are “shovel-ready,” but she noted that expanding broadband access would be a longer process. She said some broadband projects would not get underway until “well into next year”. “I think people will see their state putting together a plan,” Raimondo said. “But you know, not everybody’s going to have broadband a year from now.” Commerce secretary Gina Raimondo underscored the importance of funding to expand affordable broadband access, which is included in the infrastructure bill. Raimondo argued that the coronavirus pandemic demonstrated “how essential broadband is,” as many families struggled to access online schooling or telehealth appointments because of unreliable Internet. “The fact of the matter is, we have to close the digital divide,” Raimondo said. The commerce secretary said the Biden administration is committed to expanding broadband access while ensuring it remains affordable, so all American families can benefit from the initiative. “Broadband is the gateway to economic opportunity,” Raimondo said. “And so in order to open that gateway, we’re putting equity at the center of everything we do.” The deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, is now holding the daily briefing with reporters, and she is joined by commerce secretary Gina Raimondo. Raimondo celebrated the “incredible accomplishment” of the House passing the bipartisan infrastructure bill last week, sending the legislation to Joe Biden’s desk. Raimondo, who previously served as the governor of Rhode Island, noted that other administrations had repeatedly promised to sign an infrastructure bill but never followed through on those commitments. “President Biden delivered,” Raimondo said. “None of this could have been done without his leadership.” A last word, for now, on Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and the video tweeted by Paul Gosar in which the Arizona Republican is seen, as a mocked-up anime character, to hit her, in the same form, in the back of the neck with a sword. Joanne Freeman is a Yale historian and the author of The Field of Blood, an extremely well-regarded history of violence in Congress before the civil war. She has become a popular talking head in the media in the last couple of years, not least around the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January. Tensions and enmities in Congress itself have not reached the pitch or depths of the 1850s, when congressmen fought duels and a senator, Charles Sumner*, was viciously attacked by a southerner in his chair in the chamber, as the US tore itself apart over slavery. But parallels are there to be found and historians like Freeman are there, on Twitter, to comment. Regarding Gosar’s tweet, Freeman wrote: “Threats of violence lead to actual violence. They clear the ground. They cow opposition. They plant the idea. They normalize it. They encourage it. They maim democracy. And run the risk of killing it.” Here’s the story: *By the by, seeing as we’re talking history: in the now infamous picture below, which shows a Capitol rioter with a Confederate battle flag in the Capitol on 6 January, the portrait looking on from the right is of Sumner, the senator from Massachusetts who was a passionate opponent of slavery. And, as it happens, the fellow portrayed at the left is John C Calhoun, vice-president, senator from South Carolina, passionate champion of slavery and, and this is true, possible model for Captain Ahab in Herman Melville’s Moby-Dick… So there you go. Speaking of Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, the Democratic congresswoman has warned that the US “has not recovered our moral authority” following the Donald Trump years. Speaking at a sideline event at Cop26 in Glasgow, Ocasio-Cortez was among a group of Democrats who hailed Joe Biden’s efforts to tackle the climate crisis. But while she said America “is back” in the climate conversation, the congresswoman said this needs to be matched by actions. “We have to deliver to get credit on climate change, it’s as simple as that,” she said. Ocasio-Cortez was also asked if she had a message to young activists who have pressed governments to cut climate-damaging fossil fuel pollution. She told reporters: “Well, I would say, ‘Stay in the streets. Keep pushing.’” Ocasio-Cortez was one of a number of democrats who voted against Biden’s infrastructure bill, which passed last Friday night. After Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez accused Republican leaders of “cheering on” a congressman who tweeted a video depicting him striking her with a sword – and said the incident showed how US institutions failed to protect women of color – Nancy Pelosi called for House minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, to join her call for an ethics investigation. Twitter attached a hateful conduct warning to the tweet by Paul Gosar, a hardliner from Arizona, which also showed the sword-wielding congressman appearing to threaten Joe Biden. In a tweet, the speaker said: “Threats of violence against members of Congress and the president of the United States must not be tolerated. [McCarthy] should join in condemning this horrific video and call on the ethics committee and law enforcement to investigate.” Twitter attached a hateful conduct warning to Gosar’s tweet. “This tweet violated the Twitter Rules about hateful conduct,” Twitter’s message said. “However, Twitter has determined that it may be in the public’s interest for the tweet to remain accessible.” The video was also posted to Instagram Ocasio-Cortez, a Democratic congresswoman from New York, also called Gosar “just a collection of wet toothpicks anyway” who “couldn’t open a pickle jar or read a whole book by himself”. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Biden pitched the benefits of his economic agenda for “ordinary Americans” in an interview with a local Cincinnati news station. The president’s interview with the Local 12 station came three days after the House passed the bipartisan infrastructure bill. Biden celebrated the bill’s passage while downplaying his sinking polling numbers, saying, “I didn’t run because of the polls.” House speaker Nancy Pelosi said the chamber will pass Democrats’ reconciliation package next week. Speaking at a press conference while attending the Cop26 climate change summit in Glasgow, Pelosi told reporters, “We intend, that is our plan, to pass the bill the week of November 15, as was indicated in our statements that were made at the time of passing the infrastructure bill.” New Hampshire Governor Chris Sununu announced he will not run for the US Senate next year. The announcement will come as a major disappointment for Senate Republican leaders, given that Sununu was considered to be the party’s top recruit for the midterms. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Some of the centrist members of the House Democratic caucus have said they will not vote for the reconciliation package until the Congressional Budget Office releases its analysis of the bill’s true cost. CBO staffers are working frantically to provide members of Congress with their assessments, and the agency gave an update on its progress today. “The analysis of the bill’s many provisions is complicated, and CBO will provide a cost estimate for the entire bill as soon as practicable,” the agency said in a statement. “We anticipate releasing estimates for individual titles of the bill as we complete them, some of which will be released this week.” But the agency also noted that certain provisions will take longer to analyze, and officials do not yet have a planned release date for the cost estimate of the entire bill. It’s unclear whether the partial estimates released this week will allay the centrists’ concerns, or if Democratic leaders will need to wait for the entire cost estimate before moving forward with a vote. Time will tell. House speaker Nancy Pelosi held a press conference in Glasgow today, as she and other members of Congress attended the Cop26 climate change summit. A reporter asked the speaker when House Democrats planned to pass their $1.75tn reconciliation package, after centrist members of their caucus forced a delay of the scheduled vote last week. “We intend, that is our plan, to pass the bill the week of November 15, as was indicated in our statements that were made at the time of passing the infrastructure bill,” Pelosi said. The House was able to give final approval to the bipartisan infrastructure bill on Friday night, but Democratic leaders’ plans to simultaneously pass the reconciliation package were scrapped because of centrists’ concerns about the cost of the bill. The reconciliation package includes $555bn in funds to address the climate crisis, including tax credits for the purchase of electric vehicles and investments in clean energy technologies. Senator Alex Padilla and 17 other Senate Democrats asked the treasury department on Tuesday to consider offering voter registration services at free tax assistance preparation centers, a move they said could help add thousands of new voters to the rolls. The senators asked Treasury secretary Janet Yellen to consider giving people the chance to register at Volunteer Income Tax Assistance (VITA) centers, which offer free tax assistance to people who generally make less than $57,000 each year, or who have disabilities or limited English proficiency. They cited a 2018 Brookings Institution experiment that found implementing such a program nationwide would add 115,000 people to the voter rolls, including 63,000 who otherwise would not register. The study of just over 4,300 tax filers in Texas and Ohio found the program doubled the likelihood people would register to vote, and was particularly effective in getting younger voters on the rolls. Such a program could also successfully add many low income people who use VITA services to the rolls, the senators said. Joe Biden issued an executive order earlier this year asking all federal agencies to submit proposals to expand voter access. The Senate Democrats said they were concerned that offering voter registration at VITA centers was not included in the proposal the Treasury Department submitted to the White House. “We believe this is a missed opportunity,” the senators wrote. The letter comes as Biden and Democrats in the Senate face mounting pressure to pass voting rights legislation. Republicans have successfully used the filibuster four times this year to block voting rights bills. There is mounting pressure to get rid of the rule. New Hampshire Governor Chris Sununu said he did not give any advance notice to Senate Republican leaders about his decision to stay out of the 2022 race. “I guess you will have to let them know. I haven’t talked to them,” Sununu told reporters in Concord. The announcement will likely come as a surprise and a severe disappointment to Senate minority leader Mitch McConnell, given that Sununu was considered one of the party’s top recruits for the midterms. McConnell’s former chief of staff, Josh Holmes, summed up his response with one word: “Unbelievable.” While announcing he would not run for the Senate, New Hampshire Governor Chris Sununu made it quite clear that he thinks very little of the institution. The Republican governor noted he spoke to many senators about their duties as he made his decision about whether to jump into the race. “The more I heard about the opportunities that would be there to lead – and there are opportunities, to be sure – what the day-to-day entails, it’s so different,” Sununu said. “It doesn’t fit not just my style, but it clearly doesn’t fit the needs of the citizens.” Speaking of Republican Senate candidates: New Hampshire Governor Chris Sununu has just announced that he is not going to be one. Sununu, a three-term governor who was considered one of the Republican party’s top recruits for the 2022 midterms, made the announcement this morning. He said he would instead seek another two-year term as governor. Explaining his decision, Sununu said the governorship has been “the most fulfilling opportunity” and he did not believe he could achieve the same kind of results in the Senate. “My responsibility is not to the gridlock and politics of Washington. It’s to the citizens of New Hampshire,” Sununu told reporters in Concord. “And I’d rather push myself 120 miles an hour delivering wins for New Hampshire than to slow down, end up on Capitol Hill debating partisan politics without results. That’s why I’m going to run for a fourth term.” The news will likely be reassuring to Democratic Senator Maggie Hassan, who is seeking a second term next year. Recent polls had shown Sununu and Hassan running neck and neck in a hypothetical match-up. Also on Monday, the Hill reported that Sean Parnell, the Trump-endorsed candidate for Senate in Pennsylvania, was among candidates worrying senior Senate Republicans. Another, the former NFL star Herschel Walker, has been endorsed by Donald Trump in Georgia but faces allegations of violence towards women. He has said his Christian faith helped quell such behaviour. Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, a Trump ally, told the Hill Parnell had “to make a decision if he’s a viable candidate or not after the accusation. Again, it’s an accusation in family court. You take it seriously. He has a right to give his side of the story.” John Cornyn of Texas said: “Parnell has a primary and after recent revelations I don’t know what his future is.” Mitt Romney of Utah, a Trump foe, said: “I’m not going to give advice to President Trump on who and when he endorses but I know that for myself I try and wait as long as possible to determine who would be the best candidate and who has the best prospects for becoming a successful Republican nominee.” The retiring Pennsylvania senator, Pat Toomey, did not comment. An unnamed senator said: “If you can only win a Republican primary and can’t win a general election, you don’t serve the purpose. “Who the candidates are matter and we ought to always be doing everything we can to make sure we have the best candidates.” The Republican in charge of attempts to win back the Senate was asked to give an opinion about a candidate in Pennsylvania who is both accused of strangling his wife and endorsed by Donald Trump. The senator chose not to do so. The Pennsylvania contest is shaping up to be a key battle in the 2022 midterms. Republican control of either chamber of Congress would cripple Joe Biden’s domestic plans. Success in the Senate would let the GOP block any supreme court pick. Trump’s endorsement carries huge weight. The Trump-endorsed candidate for the nomination to succeed the retiring Pat Toomey in Pennsylvania is Sean Parnell, an army veteran and conservative commentator. Parnell’s estranged wife recently testified that he choked her until she bit him, hit their young child and called her a “whore” and a “piece of shit” while pinning her down. Parnell denied the claims, also under oath. The chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, Rick Scott of Florida, spoke to CNN on Monday. “You are head of the NRSC, charged with getting Republicans elected to the Senate,” host Brianna Keilar said. “Sean Parnell is facing allegations from his wife he strangled her and abused one of their small children. Is he still the right candidate?” “As you know,” Scott said, “we have Republican and Democrat primaries across the country and in Pennsylvania … both Republicans and Democrats have primaries, and so we’ll see who comes out of the primary. Facts will come out, we’ll find out what people think. “I think what ultimately happens is people are going to look at somebody’s background and say is that the type of person they want and also are they talking about the issues I care about.” Pressed, Scott said: “I’m not supporting or opposing people in primary. “I’m the chair of the National Republican Senatorial Committee. I’m going to help our incumbents, help our Republicans who get through the primaries, that’s what my focus is. The voters of each of the states will decide who the right candidates on the Republican and Democrat side are.” Politico has reported that Donald Trump Jr pressed his father to endorse Parnell, in a process without sufficient vetting. Even as Joe Biden and his team are selling the benefits of the infrastructure bill to the public, it’s unclear when exactly Americans will start to see the impact of the legislation. Biden said on Saturday that he believed Americans would start seeing the benefits of the bill “within the next two to three months”. But speaking to reporters yesterday, transportation secretary Pete Buttigieg acknowledged many infrastructure projects take years to complete. “So, some things [will happen] soon. But again, this is about many, many, years ahead, starting now,” Buttigieg said. Politically speaking, it may be difficult for Democratic candidates to sell the infrastructure bill to voters during the midterms next year if the effects are not yet being felt. Democrats’ reconciliation package includes some more immediate benefits, such as the extension of the expanded Child Tax Credit. But the party has not yet been able to send that bill to Biden’s desk. Joe Biden will also go to Baltimore, Maryland, tomorrow to continue selling the benefits of the bipartisan infrastructure bill. According to the White House’s guidance on the trip, the president plans to visit the Port of Baltimore and “discuss how the Bipartisan Infrastructure Deal delivers for the American people by upgrading our nation’s ports and strengthening supply chains to prevent disruptions”. It’s worth noting that the president has not yet actually signed the bill, which the House passed on Friday night. The deputy White House press secretary, Karine Jean-Pierre, said yesterday that Biden was waiting to sign the bill until Democratic lawmakers return to Washington. (The House and the Senate are both out of session this week.) “It’s urgent, but we also want to make sure that the people who spent the last couple of weeks, last couple of months just all in, delivering on this promise, are here for the signing as well,” Jean-Pierre told reporters. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. Joe Biden sat down for a rare live interview yesterday with the Local 12 news station based out of Cincinnati, Ohio. In the interview, the president celebrated the House passage of the bipartisan infrastructure bill while downplaying his sinking polling numbers. The FiveThirtyEight polling average now has Biden’s approval rating at 43%, down from 50% in August. “The point is, I didn’t run because of the polls,” the president told WKRC’s Kyle Inskeep. Biden acknowledged there was “a lot of anxiety” in the country right now because of everything from high gas prices to coronavirus-related school closures. But he optimistically predicted that the infrastructure bill, as well as the reconciliation package that Democrats are still trying to pass, will have a “significant impact on ordinary Americans” and help to turn things around. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.When I was young, I liked writing. It was the only thing I was any good at, and I wanted to do it all the time. But I knew I would never be able to write a book. A book, back then in the 50s and 60s, meant a novel. Novels were all I knew about. I’d read hundreds of them. But I thought you couldn’t write one unless you had an “idea” that you wanted to “express”. Writers, I learnt at school and university, had plots, and characters, and things called “themes”. I didn’t have any of those or know how to get them. All I had was a million details. I couldn’t see how it would ever be possible to make a container for the cascade of interesting stuff that poured past and through me each day. But I liked pushing a pen, so I went on taking notes of the cascade as a way of keeping my head while it rushed on by, trying to capture bits of it in good sentences with grammar and punctuation, to get it into words in a way that relieved me. That’s how I started to keep a diary; and I’ve never stopped. Eventually I got older and figured out how to pretend I was writing in the proper way. When I published my first “novel”, smart-arses saw through my charade and blew the whistle on me. “She’s only published her diary.” “She talks dirty and passes it off as realism.” This stung, but there was no point in caring. I was using the only material I had: the world as it presented itself to me, and through me. In other words, I was using myself. Pretty much everything I’ve ever published was drawn from this compulsion to watch and witness and record. Great chunks of the diary turned out to be useful in the books I taught myself to write. I learnt to “invent characters” who could do and think things that people could interpret as “themes” if they wanted to. But it was all based on my driven, daily-and-nightly habit of writing things down. In my heart I always liked my diary better than anything else I wrote. When I sit down to write something for publication, I’ll do anything to avoid the desk. I drag the chain for half a day at a time. I eat biscuits or put on the washing or vacuum the mats or lie on them and curse my fate. To write with conscious purpose I have to corral myself, to buckle on a harness before I can even start. But every night before I go to sleep, and every morning when I open my eyes, I pick up my diary and my fountain pen, make a note of the date and time, and start writing. I never don’t want to. I never don’t feel like it or can’t be bothered. I just do it, sitting up in bed, and when I’ve been writing for 10 minutes or maybe an hour and feel like stopping, I stop – because I’m not writing for any reader other than myself. During these hours of peculiar solitude, in conversation with myself and no one else, I’m free. I used to think (and often have been told) that there was something self-obsessed and neurotic about keeping a diary, that it was a way of defending myself from the world. Why would anyone be interested? Why on earth should a perfect stranger care, let alone feel something, when I describe, say, a dream I had of a bear in the back seat of a car? A broken umbrella in a bin, a rat in a kitchen, a bird that sings all night in a park? Isn’t it almost pathological, sitting there scribbling away by myself? But I get letters from people. Strangers make lists of the things they recognise, and send them back to me. Sometimes they even say, “Thank you. This could be my life. This could be me.” What I’ve learnt, from editing the diaries into books and putting them out there, is that during those thousands of private hours, I’m never alone. If I go far enough, if I keep going past the boring, obedient part of me with its foot always riding the brake, and through the narrow, murky parts that are abject or angry or frightened, I find myself moving out into another region, a bigger, broader place where everybody else lives: a fearless, open-hearted firmament where images swarm, and there’s music, and poetry that we almost understand, fleeting moments of sky and dirt, subtle changes in the light, a feather of a hesitation, mistakes and pain and getting over pain, all kinds of shouting and dawn and small nice things to eat, and being allowed to carry a stranger’s baby round a garden, and singing in the car all the way home. • Helen Garner’s third volume of diaries, How To End A Story: Diaries 1995–1998, is out now through Text PublishingIt may not be a “rain bomb” but record rainfall is bringing warnings of flash flooding and severe thunderstorms as wild weather lashing almost every state and territory moves east. The buzz term hitting the headlines has been used to describe Australia’s drenching this week, with flood and marine warnings in place across the nation. “It’s a good metaphor for what we’re expecting but it’s not a technical term we use,” said a Bureau of Meteorology forecaster, Jonathan How. “For some places it will feel like an explosion of rain, but anyone in meteorology would never say that, we try to steer clear from dramatic terms people like to coin. “You could say a storm or rain outbreak, which is a bit more subdued.” The low pressure system brought record spring rainfall in the Northern Territory overnight, with more than 100mm recorded in Alice Springs, the heaviest rainfall in 20 years. “It broke the record for the wettest November ever,” How said. “There are still quite a few flood watches for large parts of central and southern Northern Territory, as well as northern South Australia and southern Queensland.” Widespread record rainfall will pass over south-west Queensland in the next two days, with between two to three times the average November rainfall expected. Four catchments in New South Wales are under flood watch, with major flooding expected in rivers up to the Queensland border and flash flooding expected in inland areas. Six hourly rainfall totals exceeding 100mm are possible for northern inland parts of the state. Two-thirds of dams in NSW are already above 90% capacity, while Menindee Lakes is at 112% and Brogo Dam is sitting above 102%. The Lachlan River is expected to remain above 2.7 metres until early next week. “We’ve just issued severe weather warnings for heavy rain in inland New South Wales and southern Queensland, with possible flash flooding particularly in Tamworth and parts of Darling,” How said. Sydney will see a chance of thunderstorms on Thursday and Friday, with winds of 15km/h to 20km/h and a 90% chance of rain until showers ease off on Saturday. Melbourne will see its highest chance of rainfall on Friday and Saturday, with winds of up to 40km/h on Sunday and possible hail. High rainfall will also lash the Australian Capital Territory, Queensland and South Australia, with thunderstorms expected after pockets of heavy rainfall overnight in north Adelaide, Western Australia and the Queensland coast. North Rockhampton recorded 341mm of rain up to 9am Wednesday, while Bundaberg south saw falls of 68mm. “As the storm moves east it’s given us a taste of what’s to come,” How said. “Major flooding can be a risk to communities along rivers, but flash flooding will also cause headache and grief to farmers harvesting, likely to lose their crops. The flooding impacts will last well into next week.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The ACT is expected to be the wettest capital come Friday, once a low pressure moves to the territory, with falls expected between 25mm and 50 mm. “It could go higher,” How said. “They’re really going to cop it.” Storms are also expected in Brisbane and Sydney before easing off late Friday afternoon or early evening. But Victoria will see “dangerous easterly winds” increase on Friday which could cause tree damage across southern parts of the state, until an eventual easing early next week. As storms continue, summer is looking “quite far off” with tropical moisture brewing across the east coast and cold air pushing from the south bringing a wet, cold and windy end to spring. “It’s going to be cold across the country, more like wintertime,” How said. “We’re seeing maximum temperatures five to 15 degrees below average, and temperatures of 12 and 13 degrees in Canberra ... it’s very unusual for November.”South Korean sensation Squid Game will be back for season two, the show’s creator has signalled. “There’s been so much pressure, so much demand, and so much love,” director and writer Hwang Dong-hyuk said at a red carpet event for the series. “You leave us no choice!” The premise of Squid Game, by now, is well known. A bloody, ultra-stylised critique of capitalism told through a battle royale of characters competing in violent renditions of Korean childhood games, the series skyrocketed to become Netflix’s most-watched show ever. A “mind-boggling” 142m households tuned into the series, Netflix said last month, and it reached the No 1 slot in the streamer’s Top 10 lists in 94 countries. The show is estimated to have generated $900m in value for Netflix, according to leaked internal documents reported by Bloomberg. Squid Game’s first season ended on a cliffhanger note, with Gi-hun (Lee Jung-jae), the victor and sole survivor of the games, resolving to unmask its shady organisers. “I will promise you this,” said Hwang. “Gi-hun will come back. He will do something for the world.” Other details remain up in the air. “I’m in the planning process currently. I do think it’s too early to say when and how [season two is] going to happen.” Netflix, meanwhile, tempered expectations. “A second season is in discussions, but not confirmed yet,” a spokesperson for the company said.Australia’s Nic White has insisted he will not fall for Eddie Jones’s mind games after the England head coach singled the scrum-half out for praise before Saturday’s Test at Twickenham. Jones described the former Exeter scrum-half as “playing exceptionally well” shortly after England’s emphatic win over Tonga last Saturday. Since he took over as England’s head coach, Jones has enjoyed a 100% winning record against his compatriots and is seeking an eighth straight win this weekend. White’s side lost in a dramatic meeting with Scotland at Murrayfield on Sunday. He believes that now Dave Rennie has replaced Jones’s former Randwick teammate Michael Cheika as the Wallabies head coach, the buildup to this week’s match is “less personal”, however, which will allow Australia to avoid some unwanted distractions. “It’s nice for me to give us some praise but Eddie is the king of mind games so I’m certainly not reading into too much of what he says,” White said. “He’s the type of guy you’d love to sit down with a beer and talk rugby and hopefully one day I’ll get that chance. “But he’s the king of English rugby, with the media stuff, I love listening to it but our job is to focus on the things we could have controlled on the weekend and focus on us rather than previous times against England, focusing on what they do. I think it’ll be less personal, for sure. Not that as a playing group, or I certainly didn’t feel it but there was a lot in the media between Eddie and Cheik and I think it’ll be a little bit different this week. It’s a chance for us to focus on what we want to do and how we want to play.” White, who came off the bench when the two sides last met in England’s 40-16 World Cup quarter-final win in 2019, added: “I don’t think any of the edge has gone, not at all. Not after recent times … England are a team we’re always desperate to beat, they’ll always be big brother. Whatever sport, cricket, you name it, if it’s England v Australia the gloves are off.”A mining operation in Solomon Islands owes millions in unpaid taxes and royalties, according to a former senior government figure, with a report showing that the mining companies had not paid taxes or royalties on one-third of their exports over the last five years. According to a summary of a royalty payments report into mining on West Rennell Island from the Central Bank of Solomon Islands, seen by the Guardian, the Asia Pacific Investment Development (APID) company and its subcontractor Bintan Mining Solomon Islands Ltd (BMSI) have paid royalties for only 67 of the 100 shipments of bauxite ore exported during their operation. The report’s executive summary noted that APID and BMSI had been exporting bauxite ore, which is used in the production of aluminium, from West Rennell since 2015. In that time, 100 shipments of bauxite have been exported overseas. “With regards to the royalty share payments, only sixty-seven (67) shipments have been paid to the Central Bank of Solomon Islands (CBSI). The remaining 33 shipments were still outstanding and yet to be paid to the CBSI before it can be distributed to the rightful recipients,” said the report summary. Former director of mines, Nicholas Biliki, estimates the unpaid ore shipments leave roughly SBD80m (AU$13.4m) owing to landowners on Rennell Island, for royalties, community development assistance and landowner payments, as well as around SBD10m (AU$1.65m) owed in taxes and roughly SBD10m owed in payments to rehabilitate the island. Biliki said the alleged failure to pay royalties on one-third of the shipments was a massive loss to Solomon Islands government and resources owners. “APID and its sub-contractor, BMC, [the parent company of BMSI] miserably failed to live up to their obligations. The company [APID] has lots of agreements with the landowners and lots of money has been owed to them. Also, the government has lost taxes from these 33 shipments,” Biliki alleged. As well as issues with missed payments, Biliki claimed that the companies had also failed to rehabilitate areas affected by mining. “I understand more than a half of the areas mined have never been fully rehabilitated,” he said. APID and BMSI have been embroiled in court cases for years that contest which company is responsible for paying royalties and rehabilitating the environment. APID’s mining lease was cancelled in mid-October 2020 when Biliki was director of mines. APID has brought legal proceedings against the Solomon Islands government disputing this cancellation. “Though we cancelled the operation, the company has a legal obligation to clean up its mess before leaving,” he said. One of the Rennell landowners, Jimmy Festus, said some resources owners were still waiting for their dues. “Our waiting seemed to have no end … The sad reality we are currently facing is that we have no place for gardening,” he said. Another landowner, Steward Baiabe, told the Guardian that he had seen records of their bauxite shipments at the ministry of mines. “I was in Honiara last month following up with the company for our shipments. Unfortunately, they have no offices in Honiara, so I went to the ministry of mines to enquire about the shipments. I was told by a mines officer that we have 33 shipments yet to be paid to the government and landowners.” Baiabe called on the government to get the company to pay what they are alleged to owe. “The government must be serious on addressing this issue.” In response to questions put to BMSI by the Guardian, a lawyer representing the company said: “We are unable to comment … due to pending proceedings before the high court of Solomon Islands. The most we can say is that the informations and allegations supplied may not be accurate and may contain misleading or misstated informations.” The lawyer did respond to requests by the Guardian to clarify which information or allegations he was referring to. Chris Vehe, permanent secretary of the ministry of mines, energy and rural electrification, confirmed there were inconsistencies in the money received for this mining operation and the number of shipments that took place. “There are inconsistencies with reporting and a good number of shipments have not been kept track [of]. Mines officials were the ones responsible for record keeping and tracking of the shipments. Only the director of mines like Mr Biliki and the Central Bank of Solomon Islands would definitely know of the details of the shipments. But yes, my office is aware of these inconsistencies.” Vehe said the government would investigate the matter if they were to get hold of all the records of shipments, adding that the operation was a complicated one. “It’s been messed up from its very beginning.” The governor of Solomon Islands’ central bank has previously said that while exempt from paying export taxes, Bintan Mining Company have made some payments to the government, contributing SBD$142m (US$17.8m) in foreign exchange in 2020 and $131m (US$16.4m) in 2019. The governor did not respond to requests for comment for this story. Bauxite mining on Rennell Island has been controversial since it first began, with landowners and some officials estimating that since 2014 up to 50% of the bauxite-rich soil in West Rennell has been exported. In February 2019, Rennell Island was the site of a huge oil spill when a bulk carrier, hired by BMSI, that had been attempting to load bauxite from a nearby mine on the island ran aground on a reef. It spilled 300 tonnes of oil into the pristine bay. The oil spill turned the water black, contaminated fresh water sources, killed marine life, and children reported skin and eye infections in the wake of the disaster. The owner of the vessel, King Trader, and its South Korean insurer, P&amp;I Club, apologised for the spill in March 2019, describing the situation as “totally unacceptable”. In a statement the companies said “although matters of liability are yet to be determined … [we] have expressed deep remorse”. The statement said they were “acutely aware of environmental damage” and were working as quickly as possible to bring the spill under control. According to a report given to the Solomon Islands government in 2019 and leaked to the ABC, the oil spill caused the direct loss of more than 10,000 square metres of reef and more than 4,000 square metres of lagoon habitat, and economic losses of up to AU$50m. The report said the site could take up to 130 years to recover. APID did not respond to questions put to them by the Guardian.The federal government is attempting to introduce new “super-secret” evidence against Bernard Collaery in the Timor-Leste spying case, prompting fury from Collaery and warnings from a supreme court judge that it may cause a “perpetual vortex” of delay and secrecy. Collaery, a barrister charged for his alleged role in exposing Australia’s bugging of Timor-Leste, won a major victory last month, when the Australia Capital Territory’s court of appeal overturned orders shrouding much of his looming trial in secrecy. The court found the risk posed to national security by hearing the case in public was minimal, while open justice was crucial in deterring “political prosecutions”, among other things. On Wednesday, however, lawyers for attorney general Michaelia Cash told the ACT supreme court that they wanted to introduce “updated” evidence about the national security risks posed by hearing aspects of the Collaery case openly. They argued the national security situation had changed significantly in the 20 months that it has taken for Collaery’s appeal to be heard and resolved. The government now wants to produce new “court-only evidence” – evidence only the judge can see, and not Collaery – on the security risks. It wants to appoint its own special counsel, paid for by the commonwealth, to examine the material on behalf of Collaery. Collaery’s barrister, Christopher Ward, SC, criticised the move as a “carte-blanche” attempt to reopen the case by leading fresh evidence. “It’s described gently as being updated evidence, but it’s fresh evidence, your honour,” he said. The process that the commonwealth want to take to get the new evidence before the court would take months and may trigger another appeal, extending the timetable further. Justice David Mossop questioned whether there would ever be an end to the case, if the attorney general wanted to continually produce new evidence updating the court on new developments in national security. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Is there any prospect of this matter ever being completed? Or will we be stuck in a perpetual vortex of updating?” he said. Outside court, Collaery slammed the move, saying he was wholly opposed to the commonwealth relying on new “super-secret evidence” that was kept from him and his lawyers. “This takes the commonwealth’s hypocritical obsession with secrecy to new heights when one considers recent events,” he said. “I strongly object to the court being given and relying on evidence we can’t see. It’s a shameful mockery of open justice.” The commonwealth will now make an application to reopen the case and lead the new evidence. Human Rights Law Centre senior lawyer Kieran Pender said secret evidence, which is kept from the person on trial, has “no place in our legal system”. “The court of appeal warned that secret trials undermine public confidence in the court system and enable political prosecutions,” he said. “The attorney general is now seeking to provide secret evidence to the ACT supreme court, to insist that the trial should be held in secret, despite the court of appeal’s judgment saying otherwise.” Collaery is charged over his alleged role in disclosing information about an intelligence operation targeting Timor-Leste, an impoverished ally, during oil and gas negotiations in 2004. He and his client, former intelligence officer Witness K, helped Timor-Leste take a case against Australia to the international courts, where they argued it had negotiated in bad faith due to the spying. It eventually struck a fairer deal with Australia over the oil and gas reserves in the Timor Sea.In a victory for the northern spotted owl, the Biden administration has struck down a Trump-era plan that would have removed more than 3.4m acres of critical habitat for the imperiled bird and opened the old-growth forests where it lives to logging. The population of the small chocolate-brown owl, which lives in forested areas in Washington, Oregon and northern California, has been in decline for decades and has already lost roughly 70% of its habitat. Its numbers have plummeted 77% in Washington state, 68% in Oregon and close to half in California, according to studies by the US Geological Survey, and biologists fear that further habitat reduction would put them on the path to extinction. A controversial decision made by Trump’s interior secretary just five days before leaving office was widely viewed as a parting gift to the timber industry. The Fish and Wildlife Service has since found that there was “insufficient rationale and justification” to reduce the threatened owl’s habitat. Under the new plan, roughly 204,000 acres – approximately 2% of the 9.6m acres designated as habitat for the owls in 2012 – will be made available for development while more than 3m will be restored and protected. The agency claims the exclusion of those lands from habitat designation will enable federal land managers to meet obligations to the logging industry and help limit catastrophic wildfires that continue to threaten forests in the west. “The exclusions we are proposing now will allow fuels management and sustainable timber harvesting to continue while supporting northern spotted owl recovery,” said Martha Williams, principal deputy director of the Fish and Wildlife Service, in a statement issued when the rule revision was proposed in July. Wildlife advocates, government agencies and the timber industry have sparred for decades over the northern spotted owl. Federal habitat protections imposed in 2012 were meant to avert the bird’s extinction. They have also been blamed for a logging slowdown that has devastated some rural communities. The logging industry has contested the revision, arguing that more thinning and management of protected forests is necessary to prevent wildfires, which devastated 560 square miles (1,450 square kilometers) of spotted owl habitat last fall. Most of that area is no longer considered viable for the birds. In the agency’s analysis of the rule-change, officials note that timber harvesting doesn’t lessen the risk of severe burns, writing that fuel reduction treatments – where smaller, less lucrative vegetation is strategically culled from the landscape – should instead be used to restore forest health. Federal land managers can still conduct these treatments in designated critical habitat, the agency concluded. Timber interests also say some of the land set aside under Tuesday’s announcement isn’t actually spotted owl habitat or is broken up into parcels too small to support the owl. As such, the smaller habitat designation issued under Trump was “legally and scientifically valid”, said Nick Smith, a spokesman for the American Forest Resource Council, a group that represents about 100 manufacturing and logging operations in five western US states. “The federal government cannot set aside critical habitat unless it is habitat for the species. That’s the critical concern,” he said. But the federal biologists found significant issues with the science used to push the previous rule through. David Bernhardt, Trump’s interior secretary, and Aurelia Skipwith, the former Fish and Wildlife service director, dismissed their concerns and underestimated the threat of extinction, according to documents reviewed by the Associated Press. Democratic lawmakers from Oregon, Washington and California in February called for an investigation into the removal of spotted owl protections, citing “potential scientific meddling” by Trump appointees. Bernhardt has defended his handling of the matter, telling AP that Congress gave the interior secretary authority to exclude areas from protection. Environmental advocates championed the move, but continue to have concerns that the agency would allow any amount of logging on the land. “We’re glad the Biden administration repealed the ridiculous and politically driven decision to strip 3m acres from the spotted owl’s critical habitat” said Noah Greenwald, the endangered species director at the Center for Biological Diversity. “It needs all the habitat it can get if it’s going to make it.” But, he called the exclusions that remain, “disappointing”. “The Biden administration is condoning the cutting of old growth forests on BLM land,” he said. “It is definitely not what the owl needs and it’s not what our climate needs.” Associated Press contributed reportingThe New South Wales treasurer, Matt Kean, has taken a swipe at the Morrison government’s new electric vehicle policy, as he unveiled additional funding that sees his state’s investment dwarf the federal commitment. On Wednesday, the day after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, unveiled $178m in new funding for a future fuels fund to build charging stations across Australia, Kean announced an additional $105m to boost uptake of EVs among fleet operators in NSW. The money comes on top of $490m the NSW government has already committed to drive uptake of EVs, which includes initiatives such as waiving stamp duty on electric vehicle purchases and providing subsidies for new purchases. The auction-style initiative, which will open at the end of November, will see operators who are buying at least 10 vehicles at a time asked to submit the incentive amount they would need for them to buy an eligible electric vehicle. The Perrottet government would then cover the difference between the cost of the electric vehicles and comparable combustion engine vehicles. Kean said that about 50% of new car sales in the state were fleet sales – used by taxi companies, rideshare drivers, councils and other organisations – and were traditionally resold within three to four years of purchase. As a result, Kean said he expected the initiative would see more EVs sold as second-hand cars and make more affordable options more widely available. The Electric Vehicle Council chief executive, Behyad Jafari, who appeared at the announcement with Kean, said he was hopeful electric vehicles being sold by fleet operators would “flood” the secondhand market in coming years. It takes NSW’s investment in driving electric vehicle uptake to $595m, while the federal government has said it will spend $250m across all states and territories – which includes the $178m funding announced on Tuesday. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Kean has also confirmed the NSW government has signed up to a United Nations COP26 declaration for countries and car manufacturers to transition to net zero emissions cars by 2040. Kean believes that by 2030, half of all new car sales in NSW will be electric vehicles. In evaluating the federal government’s plan, Kean welcomed the initiatives but said “they can obviously do a lot more”. “This is a revolution which is coming whether Barnaby Joyce likes it or not. The reality is that the right-hand car markets are changing to electric,” he said. In an interview with ABC’s 7.30 on Tuesday, Kean said there were several issues the Morrison government’s policy ignored, and pointed out that “the funding they’ve put on the table doesn’t even match the funding that we’ve put here just for the state of NSW”. “We think the federal government’s initiatives are good, but they can go a lot further. I’d encourage the federal government to be looking at doing things like providing direct support for people who want to purchase an EV.” “There’s a range of taxes and charges that could be waived that would make EVs more accessible for families and businesses right across the country.” Kean also said “the biggest thing the federal government can do is deal with the issue of fuel standards”. “Australia has some of the worst fuel standards anywhere in the world. Our fuel standards are worse than China and they’re worse than India and what that means is that Australia is becoming the dumping ground for the vehicles the rest of the world doesn’t want. “That’s not only bad for the environment, but it means that consumers are getting less choice and they are paying more at the bowser. That’s not acceptable,” Kean said. “You can’t sit by and hope for the best. You’ve got to put in place the policies and show the leadership required to roll that technology out at scale.” Kean also made reference to Morrison’s change of tone on EVs, from claiming that the then Labor leader Bill Shorten’s policy would “end the weekend” ahead of the 2019 election to appearing to embrace the technology on Tuesday. On Wednesday, Kean said: “We don’t just think EVs are going to revolutionise the weekend, we think they’re going to revolutionise every day of the week.” Kean also reiterated that EVs had now been granted special permission to drive in transit lanes in NSW as a further incentive to drive uptake.The House select committee investigating the 6 January insurrection at the US Capitol issued further subpoenas on Tuesday to 10 Trump administration officials, including the former senior adviser Stephen Miller and press secretary Kayleigh McEnany, expanding their inquiry into Donald Trump’s involvement in circumstances surrounding the attack. The subpoenas demanding documents and testimony are focused squarely on activities involving the White House and come a day after the select committee subpoenaed other top Trump lieutenants who aimed to undercut the results of the 2020 election while working from the Willard hotel in Washington. House investigators targeted 10 senior Trump White House aides on Tuesday, most notably Miller, McEnany, former vice-president Mike Pence’s national security adviser Keith Kellogg and the then White House personnel director John McEntee. The select committee also subpoenaed the former operations coordinator for the Oval Office, Molly Michael, Trump’s White House deputy chief of staff, Christopher Liddell, senior DoJ counsel Kenneth Klukowski, as well as top aides Cassidy Hutchinson, Ben Williamson and Nicholas Luna. The Mississippi Democratic congressman Bennie Thompson, who chairs the select committee, said in a statement that he authorized the subpoenas to the Trump officials in order to “know precisely what role the former president and his aides played in efforts to stop the counting of the electoral votes”. Thompson added the select committee also wanted the 10 Trump officials to help inform whether anyone outside the White House was involved in attempting to overturn the results of the 2020 election. “We believe the witnesses have relevant information.” Extremist Trump supporters broke into the US Capitol on 6 January ostensibly to try to prevent congress certifying Joe Biden’s victory over Trump in the presidential election the previous November. Most of the subpoenas appear aimed at uncovering details about how Trump pressured Pence to stop the certification of Joe Biden’s election win at the 6 January joint session of Congress, and whether it was connected to the Capitol attack. Trump had argued in a court filing that materials requested by the committee were covered by a legal doctrine known as executive privilege that protects the confidentiality of some White House communications. He requested an injunction blocking the National Archives, a federal agency that holds his White House records, from complying with the committee’s document requests. The committee has said it needs the requested materials to understand the role Trump may have played in fomenting the riot. The select committee said investigators subpoenaed Miller since he pushed state legislators to send alternative slates of electors as part of an attempt to return Trump to office, and a wider effort to spread lies about voter fraud that had been debunked by the justice department and others who have declared 2020 the most secure election in US history. House investigators subpoenaed McEnany and McEntee given they were both in close proximity to Trump on 6 January as he watched the attack unfold on TV, the select committee said, and could shed light onto Trump’s actions during the insurrection. The subpoena for Kellogg, a top aide to Pence, came in part because he was reportedly a direct witness to a January 2021 meeting with Trump and White House counsel Pat Cipollone when the former president told Pence not to certify Biden’s win. Kellogg, the select committee said, was also present in the White House during the Capitol attack, and reportedly has “direct information about the former president’s statements about, and reaction to, the insurrection”. The 10 Trump officials targeted in the latest round of subpoenas reflect a new strategy adopted by House investigators in recent weeks to target aides in Trump’s direct orbit, as well as their aides in turn, who are less able to attempt to claim executive privilege and stonewall the inquiry. Then White House chief of staff Mark Meadows may have a potential claim to executive privilege, but if he had told Williamson, his top aide, what he knew about any involvement by Trump in relation to the events that unfolded on 6 January, Williamson would be more likely to have to provide that information to investigators. Williamson did not respond on Tuesday to requests for comment from the Guardian. Other aides have been subpoenaed in relation to activities such as involvement on behalf of Trump in spreading lies and pressuring election officials about unfounded election fraud and being present at meetings about overturning Biden’s victory. The select committee gave all 10 Trump officials until 23 November to comply with the document requests in the subpoena, with deposition dates scheduled through December. It was not immediately clear on Tuesday whether any of the officials would cooperate. The news of the fresh subpoenas came hours after a federal judge denied a request from Trump for an injunction aimed at temporarily blocking the National Archives from releasing records dating from his administration. Trump’s legal team had filed an emergency motion late on Monday asking the US district court judge Tanya Chutkan for the injuction, but it was refused. Late on Tuesday, Chutkan ruled that that hundreds of pages of White House records from the Trump administration could be turned over to the investigating committee. This story was amended on 9 November 2021 to clarify Chutkan’s order and focus on the subpoenas as the more recent and significant news.Prince Harry has said the word “Megxit”, used by the British press to describe the decision by him and his wife Meghan to quit their royal duties, was a misogynistic term. He said the word was an example of online and media hatred. “Maybe people know this and maybe they don’t, but the term Megxit was or is a misogynistic term, and it was created by a troll, amplified by royal correspondents, and it grew and grew and grew into mainstream media. But it began with a troll,” Harry said. He did not elaborate. Harry made the comments while speaking on a panel called the Internet Lie Machine, organised by US magazine Wired, at which he said he told Twitter boss Jack Dorsey the day before the Capitol riots on 6 January that “his platform was allowing a coup to be staged”. “That email was sent the day before and then it happened and I haven’t heard from him since,” Harry said. Harry and Meghan, formally known as the Duke and Duchess of Sussex, moved to California last year to lead a more independent life. Harry has said that part of the reason for their departure was the racist treatment of Meghan, whose mother is black and whose father is white, by the British tabloid media. A study released in October by social media analytics service Bot Sentinel identified 83 accounts on Twitter that it said were responsible for 70% of the hateful content and misinformation aimed at Meghan and Harry. Referring to the study, Harry said on Tuesday that “perhaps the most disturbing part of this was the number of British journalists who were interacting with them and amplifying the lies. But they regurgitate these lies as truth.” Harry and Meghan have since campaigned against social media negativity that they say is affecting people’s mental health. On Tuesday, Harry called misinformation a “global humanitarian crisis”. Speaking of his mother, Princess Diana who died in a Paris car crash while being chased by paparazzi, Harry added: “I learned from a very early age that the incentives of publishing are not necessarily aligned with the incentives of truth. “I know the story all too well. I lost my mother to this self-manufactured rabidness, and obviously I’m determined not to lose the mother to my children to the same thing.” With ReutersJust over half of Britons did not know that 6 million Jewish people were murdered during the Holocaust, and less than a quarter thought that 2 million or fewer were killed, a new survey has found. The study also found that 67% of UK respondents wrongly believed that the government allowed all or some Jewish immigration, when in fact the British government shut the door to Jewish immigration at the outbreak of the war. When respondents were asked about the Kindertransport, an initiative set up between 1938 and 1939 to rescue nearly 10,000 Jewish child refugees and bring them to Britain, 76% said they did not know what the historic effort was. The survey, commissioned by the Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany, also found that the overwhelming majority of respondents (89%) said they had definitely heard about the Holocaust, and about three-quarters knew that it involved the mass murder of Jewish people. A majority of UK respondents (57%) also believe that fewer people seem to care about the Holocaust today than they used to, and 56% believe that something like the Holocaust could happen again today. Most respondents in all four nations in the UK – Wales (66%), Northern Ireland (61%), England (55%), and Scotland (54%) – believe something like the Holocaust could happen again today. When polled about education, 91% of respondents in Northern Ireland believe it is important to continue to teach about the Holocaust. The numbers were similar in the other regions, – 88% in England and Wales, and 86% in Scotland. The organisation carried out a similar study last year on young Americans between the ages of 18 to 39 and found 48% could not name a single concentration camp or ghetto established during the second world war. The figure was slightly better for UK respondents, with 32% unable to name a concentration camp or ghetto, including Auschwitz. The study surveyed 2,000 UK adults aged 18 and over between 29 September and 17 October 2021. Gideon Taylor, the president of the Conference on Jewish Material Claims Against Germany, said: “We are very concerned to see the profound gaps in knowledge of the Holocaust in this and in previous studies including about events connected to the UK. Yet, it is very powerful to see the overwhelming majority of UK respondents say the Holocaust should be taught in schools.” “Eighty-eight percent believe that it is important to continue to teach the Holocaust, in part so it does not happen again. This is where we need to focus our energy. Education will not only fill the gaps in Holocaust knowledge, but it will also make for better, more empathetic citizens.” It came as new figures from the Office for Students showed that 95 UK universities have signed up to the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA) working definition of antisemitism. This is thought to represent a considerable increase over the past year, after research from the Union of Jewish Students published in September 2020 found that just 28 universities had adopted the definition. Last year, the former education secretary Gavin Williamson threatened sanctions against universities that failed to adopt the IHRA definition. The definition has stoked controversy among academics, some of whom worry that its conflation of anti-Jewish prejudice with political debate over Israel and Palestine could stifle academic freedom.The former lab director of Theranos has testified that Elizabeth Holmes gave “implausible” excuses for apparent failures in the company’s tests and personally pushed back against his concerns about its signature blood testing machines. Kingshuk Das testified on Tuesday in the high-profile case as the government heads into its 10th week of arguments against the former CEO, who faces accusations that Theranos knowingly defrauded clients and investors about its capabilities. Speaking in the courthouse in San Jose, California, Das recounted how his discovery of unusual test results met with resistance from the Theranos founder. In one particularly telling incident, Das said he found tests were turning up prostate-specific antigens for female patients. Holmes offered an explanation that a rare form of breast cancer could be behind the irregular results – an excuse Das said he said “seemed implausible”. “I found these instruments to be unsuitable for clinical use,” he said of the company’s proprietary Edison devices. Das joined Theranos in 2016 amid mounting concerns about the company’s products, taking over as its third lab director in several years. He testified that initially his “sole responsibility” at the company was responding to a lengthy report from health regulators that found significant deficiencies in its labs. That audit, conducted by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, found that Theranos was not in compliance with standards for lab certification and that the company lacked a process for correcting quality control issues, according to evidence presented in court on Tuesday. Das testified that based on his findings he encouraged Holmes to void tests from the Edison devices conducted in 2014 and 2015, concluding: “These instruments were not performing from the very beginning.” Holmes agreed to void 50,000 tests but pushed back against critiques of the devices themselves, arguing the faulty results were due to quality-control lab failures rather than inaccurate machines. Lawyers for Holmes had fought to keep the damning report from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services out of evidence but were overruled. The 121-page report came after a November 2015 audit and concluded the test deficiencies presented “a threat to patient health and safety”. Under cross-examination by lawyers for Holmes, Das testified Theranos was working “in good faith” to improve the lab practices and that Holmes was supportive of those efforts. His testimony will continue in court on Wednesday. Federal prosecutors have continued in week 10 of the trial to present their case against Holmes, who faces a potential sentence of 20 years in prison. Das’s court appearance comes after testimony from two other former lab directors as well as a number of other witnesses, including the former secretary of defense and early Theranos investor James Mattis, patients who received faulty tests, and other ex-Theranos employees. The trial is expected to run into December.The front door clicks shut and the night is on a dipped headlight, half a circle of moon hanging in an overcast sky. Clouds scud across its face like wood smoke, light sheep’s wool wisps alternating with darker shades, as if the moon were fleetingly cloaked in a thick black muslin veil. Two nights ago it played peekaboo, disappearing for a few seconds at a time into murky clouds that presaged rain, before winking into life again. Tonight, however, it is a constant, despite the interruptions. Just as most of us are oblivious to its role as the instigator of tides, so we have lost our connection with the moon’s illuminating presence. How many even recall that it’s also out by day, sometimes a complete disk against a blue sky, outshone by the sun and greyed out like an unavailable option on a computer screen? Full moon, third quarter, new moon, first quarter – each phase passes by in suburban irrelevance above the fixed, unchanging stars of our street lamps, and the full-beam snarl of home security lights, blinking on with a reproachful glare when I innocently wander past on a public highway. In a candle-snuffing breeze, I head far out into the fields, away from all that is loud and lurid, and cosy up to the fringes of a riverside wood. Shrunken pupils widen in delight and eyes, strained by electric lights, feel the balm of the moon’s diffuse and gentle luminosity. Alone but not lonely, I turn this way and that to marvel at plants, trees and bushes in five hundred shades of grey. And how this moonlight reflects nature’s glory. The sky in a pool of water, the undersides of slender willow leaves shining out, their shapes defined, contrasting with the dull, matt upper surfaces, whose outlines are hard to trace. White poplar leaves scattered over the path are there or not, depending on whether they landed sunny side up. And the trunk of a single birch tree presents great sheets of light bark, startlingly bright. In just a few minutes I have been able to rediscover the mooniverse. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryCentral Melbourne has the potential to generate three-quarters of its electricity needs from solar power, according to new modelling. By integrating more solar panels into roofs, walls and windows, the City of Melbourne could generate 2,354 gigawatt hours of energy a year – equivalent to 74% of its current electricity consumption, the Monash University research suggests. Prof Jacek Jasieniak, a co-author of the study, said the capacity of solar panels currently installed in central Melbourne was only a fraction of what was possible. “There’s a massive opportunity to build photovoltaics into a city, and Melbourne CBD … could be, as a collective, a distributed energy powerhouse,” he said. The modelling focused on the City of Melbourne, a 37.4 sq km municipal area that includes the central business district, mid-rise developments in the inner-city suburbs of Carlton and South Yarra, and the industrial area of Port Melbourne. Rooftop panels accounted for the vast majority – 88% – of the potential solar energy the area could generate. Generating 2,354 gigawatt hours annually was “an ambitious target,” Jasieniak said. “That’s assuming that you’re getting pretty high-efficiency devices and you’re covering about 80% of the rooftops that are available.” To produce that amount of energy, Jasieniak estimated several million solar panels would need to be installed in central Melbourne. The researchers used 3D models that simulated how much sunlight would illuminate buildings during the day. The modelling took into account seasonal variations in the direction of the sun, the shadows cast by buildings, and building properties such as rooftop space and window-to-wall ratios. Jasieniak said the challenge was that many buildings have multiple tenants “and it’s not clear whose responsibility is it to ensure that there are maximised photovoltaics on those buildings”. The study made calculations based on the efficiency of PERC photovoltaic cells, an existing rooftop solar technology developed by University of New South Wales researcher Martin Green. It also assumed that solar panels would be integrated into building facades and windows, generating 8% and 4% of the calculated energy respectively. “True building-integrated photovoltaics replaces the wall,” Jasieniak said. While the technology to do that exists, he said, “it hasn’t been done at scale” on buildings in Australia yet. Solar windows – photovoltaic cells that generate energy but are transparent like glass – have been less commercially viable to date, because of their low efficiency of only 2% to 3%, Jasieniak said. “We’re working on technologies that increase efficiency by a factor of four or five.” His research group Exciton Science is collaborating with the CSIRO to develop solar windows made of a crystal material known as perovskite. Producing solar electricity close to where it is used minimises energy losses during transmission. “It needs to be a distributed network,” Jasieniak said, meaning it is spread across the city. He said there needs to be photovoltaics in fields to support areas where high density or solar integration was not possible. “You also want it to be in cities and in buildings.” Future building design could take sunlight and shadowing into account to maximise the potential of solar power, Jasieniak said. “In Melbourne, you could imagine that you could have slightly higher buildings towards the southern part of the city, so they can capture as much of that northerly sun as possible.”A Hong Kong newspaper executive on trial for national security offences had his bail denied in part because of comments made by Dominic Raab after his arrest, which prosecutors cited as evidence of a “close association” with foreign political groups. The ruling handed down on 5 November against Cheung Kim-hung, the former chief executive of Apple Daily’s parent company Next Digital Media, also cited the US awarding of a congressional medal to Cheung and his colleagues, and a statement by the US state department. Cheung is facing charges of conspiracy to commit foreign collusion alongside the company’s founder Jimmy Lai, and editor-in-chief Ryan Law Wai-kwong. Convictions for national security crimes “of a grave nature” attract sentences of 10 years to life in prison. Corporate entities Apple Daily Limited, Apple Daily Printing Limited and AD Internet Limited, are also on trial. The defendants were arrested during a police raid on the Apple Daily newsroom and executives’ homes in June. They are accused of conspiring to use the outlet to collude with foreign entities and seek sanctions, blockades, or other hostile activities against the Hong Kong and Chinese governments, endangering national security. In denying bail, Judge Susana D’Almada Remedios cited prosecutors’ claims that Cheung had “a close association with the USA and foreign political groups as evidenced by their prompt reactions condemning law enforcement actions against the applicant and the condemnation of [the national security law] and enforcement actions against Apple Daily”. The ruling quoted comments made by Raab, the UK foreign secretary, in the aftermath of Apple Daily’s forced closure and the arrest of the executives. Raab had said the paper’s closure was a “tool to curtail freedoms and punish dissent – rather than keep public order”. It also cited a US state department statement calling the use of the national security law to suppress journalism a “serious and negative step” that undermined Hong Kong’s autonomy and the rights and freedoms of residents. Raab and the state department were among numerous international government figures and organisations as well as legal and human rights groups to have criticised Hong Kong’s crackdown on journalism and Apple Daily in particular. The paper, run by Lai, had become a vocal supporter of the pro-democracy movement and strident critic of Beijing and the Carrie Lam-led Hong Kong government and the city’s police force. In her reasons, Remedios also cited prosecutor claims that Cheung maintained business connections to Apple Daily in Taiwan, which they said “posted articles for making unfounded allegations against the HKSAR government and the Hong Kong police repeatedly”. The national security law reverses the onus of proof regarding bail, requiring defendants to convince the judge they would not “continue to commit acts endangering national security” if released. Remedios found she was “not satisfied that there were sufficient grounds for believing that [Cheung] will not continue to commit acts endangering national security if bail is granted to him”. There has been no trial or legal finding of such alleged acts being committed. This article was amended on 10 November to correct the name of Judge Susana D’Almada RemediosPriti Patel has been warned by government lawyers that she is likely to lose a legal challenge if she implements plans to turn around small boats in the Channel, leaked documents show. Counsel has told the home secretary that the odds of successfully defending a challenge in the courts against the lawfulness of plans to send vessels carrying people back to France is “less than 30%”. The disclosure, from internal Home Office papers, comes despite Patel’s continued public insistence the tactic is legal and will be deployed. Border Force staff are increasingly concerned that refugees are risking their lives by taking to boats later in the year. On Wednesday last week 853 people crossed the Channel – a record. Documents circulated inside the Home Office in September also show that: • the attorney general’s office has told the Home Office it should expect a legal challenge on the “turnaround” tactic. • any challenge could be “reputationally damaging” and force the policy to be suspended for months pending any court ruling. • that a legal challenge would force the Home Office to disclose other potentially embarrassing documents. The Home Office does not comment on leaked documents or legal advice. But departmental sources insist that the tactic could still be used under the right circumstances. Under the heading “Legal Challenge”, one document said the government has been advised that a legal challenge against the lawfulness, or vires, of the turnaround tactics is likely to be successful. “Whilst confirmation that the tactics are lawful would be very welcome, legal advice is that a ruling against the government is the more likely outcome in relation to vires. Counsel has advised that the prospect of successfully defending a claim on vires is less than 30%,” it said. The attorney general’s office has advised that the Home Office should prepare for a legal challenge, the document said. It explained: “The attorney general said the government should expect a legal challenge on the tactic. A challenge could be brought by the representatives of any migrant subject to the tactic or by a migrant pressure group to the policy itself. “While the prospects of successful challenge are highest in relation to vires, a challenge would likely be brought on grounds relating to proportionality and compliance with the government’s obligations under the Human Rights Act.” The document said any legal challenge would be “high profile and require wide-ranging disclosure in relation to all the grounds raised, with the potential for reputational damage”. It continued: “A successful legal challenge would be reputationally damaging so this needs to be factored into the presentational consideration. The tactics may have to be suspended pending the outcome of the court’s decision resulting in months of delay.” The Home Office would have a greater hope of defending the tactic if legal challenges focus on the “reasonableness” of the decisions to apply the policy, the document said. Patel first announced her plans to turn around boats in September, despite warnings from the French authorities, unions and refugee charities that it could endanger lives. At the Tory conference last month, Patel again said she would move forward on the plan to turn back boats after consulting Boris Johnson. Appearing before the House of Lords last month, Patel was asked by Baroness Chakrabarti if she had received legal advice regarding the pushback of boats. Patel replied: “There is a legal basis for it.” Unions have publicly questioned whether the tactic will ever be used, saying it would require international maritime law to be rewritten. So far, there have been no reports of the tactic being used. Sources from the department said Border Force already have existing powers to intercept boats. Dan O’Mahoney, clandestine Channel threat commander, said: “Migrants making these dangerous crossings are putting their lives at risk and it is vital we do everything we can to prevent them and break the business model of the criminal gangs exploiting people. “As part of our response it is important we have a maritime deterrent in the Channel and Border Force officers are authorised to use safe and legal options.”Tory MPs have been writing “sponsored content” online for the Betting and Gaming Council, a lobbying group campaigning for the gambling industry. They include Jack Brereton, MP for Stoke-on-Trent South and a government aide who wrote an article published on the ConservativeHome website on Monday urging ministers to make sure the gambling review does “nothing to put the industry’s competitiveness at risk”. It describes Bet365, a gambling company, in glowing terms and praises the “huge economic contribution that the betting giant makes to our constituencies” including “high-skilled, good quality jobs” and charity donations. “It should also not be forgotten that Bet365 and its founders are the highest taxpayers in the UK, paying some £614.6m to the Treasury in 2019/20 – money which will have helped fund vital public services like health and education, not just in Stoke-on-Trent but across the whole country,” it adds. The politicians were not paid for their articles but the Betting and Gaming Council paid the ConservativeHome website through an advertising agency for the space online and they are labelled “sponsored”. One of the Tory MPs, Philip Davies, MP for Shipley, wrote an article labelled “sponsored by the Betting and Gaming Council” that appeared on ConservativeHome in April. In June, he declared a ticket and hospitality box at Ascot Races with a value of £1,400 paid for by the Betting and Gaming Council, in the MPs’ register of interests. He had no comment when approached by the Guardian. But is understood he was not paid for the article and did not realise the article was “sponsored content” when he wrote it. Other Tory MPs who wrote sponsored content for the Betting and Gaming Council include Greg Smith, MP for Buckingham, who wrote a piece headlined “Betting shops are helping the high street get back on its feet” in June. His spokesperson said it was unpaid. Mark Jenkinson, the MP for Workington, wrote a sponsored piece in July, saying he had “grave concerns about calls by some anti-gambling campaigners that limits should be placed on how much individuals should be allowed to bet”. Jenkinson also declared a ticket and hospitality box at Ascot Races in June, with a value of £1,400, paid for by the Betting and Gaming Council. He did not respond to requests for comment. Brereton also did not respond to requests for comment. Bet365 is a major employer in his constituency. Matt Zarb-Cousin, of the Campaign for Fairer Gambling, said: “Gambling reform is a very popular agenda and reforms that we and others are pushing for have overwhelming public support. You really have to question why it would be in an MP’s interest to advocate for an incredibly unpopular sector that is resisting these types of reforms.” The government is due to publish proposals for the reform of gambling regulation early next year. Labour MP Carolyn Harris, who chairs a cross-party group examining gambling harms, has called for reform of the “national disgrace” of advertising rules around gambling. “Until we completely overhaul their access to advertising platforms, we will continue to expose children and vulnerable adults to this unrelenting attack,” she said this week after it emerged that gambling companies are among the heaviest advertisers on radio during “school run” hours when millions of children are in cars. A ConservativeHome spokesperson said: “Just like the Guardian, ConservativeHome carries advertising, which helps to provide high quality journalism for free to millions of readers each year.” It is understood ConservativeHome does not commission sponsored pieces but they are booked by advertisers via an agency in common with other media sources. The Betting and Gaming Council said the MPs were not paid for the content but the body paid for the space on ConservativeHome.Yes, 100 companies are responsible for 71% of global greenhouse gas emissions. But that doesn’t change the fact that individuals are desperate to make a difference in the climate emergency. Nearly 70% of respondents to this year’s Waitrose Food and Drink report, a solid snapshot of comfortable Britain’s consumption and concerns, said their food’s carbon footprint was important to them. But how do we do the right thing for the planet when it’s so hard to work out what that is – and the options often seem time-consuming or expensive? Despite the self-evident urgency – and our desire to do better – it can seem desperately confusing. Pure “climatarianism” is feasible: in 2012, Jennie Macdiarmid, professor of sustainable nutrition at the University of Aberdeen, helped devise a theoretical nutritionally balanced diet that would reduce your carbon footprint by 90%: pasta, peas, fried onions, brassicas, sesame seeds, dry wholegrain breakfast cereal and sweets. That would still apply now, Macdiarmid says, but she emphasises this kind of computer-generated solution is not remotely attainable. “We’re never going to change if it’s so unappealing,” she says. So is there a way to eat that is personally, as well as planetarily, sustainable? I spent a week trying to find out. Day 1: plant v meat If we could harness the seemingly limitless energy expended on this particular debate we could surely hit Paris agreement goals: a much-shared, disputed, graphic from Cop26 claiming a vegan croissant is worse than a bacon roll is the latest iteration. Should you go vegan? You may be unsurprised to hear I’m still unsure. What is clear is that we certainly need to eat less meat and dairy. Imperial College’s climate change centre, the Grantham Institute, includes this as one of its “nine things you can do about climate change”, which is good enough for me. On Giki Zero, a personal impact calculator, moving from “eat everything” to a “mainly plant based” diet saves 949kg of carbon annually. Co-founder James Hand, who was responsible for the data crunching behind the tool (the methodology is on the site), confirms: “A mainly plant-based or a mainly vegetarian diet does the bulk of the savings. It’s absolutely crystal clear.” Patrick Holden, director of the Sustainable Food Trust, organic pioneer and a regenerative farmer since the 1970s, views things differently. “This mantra of moving to a plant-based diet is just plain wrong. We should ask which plants we should eat, and which animals and animal products.” Industrial chicken, pork and dairy production, Holden argues, are only possible because of environmentally unsustainable grain monocultures; stop these and cheap, polluting meat production would end. I’m mainly “plant-based” already, but cheat for pizza (vegan mozzarella makes me miserable) and eat my own hens’ eggs, because they have nicer lives than me. Nevertheless, I have questions: is the Tetra Pak litre of pea “milk” I use in tea and never finish better than sharing my son’s organic, glass-bottled semi-skimmed? Are vegan convenience foods actually climate-friendly (or indeed healthy)? It’s something Macdiarmid has been assessing in recent research. “Plant-based foods have a sort of halo image,” she says “But look at some of the ultra-processed foods: they are high in fat, salt and sugar. From an environmental perspective, there’s extra processing, and if we’re using lots of monocrops, a lot more palm oil, we’re losing diversity.” I need to lose the processed vegan ready-meals and do more cooking. I start with hasselback potatoes, fried cabbage and onions, plus a marble-sized egg from Faustina, my only laying hen. It’s not perfect: my carnivorous family insist on adding bacon to their meals. Meanwhile, the dog carefully picks out and discards the sprinkling of Bug Bakes insect-based dog food I try to hide in his usual dinner. Day 2: seasonal Eating what is growing naturally limits or eliminates the need for artificial heat, light, fertiliser and pesticide. November, however, is not the easiest time to do that in the UK. A “what’s in season?” chart confirms what I already know: potatoes and brassicas dominate (there are already rumblings from my cohabitants about “a lot of sprouts”). A few pears and apples are still around – I gather windfalls from a neighbour. Would foraging help? “The winter is always challenging,” says Chris Bax of food foraging enthusiasts Taste the Wild. “But you’ll still find nuts.” I want to make acorn coffee on the strength of his description (“slightly nutty and malty, like the nougat out of a Mars bar”), but find none within walking distance. Chris’s other tip is seaweed. I’m too far from the sea to hunt for delicious-sounding pepper dulse (“like garlic butter, truffley”), but I rummage around a volunteer-planted flowerbed while waiting for the bus. It’s still packed with herbs, and I take a handful for my lentil bolognese. Day 3: local Eliminating driving to food shop is an obvious climate win. “Most of the food miles in the UK come from people driving to and from the supermarket,” says Macdiarmid. That limits my quick shopping to Marks &amp; Spencer; the nearby branch has plenty of British produce but acres of plastic packaging. Perhaps I’m too hung up on that? I choose unwrapped broccoli, then instantly read a tweet from botanist James Wong that says this “potentially doubles food waste”, since it shortens the shelf-life. Luckily, York’s twice-weekly Food Circle market is within walking distance. Food Circle grows its own fruit and veg, and hosts other sustainable regenerative local producers of bread, meat and dairy and more. Shopping there feels blissfully simple and, with the exception of meat, it’s not much more expensive than supermarket organics. The most local food is what you produce yourself, of course. We grew a few vegetables for the first time this year, but all I can find now are five wormy carrots and some tiny peppers, which become part of another fridge-emptying lunch (I’m trying to limit shopping trips). Four out of my five hens are still on egg strike, but I fall, Gollum-like, on every one Faustina produces, eating them before anyone else can. Day 4: food waste In the UK, Andrew Parry of the waste charity Wrap tells me, 36m tonnes of greenhouse gas emission is associated with food that gets thrown away; 70% of that waste happens at home. We have improved (food waste per person dropped by 31% between 2007 and 2018), but must do much more. Wrap provides plentiful resources on its Love Food Hate Waste website , but, as Parry says: “It boils down to people buying what they need, and using what they buy. It’s not very sexy, checking your cupboards, checking your fridge, thinking about what you’re going to eat during the week, thinking about what you can freeze.” He also recommends keeping most fruit in the fridge (“it lasts two weeks longer”) and taking a crash course in date labels. “Far too many people don’t understand the difference between a best-before and a use-by”. I spend an afternoon using up apples in a cake, freezing sad spinach, making a slightly esoteric stir-fry, and a hash of potatoes, onion and the grim kale that came in my vegetable box (“This is animal food,” my French husband declares flatly, but I like it). I enjoy this purposeful bustling, like a Beatrix Potter character preparing for winter, and I know I’ll feel the benefit over the rest of the week, but I have to admit it takes hours. My friend Ann, a lapsed food waste blogger, knows that feeling. She says: “Now I’m a self-employed single parent, I just do not have the time to de-stalk, blanch, chop and stir some bitter kale into a recipe when baby spinach will do the job.” She also says she felt uncomfortable asking individuals to change when industry changes are needed. “Systemic over-purchasing of food by supermarkets will not change in the near future, for example.” I see this myself on the excellent Olio app, which provides a platform for people to offer unwanted food – their own or local businesses’ – to others, for free. Most listings are supermarket overstock, collected and redistributed by Olio’s “food waste heroes”. I collect three bags of clementines from Phoebe, who is spending a chunk of Sunday giving away past-sell-by-date Tesco fruit and vegetables. What doesn’t go on the app, she donates to food banks and refugee aid. I feel so moved by her altruism I tell her she’s “doing the Lord’s work”, which is distinctly weird, but heartfelt. Day 5: eating out We’re having a night away in a remote cottage, but neither my husband nor I is willing to forgo our Friday night pizza. Short of time, I cycle to M&amp;S before we leave, hoping to find relatively unprocessed frozen dough, but have to resort to vegan pizza (with the not-zzarella of sadness). The next morning, we head out for breakfast. Evidence on the footprint of restaurants versus home cooking is limited – too many variables – but a 2019 Spanish study comparing a single meal concluded eating out is worse. A vegetarian full English is probably OK, emissions wise, but I don’t fancy it, so end up eating dry toast and Marmite. However, I hit carnivorous climatarian gold on the way out: the farm shop sausages are made from their own pigs, and slaughtered in a neighbouring village (the disappearance of local abattoirs is a serious welfare and climate issue). I buy a pack, but then my husband decides he doesn’t fancy sausages. I try and fail not to be furious, then consign them to the freezer. Day 6: supermarkets Most of my shopping is still supermarket-based but, as Holden says: “We haven’t got time to allow the disruptive food producers to get to scale. We have to work with the big food companies and retailers.” Wandering the aisles, puzzling over the “best” choices, is bewildering. Thankfully, there are new tools emerging. I download the Giki Badges app (developed by Giki Zero, but now run by another company), which allows you to scan a product barcode (the app has 250,000 references), and check whether it qualifies as “low carbon footprint”, “UK made”, “sustainable palm oil” or “better packaging”. It’s very satisfying – an easy answer on what’s “good” or “bad” is exactly what a lot of us want – and it works on most things (excluding M&amp;S, Lidl and Aldi products). Sadly, it also reveals that the only vegan biscuits I like, fig rolls, contain non-sustainable palm oil. Farewell, sweet stodge. Another app, Evocco, takes a picture of till receipts, analyses food items and generates a carbon score, based on a personal target of 65kg of CO2 a month. There’s even an option to plant trees to offset the footprint of your shop. “We want the new language around sustainable food to be not so much whether you’re vegan or vegetarian or any of these really strong identifiers, but more to be: are you within planetary boundaries?” says the app’s co-founder Hugh Weldon. Based in Ireland, Evocco works best there – it doesn’t pick up all the food on my receipts – but the UK product list should be expanding imminently. Yet apps only get me so far: I can’t audit the sustainability claims of everything in my trolley. “We need to move to sustainability scores like we have on fridges,” says Holden. His other plea is that we ask questions of big retailers, so I send Waitrose a couple of his suggested queries. They tell me they are working on a carbon-labelling pilot for some own-label products; that they record travel times for livestock to slaughter, and are “looking into” publishing this; and that they “include a broad variety of information on pack including country of origin, nutritional and sourcing information”. Normalising asking this stuff – and, as Parry reminds me, requesting smaller portion and package sizes – is the best way to demonstrate consumers do care. Day 7: treats You can grind, grimly, virtuously, through a week of climatarian eating; you could even live off cabbage, branflakes and Skittles. But it’s better to make changes you can live with, long term. For me, that means treats. I’m relieved to find my preferred morning carburant is carbon-neutral, or so Taylors, which produces Yorkshire Gold tea, claim. I’m suspicious of corporate carbon offset so I quiz Taylors’ head of sustainable development, Simon Hotchkin. The UK operation is carbon-neutral, but 80% of emissions are produced in country of origin, where, he says, producers feel the impact of the climate crisis first-hand. “The first thing farmers talk about every time we meet is increasingly unpredictable weather patterns and the impact climate change is having on tea and coffee production.” Taylors have planted 2m trees on tea plantations they use in Kenya and their carbon-neutral status is independently certified. Hopefully, my cup of tea is relatively harmless. I swap individual for family-size bags of crisps, a carbon improvement, but a terrible development for me personally. Chocolate proves tricky: Fortnum and Mason’s 99% emission-free Sailboat Chocolate is sadly sold out. I buy Original Beans bars instead, described as “delivered CO2 negative to our wholesale customers”. They also plant a tree for every bar sold (you can “track your tree” with a code). The chocolate is delicious but when I post a picture of it on Instagram, someone angrily queries the almonds in the vegan “milk” bar (almonds require large amounts of water to grow). It’s a fair question, but being carbon-shamed feels discouraging; best is very much the enemy of good in encouraging people to limit their food footprint. I’m excited to discover Nàdar, a “climate positive” gin, which uses British peas from regenerative farming and claims “a carbon footprint of -1.54kg CO2e per 700ml bottle”. There is probably some complex offset to parse, but I am tired and I just want a drink. I eat a tasty farro-and-mushroom “risotto” from the Food Circle market, but weakened by booze, also demand fries when my family order takeaway burgers. I’m light years from perfect and will never get there by 2030. It’s clear much of the responsibility does not lie with consumers. And yet, making manageable changes such as limiting waste and trashy “plant-based” convenience foods does help me feel less helpless, less scared and less lost. That’s worth sacrificing even fig rolls for.The Barbican centre has committed to “a radical transformation of culture and behaviours” after more than 120 allegations – a third of which related to racism – were investigated by lawyers as part of an external review into its operation. The investigation by legal firm Lewis Silkin, published by the City of London Corporation on Tuesday, followed the publication of Barbican Stories earlier this year, which contained a litany of claims from staffalleging the use of racist language at the arts organisation and failure to investigate claims of racist behaviour. The external review, which interviewed 35 people, identified “a lack of diversity in the organisation, an absence of confidence in HR systems and in the handling of complaints and in managers to deal with or take seriously concerns of racism”. It said concerns were also raised about a lack of understanding of institutional racism, “with poor career development and preferential treatment being given to white members of staff, job applicants, and those who have had, or are perceived to have had, a private education”. In addition, it found that there were concerns relating not just to heads of department and the senior leadership, but to the conduct of the Barbican centre board itself, which was accused of offensive comments “on the grounds of race”. The board has now launched an action plan to tackle discrimination at the centre, which will be considered later this month. It commits the centre to “a radical transformation of culture and behaviours, including setting new workforce diversity recruitment targets on ethnicity, gender, and other protected characteristics”. Compulsory anti-discrimination training will be rolled out to all staff, with senior leaders taking part first. There will also be a new “dignity at work” service, allowing staff to raise issues confidentially. Chair of the City of London Corporation’s Barbican centre board, Tom Sleigh, said: “This investigation makes tough reading. All of us want the Barbican centre to be a truly diverse and inclusive organisation. “Racism and discrimination have no place in the Barbican centre or anywhere else in our society. So, on behalf of the entire Barbican centre board, I apologise to any member of staff, both former and current, who has experienced this unacceptable behaviour.” Sleigh said they would now take additional action “to build a culture in which staff feel confident, valued and respected, and where there is zero-tolerance of all forms of discrimination”. He added: “Staff are the lifeblood of the Barbican centre and I hope that we can now move forward together to ensure the Barbican is an increasingly inclusive and welcoming place to work”. The Barbican also launched an internal review. In a statement earlier this month, it pledged to introduce diversity targets for its workforce.China has detailed and concrete plans on how to meet its climate commitments, and is pushing those plans forward vigorously, unlike some countries that are “paying lip service” to their climate targets, the head of delegation for China at the Cop26 climate talks has said. Xie Zhenhua, China’s veteran chief official, said: “President Xi [Jinping] announced recently on many multilateral occasions China’s specific targets and concrete policies, measures and actions. We have a policy framework to ensure that we can achieve our climate target.” He added: “If we only make promises without taking real action then we are just simply paying lip service to make a show rather than taking real action.” His words were a clear dig at developed countries which have set out targets without firm policies to back them up. The issue of how far countries are following up their pledges of emissions cuts with concrete policies and action has become the key issue at the Cop26 talks. On Tuesday, the Climate Action Tracker (CAT) published an analysis showing that the world was on track for a devastating 2.4C of heating, far above the upper limit of 2C set out in the Paris agreement, and even further adrift of the safer 1.5C limit being targeted at Cop26. The CAT analysis stood in stark contrast to optimistic estimates last week that current pledges would limit heating to 1.8C. Those pledges were based on long-term targets that countries have set out, for mid-century and beyond, while CAT based its forecast on pledges for this decade, which are crucial to holding the world within 1.5C. When only targets with concrete policies and actions to back them up are taken into account, the forecast temperature increase from CAT rises to 2.7C, a level that would be catastrophic for the planet. China has long prided itself on “under-promising and over-delivering”, by only making emissions pledges that are backed up with action. The country has said it will hit peak emissions by 2030, and reach net zero emissions by 2060, targets which have disappointed many other countries and experts, who believe the world’s biggest emitter is capable of moving much faster. In pointed remarks aimed at the US, whose president Joe Biden slammed Xi for not attending the Glasgow talks, Xie said: “It’s unfair to point fingers at countries who haven’t come. Because the final, the ultimate standard to extend the ambitions and efforts of certain countries is not by what promise they have made. It’s by what action they have taken. Action becomes the key for our efforts of addressing climate change.” In a rare and extensive interview with the Guardian, Xie implicitly chided the US president: “Climate change is already threatening the development of humanity. The situation is becoming more severe. We need to pull together and help each other instead of pointing fingers at each other, because that is pointless and does not offer any help.” Xie also signalled that China was reluctant to heed calls from many developing countries for governments to revise their national carbon-cutting targets. As the CAT analysis shows, countries’ current targets for 2030 – called nationally determined contributions (NDCs) – are far adrift of the 1.5C goal, and if they are not revised soon the 1.5C goal will be out of reach. But under the Paris agreement, countries are only obliged to revise their NDCs every five years. Many countries want to force nations to revise them every year, if their plans are judged inadequate. Xie signalled that China wanted to stick to the five-year timetable, but did not rule out a change, and expressed sympathy with the plight of the small island states which are pushing hardest for the more frequent timetable. He said: “This is a highly controversial issue in the ongoing negotiations. We fully understand the adverse impact of climate change on those small island countries. I’ve been to many small island countries before and have seen with my own eyes the impact of hurricanes and rising sea levels on them.” He signalled that if there was a change, China could be exempted because of the detailed nature of its plans: “I think that whether the NDCs should be updated annually depends on what content is in it. Actually, I think stable and long-term NDCs is more helpful for countries to carry out action to achieve targets.” He again made the point that some countries were making promises without clear plans. “We think that the most important thing for NDCs is actually to take real action to implement this step by step. Otherwise, the NDCs are only empty promises without substantial measures and actions.” Xie added: “We think that as long as we can follow the principles and spirit of the Paris agreement it is possible for us to find a proper solution on [more frequent NDCs] at this Cop.” Xie also criticised rich countries for failing to fulfil their pledges on providing the developing world with $100bn (£74bn) a year in climate finance from 2020, to reduce emissions and adapt to the impacts of climate breakdown. He said: “It’s a pity that only $80bn has been gathered and mobilised. We are still $20bn short from our target. We hope that at this Cop there can be a clear timetable and road map [to fulfilling the target].”Phoebe Dynevor and David Morrissey arrive in a London hotel room, both suited. Extremely suited, in fact: he’s in a three-piece, he looks like a lithograph; she’s experimental, very fashion forward. This would have been commonplace before the pandemic: just two big-name actors, in nice clothes, promoting a new project: The Colour Room. Now, it feels almost surreally exciting to be in the same room as a stranger at all; Dynevor, after playing Daphne Bridgerton in Netflix’s second-most watched series ever, is probably one of the most recognised new faces in the world; Morrissey – and he’s famous for this – is disconcertingly nice and self-effacing, and always looks a bit puzzled to be asked about himself. The Colour Room is quite an old-fashioned idea, a biopic of the groundbreaking art deco ceramicist Clarice Cliff, executed in quite an old-fashioned way. Dynevor plays Cliff, all fire, passion and genius, bringing colour to a drab world and revolutionising design. Morrissey is Fred Ridgeway – an amalgamation of two real figures in the industrial Midlands of the 1920s – whom he plays as a kind, thoughtful, quietly awestruck superior, not unlike Giles, the librarian in Buffy. “I was very concerned,” he says, “that Fred didn’t come across as any kind of mentor. He’s more of an observer of her talent, he just sees her as this force of nature.” In fact, the whole vibe reminds me a bit of Buffy, it’s just that instead of vampires, Dynevor slays pottery convention, workplace sexism, social prejudice and market expectations. The funny thing about Cliff – particularly if you’re over 40 – is that it’s very easy to conjure her look and colour palette, while having completely the wrong idea about her background. “I always thought she was part of the gentry,” Morrissey says, “a William Morris type, with the world at her fingertips.” In fact, she was a working-class factory worker. “She has no one to look up to, no one’s done what she’s done,” Dynevor says. “Working-class people just learned their trade and got on with it.” Her performance navigates Cliff’s life brilliantly; the problem with mould-breakers is that they need a hell of a lot of charm if they’re not going to come across as narcissists. Dynevor has been working for years – she got her first role in 2009, when she was 14, in Waterloo Road, which was Grange Hill for Zoomers – but this is her first film. “You have one script, a beginning, a middle and an end. There’s an arc. It’s six weeks.” Without using the term “cakewalk”, she makes it sound like a cakewalk, after Bridgerton. Morrissey expands: “There’s a lot of television, you don’t know what’s going to happen. It’s much like life, you’re just dealing with what’s happening on the day. Whereas in film, you know where you’re heading. You know how much time you have to tell a story. You can argue for the consistency of your character.” It’s impossible to tell whether he prefers the messiness of things that are like life, or the neatness of a tightly told story. His career is rather longer: now 57, he had his first TV role in One Summer in 1983. In fact, one of his first stage jobs was with Phoebe’s father, the actor turned screenwriter Tim Dynevor. “It was quite funny doing this, realising: ‘Oh my god, that’s Tim’s daughter.’ It made me feel so old.” Dynevor is from a showbiz dynasty: her father became a scriptwriter on Emmerdale having started as an actor; her mother is Sally Dynevor, who has played Sally Webster in Corrie since 1986. (You may remember the proto-romcom moment of her debut appearance: Kevin splashes her in his van, she yells: “Me boots! Me white boots!”, and then they fall in love. She’s absolutely terrific.) “Obviously there’s my mum and dad,” Dynevor says – clearly, she has made the decision to acknowledge the pedigree rather than etch it away – “but my grandma was a runner and an assistant director and my grandpa [Gerard Dynevor] was a famous theatre director, my other grandma paints sets. So the family conversations wouldn’t just have an actor or a writer’s perspective, it would be every perspective of the industry.” David Morrissey’s mentor was his birthplace. “I didn’t have anybody, but in Liverpool everybody is a joke teller. What I’ve always been grateful for is coming from a city that takes the arts seriously. I never felt nervous about saying to somebody, ‘I want to be an actor.’ My only nervousness was I wasn’t saying, ‘I want to be in a band.’” He always comes off as quite leftwing, without saying anything overtly political; it’s more of a leftie demeanour. He’s extremely conscious, though, of class and privilege and access. “My thing has always been, looking at this from a working-class point of view: we can get working-class people into drama schools, but that first four or five years in our business is difficult. And ipso facto acting becomes a middle-class profession because it needs the bank of mum and dad to support it.” If The Colour Room has class at its heart, Bridgerton had race: not so much colourblind casting as colour-conscious: black actors played aristocrats, not in the contemporary theatrical mode of race being invisible, but with race and racism explicitly written into their character experiences. Dynevor has appeared in so many roles over such a relatively short career – including Snatch, Dickensian and Younger – that perhaps it’s not surprising to find her at the vanguard of a new movement towards diversity on the small screen. But it’s also very important to her, smashing conventions of who belongs on screen and who doesn’t. “I grew up with TV where everyone looked like me. I grew up wanting to be an actress, and when your idea of ‘actress’ is Keira Knightley [and] Audrey Hepburn … women that sort of look like me, it was very easy to imagine myself in that position. It wasn’t until I did Bridgerton that I thought, ‘Oh, so many people aren’t seeing themselves.’” (She clarifies, hastily, that Knightley and Hepburn only resemble her in the sense that they’re white; although they do also both look a bit like her). Morrissey calls Bridgerton “an absolute gamechanger” from a casting point of view, but adds: “I feel that [if] we’re seeing diversity in front of the camera, [then] we’re seeing it less behind the camera. So now we need more diversity with directors, producers, writers. That change is still quite slow for me.” Last time I met him, it was in Baton Rouge in 2005; it was just after Hurricane Katrina, less than 100 miles away in New Orleans, the whole place was jittery and sad, and he was embarked on a film that might or might not have been his big-budget Hollywood breakthrough – in the end, it wasn’t. The Reaping, a horror movie starring Hilary Swank, had poor reviews and was much less career shaping than the British TV series’ that bookended it: State of Play; The Deal (with his remarkably acute rendition of Gordon Brown); Blackpool; Viva Blackpool; and Red Riding, the adaptation of David Peace’s Yorkshire noir quartet. He’s done a little directing, but says: “The way I like to work as an actor is to disappear into it and concentrate on that. So I could never direct myself; you need an overview as a director.” His career bears that out; he doesn’t seem to choose a part for where it could take him, or see projects as waypoints en route to fame or glory. He’s very like his character in The Colour Room, in fact: modest, craftsmanlike, expert, self-effacing. But maybe that’s a trick of the light. Maybe that’s just him disappearing into his role. Dynevor, meanwhile, has become so strongly associated with the role of Daphne, just by dint of Bridgerton’s success, that to play Clarice Cliff, such a different character, is quite a smart, tactical move: “Daphne is this woman who comes from complete privilege and only has one option. She’s very self-aware, and has to be so. Clarice is the total opposite: she’s not self-aware at all, it’s all about what she can visualise and create, what she can see.” “She reminded me of someone who was coming into a tired world, with these colours, this boldness,” says Morrissey of Cliff. “It’s quite frightening, like any revolution.” They have, between them, found the jeopardy in art deco pottery. It’s an understated film, but curiously evocative and lingering. The Colour Room is in cinemas, on Sky Cinema and streaming service NOW from 12 November.Most of our dysfunctions are caused by pandering to the rich. The way governments have allowed democracy to be eroded by lobbyists (including politicians with lucrative private interests); the deregulation that lets corporations, oligarchs and landlords squeeze their workers and tenants, then dump their costs on society; the permissive environment for profiteering during the pandemic; the degradation of health, education and other public services by the constant drive towards privatisation: all these are symptoms of the same condition. The same applies to the worst of our predicaments: the destruction of our life-support systems. The very rich arrogate to themselves the lion’s share of the planetary space on which we all depend. It is hard to understand why we tolerate this attack on our common interests. The richest 1% of the world’s people (those earning more than $172,000 a year) produce 15% of the world’s carbon emissions: twice the combined impact of the poorest 50%. On average, they emit over 70 tonnes of carbon dioxide per person every year, 30 times more than we can each afford to release if we’re not to exceed 1.5C of global heating. While the emissions of the world’s middle classes are expected to fall sharply over the next decade, thanks to the general decarbonisation of our economies, the amount produced by the richest will scarcely decline at all: in other words, they’ll be responsible for an even greater share of total CO2. Becoming good global citizens would mean cutting their carbon consumption by an average of 97%. Even if 90% of the population produced no carbon at all, the anticipated emissions of the richest 10% (those earning over $55,000) across the next nine years would use almost the entire global budget. The disparity in environmental impact mirrors a nation’s inequality. No wonder the prosperous people of the wealthy nations are so keen to seek to shift the blame to China, or on to other people’s birthrates: sometimes it seems they will try anything before attending to their own impacts. A recent analysis of the lifestyles of 20 billionaires found that each produced an average of over 8,000 tonnes of carbon dioxide: 3,500 times their fair share in a world committed to no more than 1.5C of heating. The major causes are their jets and yachts. A superyacht alone, kept on permanent standby, as some billionaires’ boats are, generates around 7,000 tonnes of CO2 a year. Bill Gates, who has positioned himself as a climate champion, does not possess a yacht. Even so, he has an estimated footprint 3,000 times bigger than the good global citizen’s, largely as a result of his collection of jets and helicopters. He claims to “buy green aviation fuel”, but there is no such thing. Biofuels for jets, if widely deployed, would trigger an environmental catastrophe, as so much plant material is required to power a single flight. This means that crops or plantations must displace either food production or wild ecosystems. No other “green” aviation fuels are currently available. Gates seeks to resolve such conflicts by buying carbon offsets. But all available opportunities to draw down carbon dioxide from the atmosphere are now required to reduce the impact of humanity as a whole. Why should they be captured by those who want to keep living like emperors? We are often told by frequent flyers that we should overlook the climate impacts of aviation, as they amount to “just a few per cent”. But the only reason they remain relatively low is that flying is highly concentrated. Flying accounts for most of the greenhouse gas emissions of the super-rich, which is why the wealthiest 1% generate roughly half the world’s aviation emissions. If everyone lived as they do, aviation would be the biggest of all the causes of climate breakdown. But their carbon greed knows no limits: some of the super-rich now hope to travel into space, which means that they would each produce as much carbon dioxide in 10 minutes as 30 average humans emit in a year. The very rich claim to be wealth creators. But in ecological terms, they do not create wealth. They take it from everyone else. Big money now buys everything: even access to the meetings that should address these dysfunctions. On some accounts, Cop26 is the most exclusive of all climate summits. Delegates from poor nations have been thwarted by a cruel combination of byzantine visa requirements, broken promises to make Covid vaccines available, and the mad costs of accommodation, thanks to government failures to cap local prices, or make rooms available. Even when delegates from poorer nations can scale these walls, they often find themselves excluded from the negotiating areas, and therefore unable to influence the talks. By contrast, more than 500 fossil fuel lobbyists have been granted access, more than the combined delegations of eight nations that have already been ravaged by climate breakdown: Pakistan, Bangladesh, the Philippines, Mozambique, Myanmar, Haiti, Puerto Rico and the Bahamas. The perpetrators are heard, the victims excluded. There’s an oft-quoted axiom, whose authorship is obscure: it is easier to imagine the end of the world than the end of capitalism. Part of the reason is that capitalism itself is difficult to imagine. Most people struggle to define it, and its champions have generally succeeded in disguising its true nature. So let’s begin by imagining something that’s easier to comprehend: the end of concentrated wealth. Our survival depends on it. I’ve come to believe that the most important of all environmental measures are wealth taxes. Preventing systemic environmental collapse means driving extreme wealth to extinction. It is not humanity as a whole that the planet cannot afford. It’s the ultra-rich. George Monbiot is a Guardian columnistThe US needs a fundamental rethink of its attitudes towards parenting, according to Pete Buttigieg, who was the target of criticism from conservatives for taking leave to care for his newborn children. Buttigieg, the US transport secretary, came under attack after he took time to help care for his newborn twins, a boy and a girl, in August. Senator Tom Cotton, an Arkansas Republican, said Buttigieg was “absent during a transportation crisis” while Tucker Carlson, the Fox News host, told his audience: “Pete Buttigieg has been on leave from his job since August after adopting a child. Paternity leave, they call it, trying to figure out how to breastfeed – no word on how that went.” Carlson’s remarks were widely seen as a homophobic attack on Buttigieg, who is gay. Buttigieg told the Guardian that he found the reaction baffling. “Leaving aside the hospitalization, part of me just wondered: how do they think my kids eat? They have two dads – do they think I just leave them with a can opener and directions to the fridge?” He added that America “has got some catching up to do” on paid parental leave. “We still have to contend with the view that the only justification for parental leave is for women to physically recover from pregnancy and childbirth, which is of course one very important reason, but it’s far from the only one,” he said. “I know in most parts of the world it’s probably puzzling that it’s even controversial.” The US is one of the few countries in the world without mandatory paid maternal or paternal leave, with Joe Biden proposing a 12-week paid leave period for the huge reconciliation spending bill that he hopes will pass Congress. This policy was reportedly cut in negotiations due to the objections of senator Joe Manchin, the centrist West Virginia Democrat, but Buttigieg said he will “keep fighting” for it to be made law. “Hopefully we are on a track to where this is no big deal, but this is about culture as well as policy,” the transport secretary said. Buttigieg is currently in Scotland, where he helping promote Biden’s agenda at UN climate talks known as Cop26. He said the spending bill, which Democrats hope will pass next week, will have a “transformative” impact upon transport, the largest source of planet-heating emissions in the US, by providing major rebates for electric vehicles and investing in public transport. “We have to get there as quickly as we can, the goals are aggressive and ambitious,” Buttigieg said. “I’ve been really encouraged by the warmth of the reception here, the sense of relief that America is back and back in a leadership role on climate. We need to be making commitments that irreversible because if we don’t, the effects of climate change will be irreversible. It’s a race.”England has the highest death rates of frail and older hospitalised patients in the western world, a landmark global study has found. Harvard University, the London School of Economics (LSE) and the thinktank Health Foundation, all part of the International Collaborative on Costs, Outcomes and Needs in Care (Icconic), a global network of healthcare researchers, used thousands of official medical records to compare the cost and quality of care in 10 OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development) countries. Patient deaths are commonly used measures of performance in healthcare systems but until now there have been few sources of comparable death rates across countries. In order to assess outcomes in frail and older patients, researchers focused on two groups that represent priority areas for the NHS and other healthcare systems: those in hospital with a hip fracture and those admitted with heart failure who have diabetes. On both measures, England had higher mortality rates than all the other countries, which included the US, Germany, France, Sweden and Spain. The data was analysed for patients aged 65 and over between 2014 and 2018 to provide an enhanced assessment of patient outcomes in the 10 countries. One year after hip fracture surgery, almost a third (31%) of patients in England had died of any cause compared with less than a quarter of patients in Canada (23%) and Australia (22%). A year after being admitted to hospital with heart failure, more than four in 10 (43%) of diabetes patients in England had died. The next highest mortality rate was in the US (38%), followed by New Zealand (36%). France had the lowest death rate (20%) on the first measure, while Australia’s was lowest (23%) on the second. High mortality among hip fracture patients is happening despite England performing well on other care quality measures. For example, 82% of hip fracture patients in England received surgery within 48 hours of admission, second only to Sweden, with 85% of patients. This is recommended as a key component of high-quality care. However, one year after their initial admission, 31% of English patients had died, compared with 25% of Swedish patients. Another striking finding where England stands out from other countries in the Icconic study, is the length of time that hip fracture patients spent in hospital. Patients in England spent an average of 21.7 days in hospital after their initial surgery, the highest of all the 10 countries evaluated. However, when it comes to financial outlay, England has among the lowest spending in primary care and secondary care on these patients, compared with the other countries. Only the Netherlands has lower overall spending. The findings provide evidence that while the NHS remains a relatively low-cost healthcare system performing well in many areas, death rates for some patients are higher than in comparable countries. Dr Jennifer Dixon, the chief executive of the Health Foundation, said: “The findings of the Icconic study warrant urgent further investigation, particularly the finding of higher mortality among patients with hip fracture in the year after their admission for emergency treatment. “That patients in England with hip fracture spend far longer in hospital after surgery than they would in other countries also highlights an opportunity to improve efficiency by reducing the avoidable use of hospital care. Less avoidably long stays would mean existing capacity could be better used to address the backlogs in hospital care as a result of the pandemic. This could contribute to both better outcomes for patients and, as hip fracture is the most common reason for emergency surgery, significantly improved productivity for hospitals across the country.” Dr Irene Papanicolas, associate professor of health economics at the LSE, added: “Further work is needed to understand what England can do to improve patient outcomes.” An NHS source said there were many possible reasons for the differences in death rates seen between the 10 countries, including different local thresholds for hospital admission. The source suggested that this is more likely to explain the variation in mortality for patients with heart failure and diabetes, where the extent to which patients are managed within the community versus hospital differs between countries. • This article was amended on 11 November 2021. The research showed that the lowest death rate in people admitted with heart failure who have diabetes was in Australia, not France as an earlier version said.When the weather is calm, wind turbines stop turning. That’s obvious, but as the UK increasingly relies on wind power generation, so an energy crunch looms if the wind doesn’t blow. One way to smooth out the vagaries of weather for renewable energy supplies is a European super powergrid. These so-called interconnectors across national borders are already here. On 1 October, a 720km (450-mile) undersea power cable went live between the UK and Norway, the world’s longest subsea interconnector. This allows Norway to export surplus hydropower to the UK, but if water levels drop in the Norwegian hydro reservoirs during dry weather, the shortfall could be supplemented by wind generation from the UK. An even longer interconnector is proposed between the UK and Iceland, tapping into Iceland’s huge supply of renewable hydro and geothermal energy. North Africa could also be plugged in – there is an ambitious proposal to link the UK to a projected giant solar scheme in Morocco. With the climate of northern Europe rich in wind, and southern areas with plenty of sunshine, sharing a range of renewable energies across borders helps to even out fluctuations in weather, making power supplies more secure as well as clean.The records of 320,000 troops from the Punjab who fought in the first world war, left unread in a basement for 97 years, have been disclosed by UK-based historians to offer new insight into the contribution of Indian soldiers to the allied war effort. Files found in the depths of the Lahore Museum in Pakistan have been digitised and uploaded on to a website in time for Armistice Day on Thursday. Whereas historians and the descendants of British and Irish soldiers could search public databases of service records, until now no such facility existed for the families of Indian soldiers. Some UK citizens of Punjabi origin have already been invited to search for their ancestors in the database. They have discovered that their family’s villages provided soldiers who served in France, the Middle East, Gallipoli, Aden and east Africa, as well as in other parts of British India during the first world war. Punjab was split between India and Pakistan in 1947. The shadow minister Tanmanjeet Dhesi uncovered proof among the files that his great-grandfather had served in Iraq and had been wounded in action, losing a leg. It is hoped that the records will help to dispel myths surrounding the contributions of soldiers from the Commonwealth. Last year, the actor turned activist Laurence Fox apologised after he had earlier criticised the historical accuracy of a Sikh character’s inclusion on the western front in the film 1917. Amandeep Madra, the chair of the UK Punjab Heritage Association who worked with the University of Greenwich to digitise the files, said: “Punjab was the main recruiting ground for the Indian army during world war one. And yet the contribution of the individuals has largely been unrecognised. In most cases we didn’t even know their names.” Punjabis of all faiths – including Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs – made up about a third of the Indian army, and about one sixth of all the empire’s overseas forces. Victorian racial ideology mythologised the qualities of soldiers from the region. In 1879, the Eden Commission report noted that “the Punjab is the home of the most martial races of India and is the nursery of our best soldiers”. The registers were compiled by the Punjab government in 1919 when the war ended. Comprising 26,000 pages, some are handwritten while others are typed. But all provide village-by-village data on the war service of recruits, as well as information on their family background, rank and regiment. Madra, who has co-authored five books about Indian history, said he first approached the Lahore Museum about the files in 2014, having been told about them by Indian military historians who knew of their existence but had never gained access. He was sent sample pages by a curator, and found that they were organised by village. “The history of each Punjabi person’s family goes back to their village. I could see that this would allow people to peer into their past,” he said. The documents showed that the volunteer rates in many villages were as high as 40%. Dhesi, the shadow railways minister, said his late grandmother had often told him stories about her father, Mihan Singh, who had lost a leg, but he knew little else about his service in the army and there were no known public records to examine. The records from Lahore Museum show Mihan was one of 16,000 soldiers recruited to the Indian army from the Hoshiarpur district in north-east Punjab. A sepoy who served in Mesopotamia, a region now divided between Iraq, Turkey, Syria and Kuwait, he was wounded in battle. “I always wondered what had happened, but no one really knew until now. He came home severely injured and went back to being a farmer,” Dhesi said. “These records give people written proof that our ancestors were there, fighting for Britain. This is about recognising both the contribution my family made, but also the contribution and sacrifice that people from across the Commonwealth made for the war effort,” he said. The pilot project has been uploaded for Armistice Day and before Remembrance Sunday. About 45,000 records from three districts – Jalandhar and Ludhiana, both now in India, and Sialkot in present-day Pakistan – have so far been uploaded to the website. It is hoped that the successful completion of the pilot project will lead to the release of the registers for a further 25 districts comprising an estimated 275,000 soldiers’ records. Dr Gavin Rand, of the University of Greenwich, said: “The personal and family histories of Punjab’s first world war volunteers are largely unknown, even to many descendants. Few Indian veterans left written records of their service, and many Punjabi family histories are dominated by the upheavals and migrations which followed Punjab’s partition in 1947.”More than 100 people were killed by an explosion in Freetown, Sierra Leone, last week, after a leaking fuel tanker collided with a lorry on a busy road in the capital city. Many of those who died were young motorbike taxi drivers, after dozens of riders rushed to the leaking tanker to collect free petrol and were caught in the blast. The tanker and lorry drivers tried to keep people away but could not stop the crowd. Half an hour later, it was too late. Abdul Bangura, 19, nicknamed Popa, had been working secretly as a motorbike rider, hiding the bike from his grandma, who he had lived with since he was a toddler. She had sponsored his education until she ran out of funds. After leaving school, Bangura had taken an informal apprenticeship with a local mechanic and was introduced to commercial transport. He knew his grandma worried, so he worked evenings without telling her until, after six months, he had saved up enough to enrol back in school. But the demands of studying by day and working by night were too great, and he dropped out. On the evening of the explosion, Bangura had just started work when he came across the leaking fuel tanker and joined the crowd, hoping for some petrol. His grandma lay awake, worried about why he had not come home at the usual time. She discovered he had died in the explosion from his school friends the next day. The informal transport business is one of the few options for young people like Bangura to make ends meet in Freetown. It is a dangerous job on poorly maintained and busy roads, which drivers are expected to navigate at speed. Accidents are commonplace. Police routinely exploit bike riders with fines or demands for bribes, in part to supplement their own low salaries. Hundreds of riders find themselves in the city’s overcrowded, colonial-era prison for motoring offences, awaiting trials that are continually postponed. Fuel prices, which rocketed in the Covid pandemic, have not gone down despite public protests, and there are worries they will rise again. Customers are unwilling or unable to pay enough for the riders to make a profit. The grim challenges Bangura and his fellow riders face are nothing new. Bike taxis were developed by former rebel soldiers in the early 2000s in the aftermath of the civil war, itself the result of a youth-led uprising against a coercive and neglectful state. The relationship between riders and the law continues to be tense. Riders say they are trying to make an honest living, but authorities label them dangerous, while officials take advantage of their precarious livelihoods, soliciting bribes. And the informal work plugs the gap in a city with little or no public transport. After a decade of civil war, and the impact of Ebola and Covid-19, Sierra Leone is yet to see a genuine recovery, and young people like Bangura are forced to look to the streets to make a living. Government officials and police are not the only ones to blame however. The state simply lacks the funds to maintain its institutions. Corruption among the political elites has exacerbated the country’s economic situation, but so has decades of international pressure to “liberalise” the economy by cutting trade tariffs and reducing state expenditure. It was these policies that caused so many industries, and employers, to fail since the 1980s, while far away, richer countries benefited by extracting the country’s raw materials, such as bauxite and diamonds. Living off the land became untenable because so much was seized by international mining companies and commercial farms. As three days of national mourning, which began on Monday, come to a close, we must remember this is not an isolated incident or freak accident. It is one more chapter in a long story that could have been different. Scores of young bike riders lost their lives, and many others were burned and maimed as a consequence of rising fuel and food costs and the pressures on informal workers from those in charge. The risk of death has become the price demanded for seeking a living in one of the world’s poorest countries. James B Palmer is an activist in the Sierra Leone Commercial Motor Bike Riders’ Union Dr Jonah Lipton is a research fellow at the Firoz Lalji Institute for Africa at the London School of Economics who has written a book about life in Freetown during EbolaAustralia Post has warned of ongoing delivery delays as the postal service, already groaning under lockdown shopping spikes, is now hit by a flood of online sales events and pre-Christmas purchasing. Ben Franzi, the general manager, parcel and express services at Australia Post, was expecting “the busiest two weeks of the year from an online sales perspective and logistics perspective”. “It’s ramping up this week with Click Frenzy,” he said. “And then, without a pause, Black Friday and Cyber Monday.” They will take place from 26 to 29 November. With many consumers still anxious about Covid exposure, Franzi said he was expecting “the biggest online shopping event of all time this Christmas”. Paul Zahra, the CEO of the Australian Retailers Association, described the online retail surge as a “perfect storm for retailers and consumers” as the Christmas trading period commences on top of Click Frenzy, Black Friday and Cyber Monday. “Online sales have surged in recent months with a record $4.3bn spent online in September, up a massive 42.6% compared to the same time last year,” Zahra said. “Some distribution centres and warehouses continue to be affected by reduced staffing levels due to Covid cases, we’ve had industrial disputes from delivery drivers and port workers, while state border controls and limited flights are also affecting the movement of goods. “Around $59bn is forecast to be spent in the pre-Christmas sales,” he said. “This is … up 11.3% compared to pre-pandemic levels in 2019.” Click Frenzy, a 53-hour online sale that launched on Tuesday evening, is the first of several major e-commerce sales. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Franzi said Australia Post had added 45 “new and repurposed operational and retail sites” and hired an additional 4,500 staff members, many of whom had already commenced. This should increase capacity by 30% and he predicted that, as borders reopened, and with them, domestic flight routes, express delivery times would improve. “A lot of our deliveries are through passenger flights,” he said. He said Australia Post’s traffic had doubled during lockdowns. In early September, e-commerce parcel pickups were suspended for three days in NSW, the ACT and Victoria, and in early October, parcel pick-ups in Melbourne were suspended for five days. Many have reported delays of more than month for delivery of express parcels. Franzi said “we’ve learned a lot of lessons” from lockdowns, foremost among them “is trying not to predict Covid”. He said Australia Post’s biggest pain points during lockdowns came from Covid-19 exposures and subsequent facility closures and that “we’ve learned how to protect our staff better”. Lisa Villani, the retail and e-commerce manager at premium ceramics manufacturer Mud, said her online sales has spiked by 300% during the recent lockdowns. “We used to have a standard shipping time of two to three days, but we then saw that go out to three weeks [during lockdowns], and had to divert a lot of resources to the administration and customer service around that. “We had an influx of calls from customers asking where their products are”. Franzi warned delays were inevitable, and urged retailers to communicate and set expectations with their customers. “The advice is definitely shop early,” he said. Franzi advised using alternative delivery options like parcel lockers, and post office pick-ups, as these services had experienced far fewer delays than home deliveries, and also suggested people track the parcels through the Australia Post app. Australia Post has published cut-off dates for Christmas deliveries, which consumers and retailers should pay close attention to. “Be patient, we’re doing our best,” he said. This article was amended on 11 November to include the cut off dates for Christmas deliveries. A previous version stated they were yet to be published.When the Age’s art critic Robert Nelson reviewed a one-day art project in Melbourne on the weekend he noted the audience was looking at an installation by a UK conceptual artist in “puzzlement”. “You could sense that viewers were searching in themselves for an explanation,” Nelson wrote in his review of Jeremy Deller’s work, Father and Son, which featured lifesize grey candles in the form of a seated old man and a younger man slowly burning to a puddle throughout the day. But it was the art critic himself who was puzzled. Nelson wrote several hundred words about the meaning of the Turner prize-winning artist’s work without realising the father and son effigies were of Rupert and Lachlan Murdoch. Of course, we’ve all made mistakes but rarely are they as public as the one published in the Age in print and online on Sunday. Remarkably, no one behind the scenes questioned why the writer had not mentioned the Murdochs in his piece, even though the likeness in the multiple pictures published was readily apparent. No one appears to have noticed other news reports about the exhibition, including Guardian Australia’s Melting moguls: life-size Rupert and Lachlan Murdoch candles burn in Melbourne installation, on Saturday. A spokesperson for Nine, publisher of the Age, declined to comment. To his credit, Nelson wrote a mea culpa of sorts on Tuesday: “Sometimes the eyes aren’t enough … I just didn’t realise that the two antiquated specimens were the Murdochs.” In the “spooky installation in a deconsecrated church in Collingwood” Nelson saw, in Sunday’s review, the Father and the Son of the Bible – not the father and son of the Murdoch media empire. “Everything about the installation at St Saviour’s Church of Exiles, Collingwood, was churchy – right down to the quotation from John’s Gospel, where Jesus declares his deference to his Heavenly Father,” Nelson wrote on Tuesday. “But I didn’t realise that the figures represented Rupert and Lachlan Murdoch, the media princes whose various dealings don’t automatically strike you as theologically motivated. “It puts a different spin on the work, for sure; and if you were really focused on the detail of the Murdoch mannequins being incinerated, the concept would come close to farce.” Nelson had an “out” but admirably chose not to take it. Some readers thought his original review involved a “conscious decision” to suppress the Murdoch name. “A witty Jane Scott, director of Horsham Art Gallery, was kind enough to write: ‘Brilliant review … without actually mentioning the unmentionable’,” Nelson said. “I’d like to bask in the glow of this subtle gamesmanship; but in all candour, I just didn’t realise the two antiquated specimens were the Murdochs.” He also admitted there were clues as he walked around the art gallery that he chose to ignore because he believes in “trusting my eyes”. “My ears heard somebody talking about ‘Lachlan’ but the whisper didn’t really penetrate my critical visual armour,” he said. “If I suppressed the connection, it was all in my unconscious. It would have been nice to own the virtue of resisting more Murdoch posterity; but the truth is that I didn’t listen to my ears.” But ultimately Nelson transcends what he calls the “embarrassment” and argues that the fact that he missed the context is negligible. “The original interpretation along the scriptural lines – that the artist himself suggested – remains sound,” he wrote on Tuesday. “The additional fact can contribute an additional layer of interpretation, but that doesn’t make it a necessary layer of interpretation.” Tell us in the comments below something you’ve got spectacularly wrong.Comedians Giving Lectures 9pm, Dave Sara Pascoe – a master in marrying science and comedy – is back with another cohort of comics ready to serve very important lectures. Harriet Kemsley and Bobby Mair are on hand to tell an unconvinced audience what makes marriage work, while Ahir Shah makes the case that you don’t need to be an expert to solve big problems (with a shoutout to the model Caprice), and Jo Brand asks you to at least “play along” with her argument that older people are happy. Seamlessly hosted, and genuinely very funny. Hollie Richardson George Clarke’s Old House, New Home 8pm, Channel 4 A new series for the format that helps out homeowners looking to turn their period properties into something practical for modern living. Matey architect George Clarke sets course for Stroud to help a couple extend their listed Georgian farmhouse before rejigging the layout of a Victorian terrace in Royal Wootton Bassett. Graeme Virtue Shetland 9pm, BBC One With Shetland under lockdown, and prime suspect Creggan armed and on the loose, DI Perez (Douglas Henshall) attempts to piece together what happened at the Creggan house before tragedy strikes again. Meanwhile, DS Tosh hears a strange story from Maurice Ross, Duncan and Donna grow closer, and Perez uncovers a surprising link. Ali Catterall Grey’s Anatomy 9pm, Sky Witness The neverending medical drama – still starring original cast member Ellen Pompeo – is back for its 18th season. The city of Seattle is celebrating a “post-Covid rebirth” with a fair that ends in casualties. Meanwhile, Meredith has a surprising opportunity when she meets a dynamic doctor from her mother’s past. HR Life &amp; Rhymes 9pm, Sky Arts A new series of the brisk, inclusive and unpretentious spoken word showcase presented by the great Benjamin Zephaniah. He begins with People Always Need People, followed by turns from Henry Beckwith, Jasmine Gardosi, Tanaka Fuego and a few randomly selected members of the audience. Phil Harrison Live at the Apollo 10pm, BBC Two Live comedy from Hammersmith Apollo returns. Host Chris McCausland kicks things off with sets from Edinburgh fringe best newcomer nominee Sophie Duker and London-born-and-bred ex-bouncer Emmanuel Sonubi. HR Film choice Passing (Rebecca Hall, 2021), Netflix Rebecca Hall’s first film as director is an assured treatment of a 1929 novel by Harlem Renaissance writer Nella Larsen. It’s the tale of two light-skinned Black women in New York and the different ways in which they “pass” for white – interestingly, shot in black-and-white, so all skin tones are mere shades of grey. Tessa Thompson plays Harlem doctor’s wife Irene, settled in her bourgeois life of charity work and cliquey soirees. Former schoolfriend Clare (Ruth Negga, channelling Tennessee Williams) has concealed her racial identity to the extent of having a white, racist husband. When they meet by chance, Clare brings excitement but also disruption to the emotionally repressed Irene’s routine. Simon Wardell Ad Astra (James Gray, 2019), Amazon Prime Video Echoes of Apocalypse Now abound in James Gray’s beautiful-looking, portentous sci-fi drama. Astronaut Roy (Brad Pitt) finds his professional insouciance crumbling when he is sent to Neptune to find the source of energy bursts threatening the Earth – and which may come from his long-lost father (Tommy Lee Jones, in the Kurtz role). Shot in a stately fashion underpinned by Roy’s pensive voiceover, it is a slow-burning story, albeit punctuated by impressively realised scenes of peril. SW My Father and Me (Nick Broomfield, 2018), 10pm, BBC Four Documentary film-maker Nick Broomfield’s father, Maurice, was one of Britain’s leading postwar industrial photographers, creating beautifully lit, romanticised images of factory workers (on display from today in an exhibition at the V&amp;A in London). Nick is a more political, off-the-cuff observer of life and, as such, was initially a disappointment to his parent. Here, the son reassess his relationship with a man who was a conscientious objector, married a Jewish Czech wartime refugee and owned a Gypsy caravan. It’s a family history that also serves as a bracingly honest self-portrait. SW Live sport T20 World Cup cricket 1.30pm, Sky Sports Main Event. Semi-final from Abu Dhabi.Top story: ‘Old guard mentality’ of safe-seat moonlighters Hello, Warren Murray with the stories that stand out as we raise Wednesday. Iain Duncan Smith, the MP and former Tory leader, is facing questions over his £25,000-a-year second job advising a multimillion-pound hand sanitiser company after he chaired a government taskforce that recommended new rules benefiting the firm. The taskforce’s report to government made no reference to Duncan Smith’s relationship with Byotrol, which provides the NHS with 92% of its non-alcohol sanitiser, although the role was declared in parliament’s register of members’ interests. Both have been approached for comment. Other Tory MPs have also been working in the healthcare sector – in some cases for companies that have benefited from lucrative Covid-19 contracts. The Tory MP Geoffrey Cox has faced mounting pressure to quit amid suggestions the former attorney general moonlighted as a lawyer out of his Commons office. Labour’s Angela Rayner has called for an investigation into Cox appearing to use taxpayer-funded parliamentary facilities to appear in a court hearing virtually. It has emerged Cox was paid £150,000 for giving legal advice to the British Virgin Islands in relation to corruption charges brought by the UK Foreign Office. Cox, 61, declared his extra earnings as a barrister and did not break any rules. Some Tory MPs have rounded on Cox – one said there was an “old guard mentality” to second jobs among veteran MPs in safer seats, and that they were “taking the piss while some of us are solely focused on being a parliamentarian, care about constituents and work hard”. Cox’s office did not respond to a request for comment. This morning it also emerges that Tory MPs have been writing “sponsored content” online for the Betting and Gaming Council which lobbies for the gambling industry. The politicians were not paid for their articles but the Betting and Gaming Council paid the ConservativeHome website through an advertising agency for the space online and they are labelled “sponsored”. The government is due to publish proposals for the reform of gambling regulation early next year. Matt Zarb-Cousin, of the Campaign for Fairer Gambling, said: “You really have to question why it would be in an MP’s interest to advocate for an incredibly unpopular sector that is resisting these types of reforms.” * * * Prediction of 2.4C catastrophe – The world is on track for disastrous levels of global heating of 2.4C, far in excess of the limits in the Paris climate agreement, according to Climate Action Tracker (CAT), the world’s most respected climate analysis coalition. As Cop26 continues in Glasgow, the CAT findings are based on the short-term goals countries have set out. It would far exceed the 2C upper limit the Paris accord said the world needed to stay “well below”, and the much safer 1.5C limit aimed for at Cop26. This morning we report that China’s chief Cop delegate says it has detailed and concrete plans on how to meet its climate commitments, and is pushing those plans forward vigorously, unlike some countries that are “paying lip service” to their climate targets. Boris Johnson will be back at Cop26 today, arriving by train after he was criticised for leaving by jet last time. * * * Midweek catch-up &gt; A pregnant Yemeni journalist, Rasha Abdullah al-Harazi, has been killed in a car explosion in Aden, witnesses and medical sources said. Her husband, Mahmoud al-Atmi, also a journalist, was injured, Reuters reported. &gt; Hundreds of pages of White House records from the Trump administration can be turned over to the House committee investigating the deadly 6 January attack on the Capitol, a judge has ruled against Donald Trump’s objections. &gt; Just over half of Britons did not know 6 million Jewish people were murdered during the Holocaust, a survey has found – though 89% had definitely heard about the Holocaust and about three-quarters knew it involved the mass murder of Jews. &gt; England has the highest death rates among frail and older hospitalised patients in the western world, a landmark global study has found. &gt; Squid Game will be back for season two, its creator, Hwang Dong-hyuk, has signalled. “There’s been so much pressure, so much demand, and so much love,” he said at a red carpet event. “You leave us no choice!” * * * ‘Misogynist’ Megxit – Prince Harry has said the term “Megxit” – used to describe his and wife Meghan’s decision to quit their royal duties – is a “misogynistic term, and it was created by a troll, amplified by royal correspondents, and it grew and grew and grew into mainstream media”. Speaking on a panel called the Internet Lie Machine, organised by Wired magazine, the Duke of Sussex said he told Twitter boss Jack Dorsey the day before the Capitol riots on 6 January that “his platform was allowing a coup to be staged”. Harry called misinformation a “global humanitarian crisis”. * * * Forgotten no more – The records of 320,000 troops from the Punjab who fought in the first world war, left unread in a basement for 97 years, have been disclosed by UK-based historians. Files found in the depths of the Lahore Museum in Pakistan have been digitised and put on the web in time for Armistice Day on Thursday. Whereas historians and the descendants of British and Irish soldiers could search public databases of service records, until now no such facility existed for the families of Indian soldiers. Using the database, the shadow minister Tanmanjeet Dhesi uncovered proof among the files that his great-grandfather had served in Iraq and lost a leg. Others have discovered that their family’s villages provided soldiers who served in France, the Middle East, Gallipoli, Aden and east Africa, as well as in other parts of British India during the first world war. Punjab was split between India and Pakistan in 1947. Today in Focus podcast: Emily Ratajkowski’s body of work The model views her body as a ‘tool’ to make a living – but ever since 2013’s Blurred Lines video, it has also been treated as public property. In this interview, she explains why she has written a book about her experiences, from an allegation of assault by Robin Thicke to how motherhood has changed her. Lunchtime read: Drinking gin on a climate budget Many of us are keen to eat more sustainably – but is a vegan croissant better or worse than locally sourced sausages? And can climate-conscious eating ever be enjoyable? One writer finds out. Sport Eoin Morgan has said that beating New Zealand in Wednesday’s T20 World Cup semi-final “would be a hell of an achievement” given the injuries that have forced five key players out of his squad and the last-minute tactical rethink forced upon him after Jason Roy’s withdrawal on Monday with a torn calf muscle. Andrew Gale, the Yorkshire head coach, has been suspended pending a disciplinary hearing into an offensive tweet he posted 11 years ago as the club continues to grapple with its racism scandal. Aston Villa look set to approach Rangers in the next 48 hours for permission to speak to Steven Gerrard, after the former Liverpool man was identified as their No 1 choice to succeed Dean Smith as manager. Emma Hayes praised “special” Maren Mjelde after the right-back made her long-awaited return to action during Chelsea’s thumping 7-0 defeat of Swiss side Servette in the Women’s Champions League. Emma Raducanu has confirmed that Torben Beltz will be her new coach, and also laughed off comments from England rugby coach Eddie Jones, who claimed that she was distracted from her sport by photoshoots and wearing Christian Dior clothes. Jones’s preparations for Saturday’s autumn international with Australia have been hit by further turmoil after Joe Marler was ruled out of facing the Wallabies because of Covid. The Wallabies’ Nic White has insisted he will not fall for Jones’s mind games after the coach singled the scrum-half out for praise before the Test at Twickenham. And England Hockey has been accused of a “shocking abuse of power” and “institutional and structural bias” by a club that has won its appeal against a 12-month suspended ban for breaching a code of conduct. Business Britain’s employers are offering bonuses of up to £2,000 to recruit Christmas workers amid fears over staff shortages disrupting the festive season. There are currently 26,307 seasonal job vacancies, almost double the 13,668 at the same point a year ago. Bonuses include £2,000 from Amazon for warehouse workers, £1,000 for DPD warehouse night sorters, and payments of £500 for new recruits at Ocado, AO.com and Hand Picked Hotels. Pressure on global supply was reflected in China where figures today showed that factory-gate inflation rose 13.5% last month, the highest for 26 years. The FTSE100 is due to fall about 0.25% this morning, with the pound on $1.355 and €1.170. The papers Apart from those dire global heating predictions, our Guardian front page today covers the crisis on the Polish border, where a wave of refugees is being used by President Alexander Lukashenko of Belarus to put pressure on the EU, which has criticised his widespread crackdown on dissent. The Times has “‘Brazen’ Cox accused of flouting Commons rules” while the Metro has that as “Geoff in paradise” because he “spent almost a month working on a Caribbean island as part of his £1million a year second job”. The Mail says it has the “Tawdry truth” on that one if you turn to its “special dossier” inside. Its front-page lead, though, is “Fury grows over raid on historic UK insurer” – Bain Capital wants to take over LV, which was “founded to help Liverpool’s poor bury their dead”. The Mirror reports on the “Race to jab 100,000 NHS staff” by next April or they’ll face the sack. “Just do it!” insists the Express. The i says “Care home cliff edge revealed” as staff shortages bite and the vaccination deadline approaches. The Telegraph says “Oxford ‘owes explanation to Jewish students’ for Mosley cash”, as in why did it take cash from a trust funded by the inheritance left by the fascist Oswald Mosley. The Sun has Katie Price talking about her “drink-drive crash” while the FT leads with “General Electric pulls the plug on conglomerate with three-way split” – the resulting public companies will focus on healthcare, energy and aviation. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendA global water crisis is being ignored at Cop26 to the detriment of billions of people’s lives, according to the charity WaterAid. Water had not had “nearly enough” attention at the climate conference in Glasgow, with urgent action needed, said Tim Wainwright, chief executive of WaterAid. “The way that climate change affects human beings is almost entirely through water, either too much or too little,” he said. “So why aren’t we talking about water all the time? “We need the kind of action on water that we have already happening on the energy transition,” he said. “I think this is the first Cop where people are beginning to sit up and take notice. But it needs more than taking note. It needs a lot of action and it’s urgent,” he said. A 2016 study found two-thirds of the global population, four billion people, faced water shortages, and many were at increased risk of floods and droughts brought on by the climate crisis. “The climate crisis is a water crisis at its core,” he said. Rainfall patterns have changed in many parts of the world; “more intense and more frequent floods pollute water sources and destroy crops or homes, while longer and more frequent droughts dry up the springs many people need to survive.” Wainwright said very little action was being taken to help affected communities. A WaterAid analysis in 2020 found that water received less than 3% of climate finance overall. Rising sea levels were introducing salt into water sources in places, and drought was pushing water deep underground in others, he said, forcing people, mostly women, to spend longer and walk further in search of water. “Water is fundamental to life,” said Wainwright. “It underlies your health, your ability to have an education.” He pointed out that it was the poorest people in countries that had contributed the least to the climate crisis who were suffering the most and said investment in managing water supply should be focused in these areas. The overwhelming focus of talks on addressing the climate crisis had been on trying to slow it down, he said, at the expense of highlighting the current impact on some of the most climate-stressed parts of the world. “We need a revolution that takes us to zero carbon and we need a revolution that takes us to adapting the world to cope with the climate change that is irreversible,” he said. As part of efforts to tackle the problem, a coalition of governments, businesses, banks and non-governmental organisations pledged their support on Friday for a water and climate crisis fund that aims to bring clean water to 50 million people in Africa and Asia by 2030. Unless action was taken, the future would not be “not worth thinking about”, Wainwright added. “It’s calamitous. [A lack of access to water] is already killing people … It’s unthinkable not to do something about this. The world has to rise to this challenge.”The album Tom Petty considered to be the best work of his career chronicled the most tumultuous period of his life. Between the summer of 1992 and the spring of 94, the stretch in which he recorded his classic album Wildflowers, Petty’s 22-year marriage to the mother of his two children fell apart, he fired the drummer with whom he had worked since his Heartbreakers band began nearly three decades before, and he left both the record company for which he recorded all of his hits and the producer who shaped some of his biggest ones. “He was blowing up every aspect of his life,” said Mary Wharton, who directed a new documentary set in that dense era, titled Tom Petty, Somewhere You Feel Free: The Making of Wildflowers. “From his personal life to his business life to his creative life, Tom was trying to figure out how to put things back together in a way that made sense to him in that moment.” Despite the frustration, controversy and agony of the time, Wildflowers also represented a fount of opportunity, a blank check for the future. For the most part, the film focuses on that aspect, leaving some of the more troubling issues either implicit, glossed-over or denied. Small wonder the film is as interesting for what it doesn’t include as what it does. Some of that has to do with what Petty revealed, and didn’t reveal, about his life at the time; some probably came as a result of a life that ended too soon and without warning. On 2 October 2017, Petty died at the age of 66 from what was ruled an accidental overdose of opioids, sedatives and an anti-depressant. An official statement by the family at the time stated that the musician had been taking that mix of medications to numb the escalating pain of emphysema, issues with his knees and a badly fractured hip. In the time since, his estate has been combing through the music and film that remains in the vault. Lately, they have concentrated on Wildflowers, drawn by its revered status with fans, critics and Petty himself. Last year, they sanctioned a four-CD box set titled Wildflowers and the Rest, which restored 10 songs excised from the original release, along with demos, alternative takes and live recordings of material from the original sessions performed over the next two decades. Wharton’s film draws on two primary sources – footage shot in the 90s during the Wildflowers recording sessions and fresh interviews she conducted with the Heartbreakers’ Mike Campbell and Benmont Tench, as well as with the album’s producer, Rick Rubin, and Petty’s daughter, Adria. The vintage footage, shot by the longtime Petty chronicler Martyn Atkins, ran four hours. Only 11 minutes of it has been seen before, as part of a press kit created at the time. The new documentary project began, said Wharton, after Petty’s daughter “found these cans of film in Warner Bros’ vault that she didn’t know existed. She felt something should be done with them,” she said. Both the vintage footage and the new interviews focus on the excitement Petty felt in this new chapter in his life. In the songs he was writing, he found a fresh way to express himself by mining his own life for material. “The songs reflected what was going on in his personal life more closely than any other project he had done,” Wharton said. In that sense, Wildflowers represents Petty’s first true solo album though his literal first, Full Moon Fever, appeared five years earlier. “The songs on Full Moon Fever were classic Tom Petty songs in that they present characters that aren’t necessarily him,” the director said. Part of the impetus to go deeper came from Petty’s entry into middle age, having just turned 44. “He was trying to figure out how to be an adult rock’n’roll star,” Wharton said. “How do you have some dignity in this very childish career of rock star?” Petty’s quest for creative growth also led him to vary the musicians he worked with. Originally, he intended to only hire musicians outside the Heartbreakers. While he did bring in other players for some parts – including Ringo Starr, the Beach Boys’ Carl Wilson and Michael Kamen for the tasteful orchestrations – he wound up using three-fifths of the Heartbreakers on every track, including guitarist Campbell, keyboardist Tench and bassist Howie Epstein. “He couldn’t quit them,” Wharton said. “If you’re putting together a dream team rock’‘n’roll band, those are the guys you want. Also, Tom had such a long and deep collaborative relationship with Mike Campbell. They worked together their entire lives.” In developing the music, and looking towards his creative future, Petty came to believe that the Heartbreakers’ drummer, Stan Lynch, didn’t have the right feel. So he made the difficult decision to fire him and bring in Steve Ferrone, who remained the band’s drummer until Petty’s death. In interviews for the film, various speakers make clear how crucial Ferrone’s sharp attack was to songs on Wildflowers like You Don’t Know How It Feels. Wharton didn’t contact Lynch for his view of things. But, she said, “we did make sure Stan was presented in a respectful way. I think that Mike Campbell had a clear-eyed view of the situation so we went with his explanation.” The lyrics to one song on the album directly address issues with another Heartbreaker – bassist Epstein – though that wasn’t obvious at the time. In Don’t Fade on Me, Petty reaches out to someone who has lost their way. It was later revealed that Epstein was addicted to heroin at the time. (He died of an overdose of that drug in 2003.) “Tom clearly loves the person he’s writing about,” Wharton said. “The song is a beautiful way to throw a life raft to someone who’s in trouble.” At the time, Petty’s daughter interpreted the song as a pained address to her mother. In the film, she says that as soon as she heard the album as a kid she felt that the whole thing reflected her parents’ impending break-up. While Petty acknowledged as much in interviews when he was promoting his next album, Echo, which openly covered the divorce, none of that was known by outsiders at the time. As a result, he doesn’t address it in the vintage footage seen in the film. Instead, he describes, with wonder, how some songs for the album came to him unconsciously, including the title track. A shimmering ballad, the lyrics to the song Wildflowers encourage a loved one to move on and find joy on their own. In that sense, it recalls Neil Young’s classic ballads Birds and I Believe in You, two of the most sensitive rejection songs ever written. It’s both fascinating and strange to watch Petty deflect his true emotions when discussing the song in the vintage footage. “Maybe he was afraid to express those feelings even to himself at the time,” Wharton said. “It’s him not wanting to fully accept the ramifications of ending a long-term relationship that involves kids and financial implications.” In both the old and new footage, the people interviewed are far more direct in discussing the dramatic changes the production style brought to the project. On Petty’s two previous releases he worked with Jeff Lynne, who has an elaborate and specific production sound. Hiring Rick Rubin for Wildflowers allowed him to work more spontaneously and organically. At one point in the new footage, Rubin says Wildflowers scared Petty because he felt he might never be able to create something as free-flowing again. The speakers in the film are equally frank about Petty’s contempt for his record company, MCA. While he was still under contract to them, he signed a new deal with Warner Brothers in secret. “Tom publicly battled with them for years over everything from the price they sold his record for to the contract he signed when he was young and stupid,” Wharton said. “He never felt like they appreciated his artistry. When he turned in the Full Moon Fever album to MCA they first rejected it. When Tom played it for Mo Ostin [head of Warner Bros] he said ‘these people are crazy. This is a hit record.’ That was the beginning of his relationship with Mo.” Yet, when Petty first submitted the sprawl of songs cut during Wildflowers sessions to Ostin, under the assumption it would result in a double album, the Warners exec shot that idea down as uncommercial. Regardless, the slimmed-down result clocked in at 63 minutes – the length of a double set in the LP era. Released in that form, Wildflowers became a huge success, selling over 3m copies in the US alone. Its songs form a perfect arc, telling a coherent story of possibility and loss. It culminates in the song Wake Up Time, which finds the artist telling himself he has to face the hard facts of his life and make changes despite the consequences. As it turned out, more hard times lay ahead for Petty. Shortly after Wildflowers appeared, he started to use heroin. Wharton said she found footage from that time in which “Tom looks different,” she said. “In the Wildflowers footage, he’s so clear-eyed. In the other footage, he’s not. I interpreted that as ‘oh, this is when he started using heroin.’” The director said she chose not to use that footage so her film could focus wholly on the Wildflowers period. In the years since, the album has only grown in stature. Before his death, Petty toyed with the idea of centering a whole tour around its songs. To Wharton, the legacy of Wildflowers boils down to “the message Tom was trying to convey to himself at the time – that we all belong somewhere we feel free.” Tom Petty, Somewhere You Feel Free will be released worldwide on 11 November on Tom Petty’s official YouTube channelThe former Australian prime minister Paul Keating has denounced the US- and UK-backed plan for nuclear-powered submarines as “like throwing a handful of toothpicks at the mountain”, declaring Australia should avoid being drawn into a war with China. The former Labor leader on Wednesday accused the major Australian political parties of losing their way on foreign policy, while dismissing the credibility of the UK’s “tilt” to the Indo-Pacific region. “Britain is like an old theme park sliding into the Atlantic compared to modern China,” said Keating, who was Australia’s prime minister from 1991 to 1996. Keating also played down criticism of China’s militarisation of disputed features in the South China Sea by saying “big powers are rude”, and said it would be wrong to insist the increasingly dominant economic power could be only “a stakeholder” in a US-led system. While he said Beijing was “in the adolescent phase of their diplomacy” and had “testosterone running everywhere”, Australia had no alternative but to engage with an increasingly powerful China. Keating was most critical of Australia’s plan to work with the US and the UK to acquire at least eight nuclear-propelled submarines, as part of the Aukus partnership, with the first of them unlikely to be in the water until about 2040. He said Scott Morrison’s Coalition government was wrongly “trying to find our security from Asia rather than in Asia”. The plan was all about hawkish national security advisers who “can’t wait to get the staplers back on to the Americans”, he said, adding that the submarines would not have a decisive military impact against China. “Eight submarines against China when we get the submarines in 20 years’ time – it’ll be like throwing a handful of toothpicks at the mountain,” he told the National Press Club. Keating said the Australian government had treated the French government “appallingly” over the cancellation of the $90bn deal for 12 conventionally powered submarines. He also questioned whether the plans would diminish Australia’s strategic autonomy – a concern also raised by the Labor opposition. The former prime minister said if Australia were to buy American Virginia class submarines, “they’ll simply be part of the United States force directed by the United States”. Last month, on an unofficial visit to Taipei, the conservative former prime minister Tony Abbott raised fears Beijing “could lash out disastrously very soon” at Taiwan – and argued the US and Australia could not stand idly by. Keating said China “wants its front doorstep and front porch” – including Taiwan – but he did not believe China would launch military action unless leaders in Taipei formally declared independence. He cited a recent speech by the Chinese president, Xi Jinping, that Beijing would try to resolve the matter harmoniously. China regards Taiwan as a renegade province that will one day be “reunified” – by force if necessary – although the Chinese Communist party has never ruled the island. China flew 150 warplanes into Taiwan’s air defence identification zone in the space of four days at the beginning of October, increasing pressure on the democratically governed island of 24 million people. Keating said Australia “should not be drawn into a military engagement over Taiwan, US sponsored or otherwise” because Taiwan was “not a vital Australian interest”. Keating argued the foreign policy debate in Australia was now driven by “the spooks” in the security agencies, and when it came to the major foreign policy choices the Coalition and Labor were “fundamentally not up to it”. Keating takes swipe at Labor He said the party he once led should not have been so quick to support the government’s submarine decision; it should have used the cover of the agreed 18-month study period to consider the right choice for Australia. “Instead of that, Labor gets a briefing one night, and by 11 o’clock the next morning, they’re in the car,” he said. He said Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, had opted for a “reasonably quiet political life” by effectively taking the position that “there shouldn’t be an ounce of daylight between her and the Liberal party” on foreign policy. “You have no big disputes, because you’re glued up on to the government, but you make no national progress,” he said. Wong, who has previously backed the argument for nuclear-powered submarines but criticised the Morrison government’s handling of the announcement, declined to comment. Morrison’s office also declined to respond to Keating’s remarks. Australia’s relationship with China, its top trading partner, has deteriorated in recent years, including over the blocking of Chinese telco Huawei from Australia’s 5G network, increasing scrutiny of foreign investment proposals, criticism of China over human rights, and the government’s early calls for a Covid-19 origins inquiry. That worsened last year when China began blocking calls with Australian government ministers and rolled out trade actions against a range of Australian exports including coal, wine, barley and seafood. Morrison has said he won’t trade away Australia’s sovereignty or values. Keating argued Australia could have a “civil relationship” with China even though they may disagree on a range of issues. He said Canberra should always reserve the right to speak out on human rights – including in Xinjiang in China’s west – but said it should also speak out about India’s treatment of Muslims in Kashmir. Keating agreed China had become “more authoritarian”, but argued “it will become a more civil society than the United States”, citing America’s problems with school shootings and Donald Trump’s attempt to overturn the 2020 election. He said China did “not want to command three oceans, like the United States” but was “interested in the corner of one ocean, its ocean”. Coalition labels former PM ‘out of date’ Liberal party senator James Paterson, who chairs the Australian parliament’s security and intelligence committee, branded Keating’s assessment as “out of date”. “The people of Taiwan can take comfort from the fact that not only does Paul Keating not speak for the government, he does not even reflect the views of the Labor party he once led,” Paterson said on Wednesday night. “His views on China are out of date and out of touch.”The New South Wales parliament will consider a revived push to make it a standalone criminal offence to cause the death of an unborn foetus when a pregnant mother is injured or killed. On Wednesday, the NSW attorney general, Mark Speakman, introduced new legislation to state parliament which he said would “better acknowledge the heartbreak suffered by families and punish offenders appropriately” when an unborn child was killed. Currently, if a foetus is killed as a result of a criminal act against a mother, it is legally recognised as an injury to the mother. The new bill before the NSW parliament creates two new offences, including one which applies to situations where a crime leads to the death of a foetus but the mother survives. The other offence covers the loss of an unborn foetus as a result of the death of a pregnant woman by criminal act. Legislation to recognise causing death to an unborn foetus as an individual criminal offence has become known as “Zoe’s law”, named after the daughter of Brodie Donegan, a NSW woman who lost her unborn daughter when a drug-affected driver crashed into them on Christmas Day in 2009. A “Zoe’s law” bill has been before the NSW parliament in some form since 2013, but has faced criticism from legal and women’s rights groups concerned about its implications for women’s reproductive rights. The bill introduced on Wednesday also increases the maximum penalty by three years, with the total penalty also taking into account punishment for charges relating to the mother. Under the proposed new laws, these charges can be laid where the foetus was at least 20 weeks or 400 grams in weight. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Speakman said that dangerous driving occasioning grievous bodily harm currently carries a maximum penalty of seven years imprisonment if a foetus was lost in the incident, and the maximum penalty would increase to 10 years. “It’s about making sure the criminal law and the criminal justice process reflects and recognises the loss the Brodie Donegans of the world and their families have suffered,” Speakman said. Donegan spoke of her experience with the law after losing her unborn child. “It just didn’t seem fair,” she said. “I just couldn’t reconcile how Zoe was listed with ... my broken bones and there wasn’t sort of ... any acknowledgement of what we actually lost. “You’ve already imagined, being eight months pregnant, that you’re having this child and they’re going to school and you start decorating nurseries and things,” Donegan said. The new bill introduced on Wednesday would also allow family members to make victim statements that will be taken into account by courts when sentencing offenders, and for the name of an unborn child to be included in the formal wording of charges against an individual accused of the offence. Family members will also be able to claim funeral costs for the loss of an unborn child caused by car accidents. A one-off $3,000 bereavement payment will also be made available to help families access counselling, when either of the new offences are charged. Since 2013 there have been multiple attempts by NSW politicians to revive “Zoe’s law”, including a push from the Christian Democrat MP Reverend Fred Nile in 2018. At the time, women’s and legal groups criticised the proposed laws for setting a “dangerous precedent” and presenting “a real risk to women’s reproductive rights”. Labor’s Jo Haylen, when asked if the opposition supported the bill introduced on Wednesday, said “these are complicated matters”. “The bill was only introduced a couple of hours ago, we’ll be seeking a detailed briefing from the government and we’ll go through our usual processes”. Other advocacy groups Guardian Australia approached on Wednesday were still assessing the new laws. With Australian Associated PressSeahorses, eels, seals and sharks are living in the tidal Thames, according to the most comprehensive analysis of the waterway since it was declared biologically dead in the 1950s. But scientists from the Zoological Society of London (ZSL), who carried out the work, warn that the 95 miles of the tidal Thames is suffering from rising nitrate levels as a result of industrial runoff and sewage discharges. Water levels and temperature are also rising as a result of global heating. On average, summer temperatures in the upper tidal Thames have been increasing by 0.19C a year since the turn of the century, the State of the Thames report said. The scale of plastic pollution littering the tidal Thames, which stretches from below Teddington to Shoeburyness is also highlighted. As well as thousands of plastic bottles, wet wipes are a serious concern. One mound of wet wipes in Barnes has grown in height by 1.4 metres since 2014 and covers an area of 1,000 sq metres. “These products, many of which contain plastic, are physically altering the foreshore along the Thames by creating large mounds of sediment densely bound together,” said the report. The density of microplastics found in the Thames was measured at 19.5 plastics per cubic metre, and microplastics flow down the river at a rate of up to 94,000 pieces per second, the report estimated. ZSL used 17 different indicators to assess the health of the Thames’s natural environment. It highlighted the impact of dedicated conservation efforts, such as the Salt Fleet Flats reserve near the mouth of the Thames on its southern bank. The mudflats and saltmarsh habitat was created in 2016 and is home to a range of wading birds. Species living in the Thames include seahorses and even sharks, including tope, starry smooth-hound and spurdog. The most recent count revealed there were about 900 harbour seals and 3,200 grey seals. Since the surveys began in 2003, there has been a clear and steady increase in both seal populations in the Thames estuary. Fish numbers have declined since the 1990s, though, with conservation scientists saying further research is needed to determine the cause. The tidal Thames supports more than 115 species of fish, 92 species of bird and has almost 600 hectares of saltmarsh, which is a crucial habitat for a range of wildlife. ZSL’s conservation programme lead for wetland ecosystem recovery, Alison Debney, said: “Estuaries are one of our neglected and threatened ecosystems. They provide us with clean water, protection from flooding, and are an important nursery for fish and other wildlife. The Thames estuary and its associated ‘blue carbon’ habitats are critically important in our fight to mitigate climate change and build a strong and resilient future for nature and people. “This report has enabled us to really look at how far the Thames has come on its journey to recovery since it was declared biologically dead, and in some cases, set baselines to build from in the future.” While levels of dissolved oxygen and phosphorus have declined, the latter as a result of better treatment of sewage since the 1990s, scientists found a long-term increase in nitrate concentrations, which can negatively affect water quality and be damaging to wildlife. Sources of the high levels of nitrates are industrial and sewage effluent discharging into the water, according to the Environment Agency. In addition, there are many chemicals of concern that are not being regularly monitored, with potentially harmful impacts on the wildlife of the Thames. The Thames Tideway tunnel, known as London’s new super-sewer, which is due to be completed in 2025 at a cost of £3.9bn, will capture more than 95% of the sewage spills that enter the river from sewer systems, according to the civil engineers behind the project. The ZSL report also highlights recreational use of the river, from rowing to kayaking and fishing to tourist boats. “As a diverse environment, accessible to millions of people, the tidal Thames is an important source of cognitive benefits,” the report said.Ladies and gentlemen, we have a new contender in the 2021 edition of Britain’s Most Embarrassing Politician! Lord Wolfson of Tredegar, an unelected life peer, recently graced us with his unfiltered thoughts on a proposed amendment to the Voyeurism Act that would criminalise taking non-consensual pictures of a woman breastfeeding. A change in the law, Wolfson warned, could hurt innocent people. Take, for example, the case of a man photographing his bikini-clad wife on a beach, “intending to use that image for his own sexual gratification”. What would happen if the photographer accidentally caught a breastfeeding woman in the background? Would the law consider him a pervert? Wolfson raised valid concerns about potential ambiguities in the drafting of the law. These concerns, however, could have easily been expressed in any number of less weird ways. But, no, there was the honour of a hypothetical man taking hypothetical photos for his hypothetical sexual gratification to protect. The noble lord’s detailed objections have, understandably, raised some eyebrows … as well as a number of questions about the contents of Wolfson’s family photo albums. But let’s not allow ourselves to be derailed from the real issue here. Which is the disgraceful fact that, under the current law in England and Wales, it is legal to take non-consensual photos of a woman breastfeeding in public. And people are taking advantage of this: the proposed amendment came about after a woman in Manchester called Julia Cooper tried to challenge a man taking photos of her nursing and was told by police she had no legal recourse because there wasn’t a reasonable expectation of privacy. Two Labour MPs then took up the cause under the slogan Stop the Breast Pest. I can’t stress this enough: hypothetical men taking photos of their wives on the beach for their “sexual gratification” aren’t the people we should be concerned about here. What we should really be concerned about is the fact that, in 2021, women still don’t have the freedom to breastfeed in peace. And the fact that we have unelected peers chiming in on women’s rights. Free the breasts, abolish the barons, that’s what I say. Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistFor an “official” documentary – sanctioned by the Cousteau Society and co-produced by his children Diane and Pierre-Yves Cousteau – this account of Jacques Cousteau’s life and mermaid’s purse of achievements is not completely uncritical. Not only does it show how the ocean explorer, seen bludgeoning sharks and dynamiting coral reefs in his 1956 classic The Silent World, graduated to become an indefatigable conservationist before his death in 1997; it also broaches the emotional price paid by the Cousteau family for his constant horizon-chasing, something his little filmed first wife Simone seems to have been even more ruthless about: “No man in the world could offer me what this vessel has.” You’re probably familiar with the trademarks – the good ship Calypso’s crew of “dropouts”, the red beanies, the wanderlust – as rhapsodised by Cousteau in his films and TV specials, and lifted by Wes Anderson for 2004’s The Life Aquatic With Steve Zissou. Even so, the course Cousteau charted through 20th-century exploration, exploitation and, belatedly, environmentalism is still quite stunning: pioneering western freediver, the inventor of the aqualung in Toulon, discoverer of the oil reserves that enriched Abu Dhabi, swashbuckling film-maker who won the Palme d’Or, and by the mid-1980s a de facto elder statesman whom governments could not afford to ignore on the emerging topic of climate change. Director Liz Garbus largely constructs her film from archive recordings of Cousteau and associates, and journal entries voiced by Vincent Cassel. Possibly, sustained sit-down interviews with his three surviving children (his heir apparent Philippe was tragically killed in a plane crash in 1979) might have yielded even more probing insights into the family dynamics – and the questing personality at its centre everyone had to accommodate. Becoming Cousteau is no hagiography, but greater distance might have also allowed Garbus to reflect more on the man’s environmental legacy. The film is keen to assert his involvement in the 1991 moratorium on Antarctic exploration. Kudos, for sure – but perhaps it’s possible that such media paragons, among them David Attenborough after him, have also allowed politicians to claim green credentials by association, rather than action. • Becoming Cousteau is released in cinemas on 12 November.Greta Thunberg and youth climate activists from around the world are filing a legal petition to the UN secretary-general urging him to declare a “system-wide climate emergency”. As Cop26 enters its final days, climate campaigners were due to file a legal document on Wednesday calling on António Guterres to use emergency powers to match the level of response adopted for the coronavirus pandemic by pronouncing the climate crisis a global level 3 emergency – the UN’s highest category. As well as the Swedish climate campaigner – who on Friday declared Cop26 “a failure” and a “greenwash festival” as she called for drastic annual emissions cuts addressing protesters in Glasgow – the group of 14 includes Ranton Anjain and Litokne Kabua from the Marshall Islands, Ridhima Pandey from India, Alexandria Villaseñor from the US and Ayakha Melithafa from South Africa. They hope that an emergency declaration would result in resources and technical expertise being rushed to countries most at risk from global heating, particularly small island states and developing countries, to support climate change adaptation, analysis of climate science and public health responses. It is understood that the UN has already seen a draft of the petition and that a level 3 emergency is under discussion, but a spokesperson for the secretary-general’s office declined to comment on whether it may be implemented. In an advance draft of the petition, seen by the Guardian, the activists call on the secretary-general and other UN agencies to “mobilise a UN comprehensive response to the climate emergency”. They also urged them to appoint a crisis management team to “oversee immediate and comprehensive global action on climate”. Citing the action taken by Guterres and the Inter-Agency Standing Committee (IASC), the UN’s humanitarian coordination forum, in response to Covid-19, they argue: “The climate emergency – which threatens every person on the planet into the foreseeable future – is at least as serious a threat as a global pandemic and similarly requires urgent international action.” Scott Gilmore, a human rights lawyer at the law firm Hausfeld and lead counsel on the case, said an emergency declaration could lead to the creation of a special body, or a “climate tsar”, to coordinate efforts across UN agencies. He said: “That’s one of the great lessons that was learned from the Covid response. The World Health Organization was tasked with leading the response but they were given the organisational support and an infrastructure within the United Nations. “The secretary-general has really taken the lead over the past few years on pushing states to declare national climate emergencies,” he added. “The UN has not taken that step yet. The view of the petitioners in this case is that now is the time.” It comes after the same group had a landmark case, in which they argued that countries perpetuating the climate crisis violate their human rights, rejected by UN children’s rights body, the Committee on the Rights of the Child, last month. In their latest legal action, they argue that a UN comprehensive response is needed because “climate action must not stop at state borders” and to address the “fundamental inequities of climate change”. They also say it is needed to show the world’s youth that the UN has “not abandoned us to a grim future”. Campaigner Villaseñor, 16, who started school striking aged 13, outside the UN headquarters in New York, called for immediate action. She said: “The UN has shown us it’s capable of mobilising against imminent global threats, and the climate crisis is the greatest global threat ever known to humanity …We are quickly running out of time to protect children and future generations, and we’re demanding adults step up right now and rally a critical global response to the climate crisis.” Stéphane Dujarric, the secretary-general’s spokesperson, said: “The secretary-general, as chair of the CEB [the UN System Chief Executives Board for Coordination], has made it clear that the whole of the organisation is mobilised to push for greater and verifiable climate action from member states and the private sector, as well as pushing to address inequalities, disinformation and lack of solidarity.”World leaders gathered for Cop26 must ban industrial fishing on the high seas to have a chance of preserving the ocean, the Earth’s “largest carbon-capturing and oxygen-generating system”, the deep-sea explorer and oceanographer Sylvia Earle has said. Earle, 86, has clocked up more than 7,000 hours underwater and holds several records, including in 1979 for the deepest untethered dive by a woman. She was at Cop26 in Glasgow this week, taking part in events with Al Gore, John Kerry and Zac Goldsmith, as well as young climate activists at the Ocean Action Hub. Stopping industrial fishing in international waters, Earle said, was as important as curbing fossil fuel use. “It’s the No 1 priority, because we have the chance, in a stroke, to safeguard the blue heart of the planet,” she said. “It’s where most of the oxygen that comes from the ocean is generated. It’s where most of the carbon is taken up.” The exponential growth in industrial fishing is blamed for an alarming drop in marine life in the last half century. A third of commercial fish populations are being harvested at biologically unsustainable levels, according to a 2018 report by the UN Food and Agriculture Organization. “All of that wildlife taken out of the ocean not only affects biodiversity and fosters extinctions at an accelerated rate. It breaks the carbon cycle – the nutrient chain that maintains the fabric of life on Earth,” she said. The pioneering marine biologist from New Jersey made history in 1970 with Mission 6, when she and an all-female team of scientists spent two weeks in Nasa’s underwater laboratory in the US Virgin Islands, Tektite II, to study aquatic life as well as the psychology of a small crew in extreme conditions, as part of Nasa’s research for sending humans to the moon. She operated deep-sea research submarines in the 1980s and served as the first female chief scientist of the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. In 1998 Time Magazine named her its first Hero for the Planet. “It is frustrating to be able to see the future so clearly, from having spent years at sea, and thousands of hours under the sea, and to realise that so many people can’t see it,” she said. “The climate scientists are saying: ‘Listen up, we’ve got about 10 years, to make or break our behaviour toward nature.” Earle noted that just five nations were “benefiting disproportionately on an industrial scale from the wild animals that live [in international waters]”. China and Taiwan account for 60% of distant-water fishing, while Japan, South Korea, and Spain make up about 10% each, according to a 2019 report by the Stimson Center. “Only a small segment of the human population truly relies on ocean life for sustenance,” said Earle. “Many more rely on it for money, using wild animals as a source of revenue.” She argued that the coastal communities who survived on fishing could do so within national waters, and compared fishing the high seas to killing elephants for ivory or rhinoceroses for their horns. Industrial fishing was “cutting slashes in the web of life” by destroying fish populations around the world, she said. Worldwide, 3 billion people rely on wild-caught or farmed seafood as their main source of animal protein, particularly in coastal communities and small-island states, according to the WWF. Earle is also president of Mission Blue, an organisation that aims to establish marine protected areas (MPA) around the world. She hailed last week’s announcement at Cop26 of a new “mega-MPA”, linking the waters of Ecuador, Colombia, Panama, and Costa Rica, but said the signatories of the “30x30” initiative – to secure at least 30% of the world’s ocean as marine protected areas by 2030 – needed to step up. “We must protect nature as if our lives depend on it,” she said, adding: “Achieving 30% of full protection for land and sea … doesn’t mean we can trash the rest.” She said the Covid-19 pandemic had helped give people a greater appreciation of nature and realise that what affects one affects us all. “We are equipped with the superpower of knowing,” said Earle. “We are one species with an oversized impact, an oversized responsibility and I’d say an oversized opportunity to take what we now know and act.” Earle, a vegetarian who says she has not eaten fish for at least four decades, called the ocean a “living system, a biogeochemical miracle, that keeps us safe in a universe that doesn’t have a built-in life support system. “We have abused it, thinking that it’s infinite in its capacity to recover – no matter what we put in, what we take out.”Meandering across spectacular viaducts bridging limestone cliffs that drop into the River Wye, the Monsal Trail is considered one of the most scenic walking and cycling routes in the UK. With slopes covered in purple orchids and cowslips in May, and ox-eye daisies, bloody cranesbill and a lilac dusting of small scabious later in the year, the trail rewards walkers with stunning scenery across the Peak District. But this haven for wildlife and geology, and attraction for rail heritage enthusiasts, is under threat. The route is at the centre of a battle between outdoor enthusiasts and those who would like to convert it back into a railway line. After the closure of the Peak and Dales line in 1968, nearly nine miles of the now- abandoned railway were transformed into a trail, incorporating railway tunnels as well as the Monsal viaduct. In 2011 the four Victorian tunnels on the trail were opened to create a complete off-road cycling route, funded as part of the wider Pedal Peak District project to promote cycling opportunities in the national park. But now the Manchester and East Midlands Rail Action Partnership (Memrap) is calling for the reinstatement of the Peaks and Dales line. The group says it would “reconnect isolated communities between Matlock and Buxton/Chinley and reconnect Manchester with the east Midlands, to and through the Peak District national park”. However, almost 14,000 people have signed a petition against the proposals. Lee Cooper-Smith, who started the petition and can often be seen walking the trail with his six-month-old daughter, said its loss would have a significant impact. “It’s such a beautiful, spectacular place that has the bonus of being incredibly accessible, which is unusual for somewhere so magnificent. It allows disabled people and those with young children in tow to access something wonderful really easily,” said Cooper-Smith, who lives 18 miles from the route in the Derbyshire town of New Mills. For Cooper-Smith, 48, a railway enthusiast who spent three months converting a dilapidated railway carriage into an office in his back garden last year, part of the fascination of the trail is its heritage as a former railway line, where walkers are able to retrace its fascinating history and the old industries along its route. “The utter joy of the trail is that you feel as if you are experiencing the engineering of yesteryear, and you get a glimpse into the industrial revolution with all the cotton mills. Walking through the tunnels is very exciting,” he adds. The trail is estimated to attract 300,000 visitors a year. In 2020, during the late summer period alone, it saw more than 200,000 visitors. At its peak, there were almost 2,000 visits a day. Cooper-Smith said that because of the topography it was not possible to have rail and trail within the valley. “If rail wins, the trail will have to follow the B6465 road. This very action completely changes, and reduces, the unique appeal of the trail, of walking through the tunnels, along the same viaduct – it just becomes a trail. And this reduces the appeal ofa tourism asset that is partly responsible for the £2.3bn Derbyshire’s tourism trade, which many of our local businesses rely on.” For more than 100 years, the line, created by the Midland Railway by digging several tunnels and bridging the River Wye with the Monsal viaduct, carried passengers, freight and tourists to the fashionable spa town of Buxton. The route linking Derby and Manchester was considered one of the most scenic in the country, carving its way through Derbyshire’s great limestone hills, with several impressive feats of civil engineering to help it through the hilly terrain. But in 1968 the section between Matlock and Buxton was closed to save money. The Peak District national park authority reopened the route for recreation in 1981, with the trail cutting through limestone between Blackwell and Monsal Head. Supporters of the rail link argue that local communities lack access to wider transport links. Some politicians hail it as an ideal opportunity for “levelling up”, and a counter-petition created in 2015 to reopen the railway from Derby to Manchester has attracted more than 19,000 signatories. Memrap claims the reopened railway would provide sustainable public transport for the 13.25 million annual visitors to the Peak District national park – 90% of whom have no other option than to arrive by car. They also claim research has found that the Derbyshire economy is suffering from a steady “bleeding” effect, due to the lack of proper connectivity between Derby and Manchester, along the corridor running south to north through the county. A spokesperson for the group said: “The campaign aims to correct this with our proposal for reinstating this railway, which once linked Derby and Manchester directly, with proper attention to and respect for the Monsal Trail and the national park through which it must once again pass. It would – this time – serve the national park better than it did previously.” High Peak MP Robert Largan said the reinstatement of the line could be a great example of levelling up. “Re-instating the railway to Bakewell, Matlock and beyond could potentially be a huge boost for Buxton. That’s why I’m sponsoring a bid for a feasibility study, so this possibility can be properly looked at,” he said. “Of course, there are complications when it comes to the much loved Monsal Trail and I certainly wouldn’t support the trail being closed. That’s why the work that Buxton Town Team are doing to consider alternative trail provision is so important,” he added. But earlier this week the pro-railway campaign was dealt a blow when the Department for Transport ruled against offering it any funding. Memrap had put in for a slice of the £500m Restoring Your Railway programme, which was launched in January 2020 as part of the government’s levelling-up agenda. Despite the setback, Memrap chief executive Stephen Chaytow vowed to continue pursuing the reopening of the railway. “While we are naturally disappointed not to have secured the funding we were seeking through Restoring Your Railway, we continue to pursue other, existing avenues via the appropriate agencies,” he said. Later this month, the Dartmoor Line, which successfully bid for government funding, will reopen almost 50 years after it was axed. The £40.5m line is the first to be reinstated as part of the initiative. This article was amended on 14 November, 2021 to include an updated comment from Robert Largan, MP.Throughout the 2021 United Nations climate change conference, the Guardian will be publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. Charlie Hobbs, Aoraki/Mt Cook, New Zealand When the snowflake falls at the top of the glacier, it might take several hundred years or so to reach the bottom. By the time it reaches there, it’s compressed into ice, solid ice. A glacier is a slow-moving river of ice. It turns corners, and like a river it gets eddies and roughness, it goes over waterfalls. At the top of the Tasman glacier we might get 50 metres of snow a year. Over hundreds of years, as it moves down the valley, it can compress into a few centimetres or millimetres of ice. Decades and decades and decades, hundreds of years of ice forming. I started my guiding business in 1989. I’ve been guiding on the glaciers, and on Aoraki/Mt Cook since that time, and I’ve seen a lot of changes. When I first started, the glaciers were there – and they are still there. But over the years, we noticed that the glaciers were receding. If you get multiple seasons of lower snowfall, it’s going to have a huge effect on the glacier over time. You’ve got to feed a glacier with snow. It gets hungry for snow. So you’ve got to feed the upper regions of it with a huge amount, so that over time, that will start feeding and pushing down. Thirty years ago, there was no lake. Now it’s about 6km long and 300 metres deep. We can take people paddling around icebergs who normally would have to travel to the Antarctic or Alaska to do that. So it creates opportunities for other things. That doesn’t help the glacier, of course: when the lakes get bigger and bigger, there’s more water volume, and when you’ve got more water, it will encourage ice to melt. There’s no two ways about it: at the moment, the lakes are getting bigger. And there’s going to come a time when that huge Tasman glacier is going to leave the lake and move on to dry land, where it won’t calve off icebergs into the lake … The majority of people know that glaciers are receding but they just want to see them. There is a thing called last-chance tourism: “Come and see these glaciers, before they melt.”I am not a fan of bloodsports. But, growing up in posh, rural Northumberland in the 80s, it was expected that I would be. When my father, who grew up on Tyneside, moved to the country in the 70s, he rapidly began accepting invitations to pheasant shoots, as well as to grouse moors and fishing expeditions. He enjoyed the company, the sport and the hours spent out in the wild. From about the age of eight, I was invited to accompany him on these weekend excursions, much like a child being taken to their first football matches. I disliked the early starts and standing around in freezing conditions, waiting for birds to be driven into the sky, to their deaths, over a line of booming guns. But I wanted to please my dad. As soon as I was old enough to make my own weekend plans, though, I made them. They tended to focus more on clothes shopping and cinema trips to the Metrocentre in Gateshead. So why, years later – aged 27 and working for a film company in London – I accepted an invitation to go deer stalking in Scotland with my father, I have no idea. Except I do. It was offered as a family holiday in the beautiful western Highlands. We had often visited the area as children and I was nostalgic for the stunning views and dramatic hills. And I still wanted to please my dad. I even took lessons, at his request, in using a .22 rifle – which, in a twist of poetic justice, recoiled and gave me a black eye the first time I tried to fire it at a paper target. The hunting party assembled one Friday in September at the turn of the century. We started at dawn the next day in an Argocat, an open-top eight-wheel military-style vehicle that can climb near-vertical slopes at great speed. The driver was also our ghillie, a tough, wiry figure whose job it was to identify elderly or infirm deer that were selected for culling and guide us to them through wind, fog and rain. The ghillie was tougher than the hills themselves. He hurried us up and down the bare peaks so fast and so frequently that I half thought we were training for a fell run. With every hour that passed, it felt more and more like a Buchanesque special ops mission. We were instructed to slither over a rocky streambed on our bellies, rifles clanking on our backs. We waded through bogs and hauled ourselves over marshy summits. As our quarry moved, so we changed direction continuously. “Why are you doing this?” I kept asking myself. “What would have been wrong with a walk? Or a guided wildlife tour?” And then, suddenly, the ghillie almost pushed me to the ground. He pointed at a cloud of fog about a hundred yards ahead. I was baffled, until the cloud lifted like a curtain to reveal – directly in front of us – one of the most magnificent living creatures I have ever seen. I can still see the stag so clearly in my mind’s eye. Those staring dark eyes and almost puppyish large, black nose, a skeletal spread of antlers and a shaggy coat of fur, marbled with grey. He was old, but still majestic – and fit enough to have led us a merry dance over the hills. “Now!” the ghillie hissed in my ear. “Now’s your chance. Remember. You want to kill it, not wound it.” I adjusted my position, focused down the scope once more and placed my finger on the trigger. And, of course, I couldn’t take the shot. What on earth was I even thinking? I didn’t feel as if I was looking at an elderly beast that needed to be culled. Spectral, silhouetted against distant cloud-topped peaks, he looked more like the faded ruler of an ancient kingdom. I looked into those eyes and laid down the rifle, to the groans of the ghillie and my companions. Another curtain of mist descended; when it lifted, seconds later, the stag had vanished. I picked up my rifle and brushed off the grass and mud. The rest of our party continued on, while I trudged back to our holiday rental. But I wasn’t dejected. I was elated. I had come – via a telescopic sight – face to face with one of the most beautiful, iconic and noble beasts of Britain, roaming free in a bleak and deserted land of his own. It was a moment of truth and lasting inspiration. I could never have killed that stag – not in any context, for any reason. But I would, a decade later, write a story about him. Not just one book, but four, about a little boy and the stag that persuades him to help save the world’s last remaining animals. The encounter with that magnificent stag changed my life. And guess what – those stories did please my dad. Piers Torday’s latest book, The Wild Before (Quercus Children’s, £12.99), is out now. To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Three hundred metres below ground, Sebastian Tirintică operates an elevator at the Livezeni mine in Romania’s Jiu valley. His eyes widen with concentration as he guides the lever to lower the cage, ferrying the iron, wood, and other materials his co-workers need to extract coal. His focus keeps his fellow miners alive, which could be said for everyone working at Livezeni. Most of the equipment is more than 30 years old. Miners go underground knowing that a ceiling support could collapse or that a conveyor belt could snap. In seven years working inside the mine, Tirintică has been buried in coal three times. Each time, his co-workers pulled him out. “Danger unites us,” he said. “The brotherhood of the underground. You know that your colleague behind you can save your life.” Outside the mine at an institutional level, he says, there’s no one to watch his back. Coal has been on the decline for 3o years with little else created to replace the lost jobs. In the mid-1990s, 15 mines in the Jiu valley employed 45,000 people. Now, only about 3,000 workers remain in four mines: Livezeni, Vulcan, Lonea, and Lupeni. They are all scheduled to shut by 2030, as Romania strives to meet the EU climate targets. Coal makes up about a fifth of the country’s energy supply, less than wind and solar combined. But as operations close, people in these monotowns reliant on the coal industry are left with few options other than moving away to find decently paying work. Many have already left. In Tirintică’s five-storey apartment building, almost half of the homes are empty. “We need something to replace mining jobs with,” Lucian Enculescu, the leader of the Livezeni ‘Libertatea 2008’ union said. “Anything.” Multiple EU funds will begin to distribute money in an effort to help countries phase out coal and facilitate a “just transition” to clean energy. But currently, only one programme is under way in the valley: a training centre about to open in the city of Petroșani, the closest town to Livezeni. It aims to re-skill 200 people in the next two years as wind turbine technicians. The project is run by the Renewable Energy School of Skills (RESS) with the support of the Romanian Wind Energy Association. The centre, which began operations at the end of September, is funded through the Human Capital European programme. It is the pilot project of a larger proposal to reskill 8,000 miners and other people in the valley over the next 10 years, a goal that could be achieved using EU funds, said Sebastian Enache, senior managing director of RESS. “We have the commitment of the industry that those who will graduate from the academy will have priority on the job market,” Enache said. The one- to four-month training programme, valued at about €8,000 (£6,828), is free for miners to take part in. The course certifies them to work on turbines across Romania and abroad. “This reskilling programme is maybe the best thing that has happened in the Jiu valley in the past 10 years,” said former miner Adrian Borbel, now a wind energy technician trainer. “Wind energy offers jobs that allow people to support their families, even if there’s only one person working in that family.” Tirintică and his fellow miners are aware that coal is on its way out and they welcome the new programme, saying they are eager to learn, and that the wind energy jobs suit them. After mining with decades-old machines, the state-of-the-art wind turbine equipment feels like a luxury. “Many people ask: wouldn’t you be afraid to work on a wind turbine?” he said. “How can I be afraid to work 100m above the ground? Inside the mine, I go 300 metres below ground every day.” But while there is enthusiasm for the wind energy training programme, miners say it is not perfect. The valley is not suitable for wind energy, so anyone who wants to work in the industry will have to leave. Many miners say the wages offered by the renewable sector are not high enough to compensate them for the time spent away from their families. Tirintică already took a wind industry reskilling course, and said he was offered €1,350 a month take-home pay to work as an entry-level technician. That would be more than the €600-800 he makes at the mine, but it would also mean spending half of the year away from his home and family, giving up on his side hustles and paying rent, possibly in a city with a higher cost of living than the Jiu valley. The training is designed to provide miners with hands-on experience so their starting salaries can match their mining pay. In time, graduates from the programme could earn up to €5,000 a month, Enache argues. But the necessity of taking time to build a career in renewables collides with the miners’ need to earn money in the short term. Some said that if they have to be away from their family anyway, they might consider taking other better-paid jobs. Working in construction or picking asparagus in Germany pays €2,000-2,800 a month. For people such as Tirintică, who have families in the valley, mining has always been a profession chosen out of economic logic. He grew up hearing stories about working underground from his father and did not want to join their ranks himself. But since most employers in the region only offer €300-400 a month, he saw the mine as his only route to financial stability. For decades, the local economy has been dominated by a single industry: coal. The incoming European money aims to diversify the region. Romania can access around €2bn billion from the EU’s Just Transition Fund. That process starts with creating specific plans for the country’s coal regions, including the Jiu valley. The European Commission hired the consulting firm PwC to run the planning process, and the consultants have held multiple meetings and workshops with local stakeholders, including mayors, union leaders, priests, and NGOs. However, the miners say the consultants have not spoken to a single frontline worker. The most recent draft proposes to remake the economy, build infrastructure, improve quality of life, and support local entrepreneurship. It calls for programmes to attract international investors, to build centres where people could train for careers in technology and other industries, and to develop tourism in the region. How those plans are implemented remains an open question. “Everybody asks: Why don’t investors come?” said Florin Tiberiu Iacob-Ridzi, mayor of Petroșani. “We are 100km away from any highway. The Jiu valley is a bit isolated.” Until a strategy is implemented, the miners are left to find solutions on their own, knowing that their employment could end soon. Those close to the retirement age of 45 plan to take the government’s €10,000 buyout, which is periodically offered in a bid to reduce the number of jobs relying on coal. In addition to the lump sum, they rely on the generous pension given for dangerous working conditions. Younger miners are forced to come up with their own backup plans. Some already work second jobs on top of their mining shifts, doing repairs, laying floor tiles, or driving delivery trucks. Mădălin Brândău, who has been a miner for six years, recently took a wind energy course on working at heights, taught by the same organisation that opens the Petroșani centre. At the moment, he says the mine is the best option and has not signed a contract to transition to renewables yet. He knows, though, Romania’s coal phase-out date is near, and he’s making backup plans. “I’m preparing for when the mines close,” he said. “I did a welding course. I got my truck driving licence. I took every possible course that was available. When the mines close, I’ll put all my certifications on the table.” If possible, he wants to stay in his home town, where he is the lead singer of a traditional Romanian band that has other miners. For now, with few other lucrative jobs, miners such as Tirintică and Brândău continue to go underground hoping they will emerge alive at the end of their shifts. “As a child, seeing how many accidents and explosions kept happening, I cried into the night praying to God to close the Petrila mine where my father worked,” Brândău said. He has still not told his mother that he works as a rescuer, going inside the most dangerous underground areas to save his colleagues or put out fires. The wind energy courses in Petroșani will begin by the end of the year, but the Jiu valley’s future remains uncertain. “We know what we should do,” Iacob-Ridzi, the mayor of Petroșani said. “But nobody knows how we should do it.” This story was produced in partnership with the Pulitzer CenterThe Apple Watch gets a bigger, better screen, faster charging and a small price cut for 2021, which is enough to keep it at the top of the smartwatch market. The Series 7 version costs from £369 ($399/A$599) and, despite being £10 cheaper than last year’s Series 6, is Apple’s most expensive smartwatch, above the Watch SE costing from £249 ($279/A$429). It requires an iPhone 6S or newer and does not work with Android. The Series 7 comes in 41 or 45mm case sizes, both 1mm taller than their predecessors and thinner bezels mean the screens are 20% larger. Every extra pixel on a device as small as a smartwatch counts. On-screen buttons are bigger and easier to tap. More text fits on the display or fonts can be made larger and easier to read. New watch faces can fit two full-size information widgets at once, and there’s a new full qwerty keyboard for typing out messages that is exclusive to the Series 7. None of these additions are revolutionary, but they are good refinements to the current Apple Watch formula. Specifications Case size: 41 or 45mm Case thickness: 10.7mm Weight: 32/38.8g, 42.3/51.5g or 37/45.1g depending on material and size Processor: S7 RAM: 1GB Storage: 32GB Operating system: WatchOS 8 Water resistance: 50 metres (5ATM) Sensors: gyro, HR, ECG, blood oxygen, microphone, speaker, NFC, GNSS, compass, altimeter Connectivity: Bluetooth 5, wifi n, NFC, ultra wideband, optional 4G/eSIM Slick performance, 36-hour battery life The new S7 chip matches the performance of last year’s S6, making the Series 7 the fastest, smoothest and slickest smartwatch you can buy. Battery life is the same, too, lasting about 36 hours between charges with sleep tracking overnight and the screen on all of the time during the day. Tracking a 35-minute run consumed 7% of the battery, so it should manage a marathon or two. Sustainability Apple does not provide an expected lifespan for the battery in the Series 7. Batteries in similar devices typically last at least 500 full charge cycles while maintaining at least 80% of their original capacity. The battery can be replaced for £82.44. Repairs cost between £286.44 and £462.44 depending on the model, while repair specialists iFixit awarded the Series 7 a repairability score of 6 out of 10. The Series 7 includes 100% recycled aluminium, 99% recycled tungsten and rare earth elements, and 100% recycled tin in the solder of its main chips. Apple offers trade-in and free recycling for devices, and breaks down the watch’s environmental impact in its report. WatchOS 8 and health tracking The Series 7 runs the same watchOS 8 software as every Apple Watch from 2015’s Series 3. It adds a portrait photo watch face, the “focus” notification handlings from iOS 15 and the ability to set more than one timer at once. It also adds better text entry including the ability to use combinations of dictation, scribble, emojis and a full qwerty keyboard. There is also a redesigned meditation app that melds breathing coaching with mindfulness. WatchOS 8 is the best supported and most capable smartwatch operating system available, despite recent advances by Google with WearOS. You can expect at least five years or longer of software support, including feature and security updates, which is far longer than smartwatch rivals. The Series 7 has the same comprehensive health-tracking features as the Series 6, including the ability to take ECG for heart rhythm, blood oxygen level monitoring and fitness tracking across a large range of workout types. Only dedicated multisport watches track more metrics across running, cycling and adventure sports. Observations Sleep tracking now includes respiration rate, but not sleep cycles like some competitors. The Apple Watch can be used to unlock an iPhone with Face ID when wearing a mask, which is extremely convenient. Bands made for older Apple Watch models fit the Series 7. Price The Apple Watch Series 7 comes in two sizes, three different materials and models with the option of 4G that requires an eSIM and compatible phone plan add-on. The aluminium or Nike versions in 41mm size cost £369 ($399/A$599) or £399 ($429/A$649). 4G models cost an extra £100 ($100/A$150). Stainless steel and titanium models cost more. For comparison, the Apple Watch SE costs £249, the Samsung Galaxy Watch 4 costs £249, the Fitbit Sense costs £279.99 and the Garmin Venu 2 costs £299. Verdict There wasn’t a lot wrong with last year’s Series 6, so a bigger, better screen and faster charging add to an already winning experience. It is still expensive, even if it is £10 cheaper than last year, and the lack of third-party watch faces means you’re stuck using only those that are built in. Sleep tracking could be better, too, but the rest of the health features are top-class. It is not worth upgrading from a recent Apple Watch. But for those with worn-out models or looking for their first smartwatch for the iPhone, the Apple Watch Series 7 is the best you can buy. Pros: excellent haptic vibrations, larger and better always-on screen, ECG, top health tracking, great activity tracking, 50m water resistance, solid battery, long software support, recycled aluminium. Cons: expensive, only works with an iPhone, sleep tracking still not great, blood oxygen data not that useful, no third-party watch faces, not a giant upgrade. Other reviews Apple Watch SE review: an almost great cheaper option Fitbit Sense review: a good smartwatch that fails on sustainability Venu 2 review: can Garmin make a good smartwatch? Samsung Galaxy Watch 4 review: Google smartwatch raises barTwo months ago, I received a letter from the Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) stating that I owed it £583.32. There was no explanation of how this “debt” arose, just details of how to repay. Initially, I thought it was a scam. I sent a recorded-delivery letter asking for a detailed explanation. More than a month later, another letter arrived from the DWP informing me that it had instructed my employer to deduct the money from my salary. I tried to ring the number on the letter, but couldn’t get through. How is it legal to accuse someone of owing money and enforce repayments without explanation? JS, Worthing Your experience highlights the problems that arise when a mammoth organisation disgorges automated, generically worded letters. I’ve established that you do, in fact, owe the DWP money – for a £700 universal credit new claims advance that was awarded in December 2018 – but it’s unsurprising that you did not twig. Firstly, the DWP admits there was a delay (of more than two years) in alerting you. Secondly, the letter simply states the sum and methods of repayment. It briefly mentions you can view a breakdown online. You did access your online account and could only see a statement showing that your universal credit claim had been closed after a final payment in February 2019. You replied to the demand three weeks before the required deadline, but the DWP didn’t process your letter until five days after that had passed, hence the second missive informing you of the salary deductions. The DWP says: “In this case, there was a delay in contacting JS about her preferred method of repayment, and we apologise for this. She has since arranged to repay the amount, and the earnings attachment has now been cancelled as a result.” Shortly after you set up a direct debit to repay the sum, another letter from the DWP arrived, ominously headed “About the money owed to us” and repeating threats of debt-management referrals. The letter was sternly phrased and designed to cover a whole range of circumstances irrelevant to you. The DWP apologised if the “standard wording has caused any confusion”. Given the psychological impact of official debt-collection warnings, the DWP would be well advised to draft a greater range of generic letters more relevant to the situation they are addressing. Email your.problems@observer.co.uk. Include an address and phone number. Submission and publication are subject to our terms and conditionsTwo leading art institutions have been awarded £800,000 to address racial inequality in visual arts, which will allow 120 artists to collaborate with almost 30 museums and galleries across the country. The Freelands Foundation has announced “unprecedented” long-term funding, part of a multimillion-pound commitment, to initiatives led by Wysing Arts Centre and the UAL Decolonising Arts Institute that will focus on amplifying and empowering black and Asian artists. Wysing Arts Centre in Cambridgeshire will receive £500,000 for a 10-year artist development programme, known as the Syllabus. Every year, 10 artists from diverse and underrepresented backgrounds will undertake an ambitious programme delivered across a nationwide network of eight art organisations. The groundbreaking partnership will provide a decade of support for artists from ethnic minority backgrounds, as well as those from low-income backgrounds, with additional access needs or without formal art education. The programme will include mentoring, artistic development and peer networking delivered by artistic advisers and a dedicated curator. UAL Decolonising Arts Institute will receive £300,000 toward its three-year 20/20 programme, which will allow 20 black and Asian artists to be placed in residence at top art organisations across the UK to produce new commissions for permanent collections. These permanent collections will “reshape the landscape of commissioning, collecting and exhibiting in Britain”. The 20 partners include the Hepworth Wakefield, Box in Plymouth, MIMA in Middlesbrough, Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum in Glasgow, Kettle’s Yard in Cambridge, the National Disability Arts Collection and Archive, Sheffield Museums Trust, and Wolverhampton Art Gallery. The awards to Wysing Art Centre and UAL Decolonising Art Institute have been made following a review of proposals by the Freelands Foundation Diversity Action Group. The panel is chaired by Sonita Alleyne, the first black female master of any Oxbridge college. Others on the panel include the artists John Akomfrah and Hardeep Pandhal; Sade Banks, founder of the charity Sour Lemons; and Melanie Keen, director of the Wellcome Collection. Alleyne said: “The Diversity Action Group is committed to creating the conditions in which black and brown artists in the UK are able to thrive: removing barriers and creating pathways into the sector in order to transform the experiences of artists and audiences. “These two new grants are a landmark in terms of our continuing commitment to addressing racial inequality throughout the visual arts.” Rosie Cooper, director at Wysing Arts Centre, said: “The ambition and vision of Freelands Foundation in deciding to support Syllabus across 10 years is unprecedented and inspiring. It provides much-needed stability and significant growth for a programme that has already made a huge contribution to the sector. We are immensely grateful to the foundation for deciding to champion artists in this way, especially at this incredibly challenging time.” Dr Susan Pui San Lok, director at UAL Decolonising Arts Institute, said: “We are extremely grateful for the support of Freelands Foundation in making UAL Decolonising Art Institute’s ‘20/20’ project possible. Following an extraordinary 18 months, ‘20/20’ is a response to urgent calls for artworld actions to follow words and gestures and move ‘Beyond the Black Square’.” The funding follows the announcement of a landmark research commission into how black, Asian and minority ethnic students are excluded from art education. The study will be carried out by the Runnymede Trust and Freelands Foundation.In my parents’ home, for as long as I can remember, the crown jewel of the kitchen decor has always been a framed, sun-bleached photograph of Julia Child. In it, she’s winding up to smack my father, the audio technician, in the head with a copper-bottom pot while he cowers in mock fear, a smile creeping across her face. The new documentary Julia suggests that this is a pretty accurate summary of her natural state: fun-loving and funny, treating her work like play, the ideal antidote to stuffy chefs with a monastic relationship to the making of food. “She had a fantastic sense of humor,” co-director Betsy West tells the Guardian. “She loved when Dan Aykroyd impersonated her on Saturday Night Live, so much that she used to play it for guests at her dinner parties. But she did take her skill as a cook very seriously.” “Julia changed the way Americans thought about food, fully and completely,” co-director Julie Cohen adds. “From the idea that the goal shouldn’t just be about speed and convenience, but deliciousness and the joy of creation.” Their latest project offers the same respect and admiration of their Ruth Bader Ginsburg bio-doc, RBG, to the great Julia Child, another one of the “groundbreaking women” toward which West and Cohen gravitate. In a mid-century culture besotted with ready-to-eat TV dinners and other microwavables, Child showed audiences – and, eventually, the world – that whipping up something mouthwatering was far from an alchemical process. Her easygoing demonstrations proved that anyone can cook, requiring only a dash of confidence and a sprinkle of adaptation. “She wouldn’t worry when she made a mistake, and just incorporated it into her show,” West says. “She didn’t come across as didactic, just as someone trying to share what she knew, which gave her so much pleasure.” Child launched her first TV series, The French Chef, for which she was paid a lowball rate of $50 a show by the Boston-area station WGBH, at a time when the American culinary palate desperately needed a shake-up. She brought French cooking from the height of exclusive elegance to a more accessible pedestal, demystifying the steps to constructing the picture-perfect omelette or roasting a chicken to optimal brownness. And she arrived not a moment too soon, lighting up a gustatory dark age of Jell-O molds, mayonnaise-based “salads” and tinned pineapples. “Both Julie and I grew up in the pre-Julia Child era, or at least experienced that food, and we knew first-hand how much she changed this world of American eating,” West says. Cohen recalls the highlight of her girlhood diet being the weekly Spaghetti Day on Wednesdays, describing this era as a “desert” for creative, flavorful meals. “We’ve got interviews with French people recalling visiting America in the 60s and just being appalled at the state of the grocery stores,” she laughs. “Things were pretty paltry, especially in produce. If you wanted mushrooms, you’d have to go to the canned food aisle. I love the scene in the film when Julia holds up an artichoke and tells the audience not to be afraid of it.” Simply by sharing her enthusiasm for just how good food could be, Child defied the commonly held perception that men create cuisine while women merely put dinner on the table. Standing at 6ft 2in, her voice in a distinctive singsong suggesting the image of a large bird, she was anything but the typical domestic goddess. Yet her “authority, knowledge and authenticity” were too much to deny, and she quickly amassed a wide following by marrying those virtues to a casual relatability. While she wasn’t the first person to bring these talents to broadcast, she paved the way for a generation of personalities putting their own skills and unique charms over the generic primped-and-pressed quality that supposedly makes a person telegenic. “At every turn, people wanted to question, dismiss, trivialize or roll their eyes at what Julia Child was up to,” Cohen says. “And not just her, but her audience too; she writes this extremely complex, comprehensive, encyclopedic and yet very readable book, puts down on paper how to make French food in an approachable way, and the publishing industry thought women wouldn’t be interested! ‘It’s too hard. It’ll be too complicated for their brains.’ But then she shows up on TV, makes her omelette, and the station gets a pulse. And then, the executives’ response isn’t that they have a superstar on their hands, it’s giving her three shows for $50 a week. She didn’t let that deter her as she pushed forward, but it took her quite a long time to get the respect she deserved.” The documentary exists in no small part to give Child her due, but West and Cohen were mindful not to drift into full-blown hagiography. They consider her in all her humanity, which eventually means confronting the odd flaw, in this instance her evolving attitude about the queer community. The film conveys that as unconventional as she may have been, Child had a rather traditional stance about a woman’s place in the home, touting the three Fs of good wifeliness: to feed, flatter and fuck your husband. That social conservatism also extended to the emergent gay population, whom she could be heard referring to as “homos”. In time, she would come around and make amends by speaking out during a moment of grave crisis, her ignorance spun into a testament to her newfound open-mindedness. “Our whole goal is to tell an engaging and fascinating story that’s also fun to watch,” Cohen says. “Truthfully, Julia’s change of heart on gay issues felt like an important part of this. She had a narrative arc. We start off, unsurprisingly for someone with Julia’s relatively sheltered background, in a pretty homophobic state of mind. It was a common attitude back then, and we didn’t want to shy away from that fact. An important part of that story is how drastically Julia changed her mind on the matter. Her attorney, Bob Johnson, who she was quite close to, became ill with Aids. She was compassionate toward him as he was dying, and went a little further afterward, realizing how horrible it was that people weren’t speaking out about this brutal disease. She spoke out in 1988, at a time when many celebrities weren’t really doing that yet, especially celebrities with the middle-American fanbase she had.” Today, Child’s influence on the art of food has a deeper presence than the woman herself, evident in every small-screen stylist of the scrumptious. But in its purest form, her legacy is concentrated in the home, where amateurs are still having the miraculous epiphany that they don’t have to go to a restaurant for a Michelin-star meal. Cooped up during the editing process in the early days of lockdown, West and Cohen connected to Child’s spirit by following her recipes, and found that the everyday magic hadn’t faded one iota. From butter, oil or salt, one can conjure beauty or speak in a wordless love language. “We were watching all this footage of Julia’s cooking, and we couldn’t help but be affected by that,” West says. “Julie and I both like to cook, and we really dug into it even more during this time of isolation. It gave us a renewed energy to try some of Julia’s dishes: beef bourguignon, we found, was very doable. We found out later on that we’d both started to really enjoy making salad niçoise. The film shows you pretty specifically how to make roast beef and that potato dish – now that’s how I make potatoes! In these difficult months, that’s one of the things people have discovered as a source of pleasure: making food, and serving it to people you love.” Julia is in US cinemas from 12 November and in the UK from 18 MarchDuring the 18th century, in the borderlands between present-day Ukraine and Poland, an extraordinary religious movement arose. It was a Jewish heresy invented by a man called Jacob Frank – “the most hideous and uncanny figure in the whole history of Jewish Messianism”, according to the Israeli scholar Gershom Scholem. Frank claimed that the end times had come and conventional morality needed to be turned upside down. He bragged about defiling the Torah with his naked buttocks, encouraged his followers to break all sorts of sexual and dietary taboos, and eventually persuaded many of them to be baptised into the Christian church. His many disciples worshipped him as a prophet and wrote his visions and utterances down in a book called The Words of the Lord. Sample extract: “In a dream I saw a very old woman, 1500 years old. Her hair was white as snow; she brought me 2 silver belts and a Walachian sausage. I bought one from her and stole the other.” Charismatic, transgressive and downright loopy, Frank comes across today as a Monty Python mashup of Osho, David Koresh and Mormon leader Joseph Smith, but he was highly influential in his time. Furthermore, the course of his turbulent 80-year life coincided with huge political and philosophical changes in Europe, as the Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth collapsed and traditional religious beliefs were usurped by the rival claims of science. The Books of Jacob by the Nobel laureate Olga Tokarczuk is an epic chronicle of the life and times of Frank and his followers. Over a thousand pages long, dense with history and incident, it is vast enough to make this reader’s knees buckle. As crowded as a Bruegel painting, it moves from mud-bound Galician villages to Greek monasteries, 18th-century Warsaw, Brno, Vienna and the luxurious surroundings of the Habsburg court. It takes in esoteric theological arguments, diplomatic history, alchemy, Kabbalah, Polish antisemitism and the philosophical roots of the Enlightenment. It is a dauntingly ambitious piece of work and one of the responses it arouses is just plain amazement at the patience and tenacity that have gone into its construction. English-speaking readers will have encountered Tokarczuk’s writing in the two previous novels of hers also published by Fitzcarraldo. Drive Your Plow Over the Bones of the Dead, the most immediately accessible of her books, is a noirish murder mystery set in rural Poland; Flights, which won the Booker International prize, is a thought-provoking collection of philosophical oddities about travel, time, history and dislocation. Both those hard-to-classify books are given coherence by the mordant and idiosyncratic authorial personality that hovers over them. Dense, captivating and weird, The Books of Jacob is on a different scale from either of these. It is a visionary novel that conforms to a particular notion of masterpiece – long, arcane and sometimes inhospitable. Tokarczuk is wrestling with the biggest philosophical themes: the purpose of life on earth, the nature of religion, the possibility of redemption, the fraught and terrible history of eastern European Jewry. With its formidable insistence on rendering an alien world with as much detail as possible, the novel reminded me at times of Paradise Lost. The vividness with which it’s done is amazing. At a micro-level, she sees things with a poetic freshness. Here’s a tiny instance: when two of Frank’s followers curtsey to the Habsburg emperor, “Eva and Anusia’s dresses wither as they squat”. There is a haiku-like density to this image of the big formal dresses losing their structure – and this painstaking degree of observation is sustained consistently throughout the book. Another writer might have told this story from Frank’s birth and followed the twists and turns of his vocation and ministry in a linear fashion. That isn’t Tokarczuk’s way. Like Flights, The Books of Jacob is a patchwork of scenes and voices, tableaux and fragments, interpolations from Jacob’s followers, pictures and maps from contemporary documents. (And, by the way, the pages are numbered backwards in a nod to Hebrew convention and the reversal of values implied by the imminent millennium.) The dominant voice of the novel is that of its omniscient narrator, who writes in stately present-tense prose about the spiritual crises of her characters: “In this moment, Antoni Kossakowski realises that the plaintive rumble of the sea is a lament and that all of nature is taking part in this process of mourning those gods of whom the world has been in such desperate need. There is no one here. God created the world, and the effort of doing so killed him. Kossakowski had to come all the way here to understand this.” Interspersed in the narrative are first-person reminiscences from Nahman, one of Frank’s followers, who ends up playing the role of Judas to his messiah, as well as letters between a Polish noblewoman and a bibliophile Catholic priest, Father Chmielowski, who wrote the first Polish encyclopedia, The New Athens. Readers of Flights will know this is one of Tokarczuk’s two favourite books. (The other, tellingly, is Moby-Dick.) Over the whole story floats the disembodied spirit of Yente, Jacob’s grandmother, trapped between life and death by a Kabbalistic spell, and bearing witness to the long bloody history of the Jews in Poland right up to the 20th century. Though he is at the book’s core, the eponymous Jacob doesn’t appear in the novel for more than a hundred pages, and he remains a mysterious figure whom we see in glimpses of varying intimacy. It would be easy to portray him as a charlatan and opportunist – his control over his disciples is unnerving and his sexual behaviour is exploitative. But Tokarczuk, an atheist, allows him his charisma, his sincerity, and is clearly fascinated by the spiritual and worldly journeys of his real-life followers (some ended up amassing big fortunes and playing important roles in European history). Over the 30 or so years that the bulk of the action covers, we see these characters age, time pass and the world around them undergo enormous changes. Tokarczuk has written in Flights about the theological concept of contuition, the ability to see the divine unity in disparate things, and that’s the artistic logic behind this book. The reader’s task is to deduce a higher order out of the patchwork of scenes and fragments. It does require patience – and I’m not sure that I would recommend newcomers to Tokarczuk’s work start here. But The Books of Jacob, which is so demanding and yet has so much to say about the issues that rack our times, will be a landmark in the life of any reader with the appetite to tackle it. • The Books of Jacob by Olga Tokarczuk, translated by Jennifer Croft, is published by Fitzcarraldo. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Ted and Helen Russell are devastated. Their last surviving son was shot dead by police at his aunt’s home in north-western Sydney on Tuesday, and they want to know why. “We are shocked and appalled by the shooting by New South Wales police of our second son Stanley Russell yesterday morning when he was inside his Aunty Pam’s house in Seven Hills,” his parents said. “It is terribly painful for us to learn suddenly that we will never see Stanley’s smile again. His children will suffer from never seeing him again. “There are many questions about the killing of our son Stanley by police that we will seek to have answered through the coronial inquest. We will keep going in our struggle for justice, to ensure that deaths in custody must stop.” The magnitude of the Russells’ grief is unimaginable. Stanley was their last surviving son. Their other biological son, Edward, died in prison custody in 1999. Gomeroi man Stanley Russell, 46, was a father and grandfather. NSW police officers shot him after what a police spokesperson described as a “physical confrontation” at the house, where they had gone to execute a warrant. Police allege Stanley Russell had a knife and an axe and “confronted” the four officers, who “let out a number of shots”. The acting assistant police commissioner Julie Boon told reporters at the scene that Russell “collapsed” after being shot. A critical incident investigation team is investigating the incident. Police have refused to give any further details about what happened, including how many shots were fired, which officer fired the shots and the nature of the “confrontation”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In a statement, Stanley’s parents said they realised he’d been killed when news of the shooting flashed up on TV. They recognised the house – belonging to Helen’s sister Pam – in the aerial footage of police in the front yard. Now, they want to know why police fired shots. They have questioned police reports Stanley Russell was armed with a knife and an axe. They want to see the police body-worn camera footage of the incident. “Neighbours say they heard four or five shots, all inside the house,” the Russells said in the statement. “We found out about the killing of our son Stanley when we were watching the news. Pam told us about hearing shots inside her house soon after police told her to go outside. Pam said that when the police arrived Stanley had only recently woken up. “We have heard the police who went to Pam’s house say they had an arrest warrant for Stanley. There is a very big difference between an arrest warrant and shooting a man.” Guardian Australia asked NSW police a series of questions about the incident but the force declined to comment as the shooting is now subject to a critical incident review. NSW police were asked whether body-worn camera footage of the incident had been captured, whether all officers involved had activated body-worn cameras, and whether the Russells would be able to view it. They were also asked whether the officers involved had attempted to use other “non-lethal” options prior to shooting Russell, such as OC spray or tasers. In 2014, in sentencing Russell to jail, a NSW district court judge found he had a history of drug addiction and had been deeply affected by his brother’s death. NSW police did not respond to a question about whether they had considered any of these factors prior to the incident on Tuesday, or whether they had attempted any other contact with Russell regarding the outstanding warrant before visiting the Seven Hills home. A spokesperson for the NSW police minister, David Elliott, said he would be unable to comment because of the critical incident review. Family members who gathered outside the police tape on Tuesday were heard saying it was “only bullets for us, no taser”. Justine, a neighbour, said she knew Stanley as a “nice and calm man”. “I knew him for three years, he’d come and visit his aunty here every now and then. I spoke to him last night, and there didn’t seem to be anything wrong,” she said. Dale McPherson, another neighbour who knew the family, told the ABC they were “lovely people”. Helen and Ted Russell are respected members of their community in Walgett, in the state’s north-west, and have fostered Aboriginal children for years. For the past 22 years, they have spoken about Edward’s treatment in custody. He’d been moved out of a safe cell, even though prison staff had known for weeks he was at very high risk of self-harm. He’d been allowed to keep a personal item which he used to take his own life, an item that the Long Bay property officer told the coronial inquest “should have been confiscated immediately”. “Stanley’s older brother Edward died in Long Bay jail because the NSW prison system failed completely in its duty of care to Edward,” the Russells said on Wednesday. “We have already been to hell and back during the investigation into Edward’s very avoidable death in custody. “Now we have to go through the same pain and trauma all over again. Given what we know currently about how Stanley died, we have questions about whether police failed in their duty of care to him too. “For 30 years we have struggled to help stop Aboriginal deaths in custody. We have now lost both our sons in NSW custody. The royal commission’s key point about ensuring an active duty of care has been repeatedly ignored.” The distress at Stanley Russell’s death by police shooting comes a week after marches to remember the 29-year-old Yamatji woman JC who was shot dead by police in Western Australia in 2019. A first-class constable was charged with her murder – the first WA police officer to face a murder charge for a death in custody in 93 years. After a three-week trial the jury, which had no Aboriginal members, deliberated for three hours before finding the constable not guilty of murder or manslaughter. JC’s sister, Bernie Clarke, said her death was another example of there being “no justice and no accountability”.Melbourne writer Christos Tsiolkas has been awarded one of Australia’s richest literary prizes in recognition of his work spanning a quarter of a century. The $60,000 Melbourne prize for literature was announced on Wednesday, with Tsiolkas honoured for his “outstanding contribution to Australian literature and to cultural and intellectual life”, according to the prize’s judges, which included writers Declan Fry and Alice Pung, and Michael Williams, the artistic director of the Sydney writers’ festival. Tsiolkas has written a number of bestsellers, including Loaded, The Slap and Barracuda. Many of his works have been reproduced for television and film. His 2020 novel Damascus won last year’s Victorian premier’s prize for fiction. In a short speech, Tsiolkas thanked his family and his publisher, Jane Palfreyman, saying: “I feel like the luckiest fella tonight.” A new $20,000 professional development award was also announced on Wednesday, with the co-editor of the Overland literary journal, Evelyn Araluen, being the inaugural recipient. Her debut collection of prose and poetry, Dropbear, was published in 2020. Essayist, poet and critic Eloise Grills won the $15,000 writer’s prize. The publicly voted $3,000 civic choice award will be announced on 11 November.And with that, we will wrap up the blog for today. Here is what went down: Former prime minister Paul Keating was at the National Press Club, and said Australia “has lost its way” and that the government’s submarine deal was ‘a handful of toothpicks at the mountain.’ The Theraputic Goods Administration announced it has granted provisional determination to Moderna, to allow it to apply to have its vaccine used in children aged 6-11 years old. Accused Sydney drug smuggler and fugitive Mostafa Baluch has been re-captured after more than two weeks on the run. Prime minister Scott Morrison doubled down on his climate action plan, saying his government’s policy will be “can do capitalism” not “don’t do” government policy. He also told the Victorian chamber of commerce that international students should be able to return to Victorian by the end of the year. Labor’s Chris Bowen called the government’s proposed new emission reduction fund “all spin and politics”. Victoria recorded 1,003 new cases today and 14 deaths. NSW recorded 216 new cases and three deaths. Queensland recorded three new cases. The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners called for urgent action to ramp up vaccination rates for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. The parents of the man shot dead by NSW police yesterday have spoken out, saying they are “shocked and appalled” by the shooting. Gomeroi man Stanley Russell, 46, a father and grandfather, was shot yesterday after what a police spokesperson described as a “physical confrontation” at the house, where they had gone to execute a warrant. His parents, Ted and Helen Russell, spoke out about their grief and loss: We are shocked and appalled by the shooting by New South Wales police of our second son Stanley Russell yesterday morning when he was inside his Aunty Pam’s house in Seven Hills. It is terribly painful for us to learn suddenly that we will never see Stanley’s smile again. His children will suffer from never seeing him again. There are many questions about the killing of our son Stanley by police that we will seek to have answered through the coronial inquest. We will keep going in our struggle for justice, to ensure that deaths in custody must stop. You can read more on the story from Lorena Allam and Nino Bucci at the link below: The Victorian anti-corruption commission is calling for anyone with information about the alleged sharing of a photograph of the former AFL coach Dani Laidley to come forward. The Independent Broad-based Anti-corruption Commission, which oversees the Victorian police force, made the call after the Age published a story on Tuesday that revealed allegations of officers sharing an image of Laidley attending a country race meeting. The image was accompanied by transphobic comments, the article said. Victorian police officers have been charged in relation to sharing a separate photo of Laidley when she was in custody last year. Ibac said in a statement that it was: Appealing to anyone who may have information in relation to allegations a photograph taken of former AFL coach Dani Laidley at Geelong Racecourse was shared by Victoria Police officers via text message alongside transphobic comments.The unsolicited photograph was allegedly taken at the Ballan Cup, held at Geelong Racecourse on Saturday 6 November. Ibac is asking any member of the public or police personnel who witnessed the photo being taken, or has information about the photo in a text message being sent or received, to contact Ibac. Cases involving high-risk family violence are far more common than previously thought, according to data released by the federal circuit and family court. Half of cases triaged as part of a pilot project included four or more risk categories, the court says. Chief justice Will Alstergren used the release of the data to call for national funding of the program that helped uncover it, which is known as the Lighthouse Project. Alstergren said in a statement: The increased prevalence of risk in family law cases makes it critical that the project be extended nationally to ensure risks are appropriately managed in all locations, including regional Australia to ensure safer outcomes for all vulnerable parties and children involved in family law disputes. Alstergren singled out Launceston, Newcastle, Wollongong and Townsville, where more than two-thirds of litigants said they had been exposed to family violence, as places where the project should be permanently funded. Initial court data taken at the point of cases being filed showed: 54% of parties allege a child has been abused or is at risk of abuse 64% of parties allege they have experienced family violence 57% of parties allege a child has experienced family violence 39% of parties allege that drug, alcohol or substance misuse has caused harm or poses a risk of harm to a child 40% of parties allege that the mental ill-health of a party has caused harm or poses a risk of harm to a child Hayley Foster, the CEO of Rape and Domestic Violence Services Australia, said: There is now undeniable evidence that the majority of family law matters involve high risk family violence and abuse. The Lighthouse [Project] is changing the way in which the Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia is handling these matters, putting safety first in family law. But it’s not uniformly available across Australia. It’s time we expanded the pilot to make it national. More information about the project is here. The Bureau of Meteorology is urging people across Victoria to prepare for severe weather toward the end of the week, with Friday and Saturday expected to see the heaviest rainfall. Western Australia has recorded no new cases today, with 66.4% of the state’s eligible population now fully vaccinated. Following on from Matt Kean’s comments, NSW opposition leader Chris Minns also appeared on the ABC this afternoon, and largely backed the state government’s climate policies. Asked if there needs to be a more ambitious target for state government, Minns gave a diplomatic answer: We support it, we think it is appropriate. Australia has been pretty terrible at electric vehicle uptake, we required no lease operators or large purchases of electric vehicles to have any particular requirements when they go about their purchasing strategy, and as a result it’s often been dumped on the Australian market over the last 10 years. So it’s good the New South Wales government has got an incentive in place, they’ve already rolled out about half $1bn for electric vehicle charging stations particularly in the regions which is important as people move towards electric vehicles. And I think that in some ways, and a small way we are seeing changes from the federal government, we need to keep going further, [but] states have obviously led the way, in New South Wales in particular. Asked if the federal Labor party should release its midterm targets, Minns was more avoidant: I don’t want to, I guess, jump in front of what will be the federal Labor policy proposal. I’m sure it will be in keeping with the obligations that every political party has to meet these climate change goals and to ensure that we’ve got realistic targets but ambitious targets that can be met over the coming decades. We need these things entrenched not just in law but obviously in a ranges of policy decisions because it is not just going to have to be the heavy lifting of the NSW government or the state Government in Victoria, it will require federal leadership for us to meet our obligations. New South Wales treasurer and minister for energy and environment Matt Kean was on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing earlier, and had some choice words about the commonwealth’s EV plan. Asked about the federal government’s EV “plan”, and if it was a “chance missed”, Kean tried to keep it economical: Put it this way. We are spending $600m to ensure that New South Wales consumers can enjoy all the benefits that this new technology has to offer. Compare that to the commonwealth who are spending $250m across the entire country. So the proof is in the pudding. Asked what he thought of the PM facing questions about his own rhetoric about EVs in the leadup to the 2019 election, Kean tried to dodge the question without dodging the question: Look, what I do know as someone that drives an EV is it won’t ruin their weekend, they will make it even better. That will revolutionise not just the weekend but every single day of the week. That is a matter for the prime minister, but what I say as someone that drives an EV is that they are a great product, they are good for the environment and cheaper to run and we want to see those advantages rolled out so everyone who wants one can afford one. The Australian Health Protection Principal Committee (AHPPC) is recommending mandating vaccines for all disability support workers, adding that all first doses should be administered by the end of November. In a statement that also details their recommended national definition of a disability support worker, the AHPPC recommended the vaccine be mandate for all workers delivering at-home services as well. AHPPC notes mandating of vaccination for disability support workers providing services and supports to people with disability provides an important protection for people with disability during this emergency. The committee also recommended that exemptions be “limited” and “consistent with the national framework endorsed by AHPPC for residential aged care workers.” The group, which is made up of the country’s chief medical officers, said vaccinations should become a condition of entry into the homes of NDIS recipients. The Theraputic Goods Administration has announced it has granted provisional determination to Moderna, to allow it to apply to have its vaccine used in children aged 6-11 years old. The granting of the determination means Moderna can apply for provisional approval for the vaccine use in children, not that its use has been approved immediately. In a statement, the TGA said it considered both the clinical data in relation to the use of the vaccine in children, as well as the impacts the pandemic was having on children’s education: In making its decision to grant Moderna a provisional determination, the TGA considered evidence of a plan to submit comprehensive clinical data in relation to use in children. The TGA also considered infections in children and the impacts of COVID-19 in relation to children’s participation in school and sporting activities. The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners (RACGP) are warning that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples and communities are facing elevated risk as the country opens up. The RACGP said that vaccine rates among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities continue to “lag behind non-Indigenous populations”. They said only 54.5% of eligible adults among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islanders are fully vaccinated, and 66.2% have received one dose, compared to the double-vaccinated rate of all Australians, which sits at 80.6%. RACGP Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health chair, Prof Peter O’Mara said it was essential that governments ramp up outreach and vaccination programs: The fact that there remains a serious gap in vaccine coverage between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and non-Indigenous people in our country is a national shame. We urgently need to ramp up vaccine access and education for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, particularly for younger community members and certain jurisdictions, including Western Australia, Queensland, South Australia, and the Northern Territory, which we know are really lagging behind. We have already seen devastating outbreaks in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, particularly in the eastern states, despite the considerable work that went into ensuring these communities were isolated from the virus. So, earlier today, the Australian government has ranked dead last by the Climate Change Performance Index for its response to the climate crisis. The assessment looked at the climate response of 60 countries, and the current government’s lack of policies, high per capita greenhouse gas emissions, weak targets, low levels of renewables and high levels of energy use. Australia slipped four places on the index from last year, and was the only country allocated a score of zero in the climate policy category. You can read more on the assessment in the story from Graham Readfearn, linked below: WA police have confirmed the arrest of two men after they allegedly drove through a border checkpoint. In a statement, police say a 17-year-old male driver and his 24-year-old male passenger were attempting to return to WA by road from NSW, via Victoria and South Australia, but his G2G pass had been rejected multiple times for “failing to meet the threshold to be granted entry from an ‘Extreme Risk’ location”. A subsequent G2G Pass application was accepted on 7 November, suggesting he had been in South Australia for the previous fortnight. They attempted to cross the border on Monday and were turned around. Police say the car returned later that day, and attempted to drive through the checkpoint. About 6:25pm the same vehicle re-attended the checkpoint and it will be alleged the vehicle was driven through the checkpoint at high speed, failing to stop for police. The vehicle was later located about 20km east of Norseman. The two occupants were arrested without incident and have been tested for COVID-19. Both men have been charged with three counts of Fail to Comply with a Direction. The Australian Aged Care Collaboration (AACC) is urging the Victorian government to rethink its decision to allow unvaccinated visitors to residential aged care homes. The state government eased the restrictions on visitors on 29 October, allowing each aged care resident up to five visitors per day, as well as allowing unvaccinated visitors, as long as they avoided common areas and visited outdoors or in the resident’s room. But the AACC, along with Leading Age Services Australia (LASA) and Aged and Community Services Australia (ACSA) have raised concerns at the decisions. The AACC said in a statement they had written to chief health officer Brett Sutton, seeking a meeting on the matter. The AACC has written to the Victoria Chief Health Officer, Professor Brett Sutton seeking a meeting as a matter of urgency. The AACC is a group of six aged care peak bodies representing more than 1000 aged care providers delivering care to nearly a million older Australians. None of us want to experience the high rate of disease in facilities again given the traumatic experience in Victoria last year. There are still high rates of community transmission in Victoria and even though the workforce and a high proportion of residents are vaccinated the presence of unvaccinated visitors poses too much of a risk particularly to vulnerable older residents. Vaccination is one of the most important defences available to protect our older Australians. We therefore, urge the Victorian Government to reconsider this position. NSW, the ACT and South Australia only allow fully vaccinated people to visit at aged care facilities. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you this afternoon, taking the blog into the evening. Before we dive in, a quick thanks to Josh Taylor and Matilda Boseley for their work this morning. And with that, I will hand you over to my excellent colleague, Mostafa Rachwani, who will take you through the next little while. Canberra hospitals are now free of active Covid-19 patients for the first time since the beginning of the Delta outbreak in the ACT, AAP reports. It comes as the national capital recorded nine new cases in the latest reporting period. ACT health authorities reported there were no Covid-19 patients in the territory’s hospitals, the first time the milestone has occurred since Canberra went into lockdown in mid-August. Vaccination levels have risen to 95.6% of over-12s being fully vaccinated. The territory’s high vaccination rates have led to the easing of restrictions being brought forward by two weeks. From Friday, visitor limits to households will be scrapped, density caps will be lowered in hospitality and retail, stadiums and entertainment venues will be able to open at 100% capacity, and nightclubs will be allowed to open their doors. There are now 150 active cases in the Canberra community. Testing levels remained relatively high, with 1,910 tests conducted on Tuesday. The federal government is attempting to lead new “super-secret” evidence against Bernard Collaery in the Timor-Leste spying case, prompting fury from Collaery and warnings from a supreme court judge that it may cause a “perpetual vortex” of delay and secrecy. Collaery, a barrister charged for his role in exposing Australia’s bugging of Timor-Leste, won a major victory last month, when the ACT court of appeal overturned orders shrouding much of his looming trial in secrecy. The court found the risk posed to national security by hearing the case in public was minimal, while open justice was crucial in deterring “political prosecutions”, among other things. On Wednesday, however, lawyers for attorney general Michaelia Cash told the ACT supreme court that they wanted to introduce “updated” evidence about the national security risks posed by hearing aspects of the Collaery case openly. They argued the national security situation had changed significantly in the 20 months that it has taken for Colleary’s appeal to be heard and resolved. The government now wants to produce new “court-only evidence” – evidence only the judge can see, and not Collaery – on the security risks. It wants to appoint its own special counsel, paid for by the commonwealth, to examine the material on behalf of Collaery. Collaery’s barrister, Christopher Ward, SC, criticised the move as a “carte-blanche” attempt to reopen the case by leading fresh evidence. “It’s described gently as being updated evidence, but it’s fresh evidence, your honour,” he said. The process that the commonwealth want to take to get the new evidence before the court would take months and may trigger another appeal, extending the timetable further. Justice David Mossop questioned whether there would ever be an end to the case, if the attorney general wanted to continually produce new evidence updating the court on new developments in national security. “Is there any prospect of this matter ever being completed? Or will we be stuck in a perpetual vortex of updating,” he said. “You may not want to answer that but I’m just telling you what I think, and perhaps thinking out loud a little too much.” Outside of court, Collaery slammed the move, saying he was wholly opposed to the commonwealth relying on new “super-secret evidence” that was kept from him and his lawyers. This takes the commonwealth’s hypocritical obsession with secrecy to new heights when one considers recent events. I strongly object to the court being given and relying on evidence we can’t see. It’s a shameful mockery of open justice. Pretty wet across much of Australia today, as hinted by this recent satellite image from Japan’s Himawari satellite. Flooding is possible across five states and territories in coming days, as we have already seen in those pics of flooding near Alice Springs earlier today on this blog. Emergency services are gearing up for quite a lot of flooding, according to internal details circulated to staff about “potential adverse weather”. The deep low pressure system moving across the continent is interacting with very humid tropical air, and watch out behind it because some chilling winds are coming and snowfalls in alpine areas of southern NSW are possible. For NSW at least the ranges, western slopes and plains and the north-east are likely to cop the heaviest falls. Some areas will top 150mm and require some record refreshing for November totals, the internal information states. Mind you, there’s a lot in the public domain too, including a lengthy list of areas in NSW facing the prospect of widespread flooding, according to the Bureau of Meteorology. BoM’s national warnings include flood risks in the Northern Territory, South Australia and Queensland, along with the ACT and NSW. The risks have been amplified by previous falls making catchments pretty saturated to start with, and more than a few major inland dams close to full if they are not already. Thunderstorm activity, which is harder to predict precisely, carries the threat of flash flooding but also hailstones, if you’re unlikely enough to be under one. And we mentioned here yesterday, most of us can expect a wetter than usual few months to come. Keating then stated the US misunderstands its role in our region: The US is still pretending to be the security guarantee of Asia, not just the Atlantic, despite the fact that China is already 1.25 times larger and will soon be two times larger. What it should be is this, the United States should be the guarantor and the leader of the west, it should be the balancer and consolidator. I’d bring you more, but the ABC just cut away from the Keating interview to analyse the Keating interview. My colleague, Daniel Hurst, who was there, should have more soon. When asked whether Australia should be concerned that Chinese president Xi Jinping is effectively president for life, Keating says he would like to see Chinese leaders have 10-year term limits, but stresses that western nations do not understand the mindset in China: China is broadly a Confucian society that believes in harmony, in authority and it is with this background that it accepts, I think broadly, the role of the Chinese Communist party. I mean, the idea that we have, if you don’t vote local ballot box, that is, if you are not a Jeffersonian liberal, then you are a savage, it belies the fact that China has a 4,000-year history which has these characteristics about it. He says Xi has been at war against corruption, but says that does not excuse the use of facial recognition technology or attempts to control the internet and the content on the internet. But nevertheless, there is a background in Chinese society which is about harmony, which has a Confucian basis to it, we don’t understand in the west and we have never had in the west. Does all that add up to mean, this guy is better with another term? I don’t think it does. Keating was asked about the destruction of sacred sites, with regard to the Native Title Act, but he didn’t want to go into too much detail except to say he was proud of the legislation. I’m proud of the Native Title Act and every political skill and heft I had took every effort to get that through. Indigenous Australians now have, correct me if I’m wrong, but about 67% title to the landscape of Australia. And through that title, they enjoy autonomy and overtime wealth. 200 years after we stole the titles from them. There is no doubt, I mean, I’ve made speeches in the past about reversing the onus on native title, native title groups not having to prove that they have unbroken association with the land, is a more literal translation of this by the high court since is said, by and large, we did make a lot of progress with the Native Title Act but I don’t think this is the time for me to discuss it, thank you. In response to a question from my colleague, Daniel Hurst, on how Australia can have a sensible relationship with China while also speaking up on human rights issues in Hong Kong, Taiwan and Xinjiang, Keating says Australia should always reserve its right to speak out on human rights issues, but it can’t be the only conversation: You can speak powerfully about the rights of citizens of these countries, but it can’t be the whole conversation. That doesn’t displace the wider country to country nation to nation conversation about the states. In other words, you can’t let human rights discussions completely supplant the relationship between the countries. Keating says while there is no doubt that China is more authoritarian with surveillance, but at the same time it wants to be part of the world, and contrasted it with the ongoing fracturing in the US. He says China is seeking to have the extremes of wealth moderated, and have platforms like Facebook, Google and others “operating in a socially good way.”. He says he believes, authoritarianism aside, that China “will become a more civil society than the United States.” There were 83 school shootings in America since 2018. Eighty-three. Eighty-three people carried guns around. I mean, it is a crazy land. Twenty-four schools get attacked by shooters every year in the United States. It is not civil. You saw what Donald Trump did, trying to overturn the election. You still have a big bowl of Republicans that still believe that the current president was not legally elected – a big bunch of Republicans. A great challenge for the United States is for its re- modernisation. Keating says Australia treated France, the only European nuclear power “appallingly” and suggests the government had other reasons for not continuing with France and seeking nuclear submarines. This is all about, what young guy that works ... Andrew Shearer? This is Andrew Shearer? Well, can’t wait to get the staplers back onto the Americans and you have the ambassador, a local Sydney genius telling us now, no. Why would we need submarines in defence of Australia that are able to stand off the Chinese coast 13 flying hours away if it is not to attack Chinese naval assets? When you start attacking Chinese assets you are a different state. The Chinese, is hard nosed as they are, Australia have these Collins submarines, but they are not in our field, we are not going down there. We don’t care. No, no, no, no, we have a better story for you. We are going to get nuclear attack American submarines and we will hunt your submarines down into the shallow waters of your continental plate. Beauty. Beauty. Former prime minister Paul Keating has called the federal government’s planned submarine project under Aukus “a handful of toothpicks at the mountain” and will be “very old boats” when they’re ready by 2040: Eight submarines against China in 20 years time, a handful of toothpicks at the mountain. Kim Beazley and I ... built the Collins. I built the Anzac frigates, they were built for the defence of Australia. Their range was to stop any incoming vessels, military vessels against us. What Arthur is talking about is our attack class submarines to contain Chinese submarines, hunter killer submarines and knock them out. What has that got to do with the defence of Australia and what possible impact could we have militarily with eight submarines Arthur Sinodinos? These submarines were designed in the 1990s. By the time we have half a dozen of them, it will be 2035, they will be 60 years old. In other words, our new submarines will be old tech, like buying an old 747. And here we are, we’re going to wait 20 odd years to get the first one and 35 to 40 years to get the lot. For what will be then very old boats. He says the French nuclear submarines would have been the newest in the world. If we were unhappy with diesels, the obvious choice was the most modern submarine in the drawing board, which is the French nuclear submarine. No no, we are rushing over, this has the Liberal party fingerprint all over it, they’re going to rush back to the Americans, to a data design but the whole point of these hunter killer submarines is to round up the Chinese nuclear submarines and keep them in the shallow waters of the Chinese continental shelf before they get to the Mariana Trench and become invisible. To stop them having nuclear capability towards the United States. Keating also referred to ABC’s Insiders as “a peak-a-boo show for insomniacs”. Just so you know. What should be done to repair the China relationship? Keating says China wants acknowledgement of the validity of how far it has come. What do we leave them with? Do we hang around in poverty five families to a little house, one toilet, bad sanitation, no education for 20% of humanity? Twenty percent of humanity drags themselves out of poverty and we say ‘No, no, this is not right, you’ve got to stay in the mud. Know your place, stay down there in the mud’ and the Chinese say, ‘Hang on, it’s taken us 40 years to get the $10,000 per head, isn’t that good for you, isn’t it good for us, isn’t it good for Australia and the world? Cheaper goods, buying your iron ore, selling a cheap, flatscreen TVs, all the rest, isn’t that good? Isn’t it better the 20% of humanity is dragged out of poverty?’ We should say yes. I think what the Chinese want is acknowledgement of the validity of what they have done and what they have created. The legitimacy of the rise of China from its colonial past and from poverty. Keating says Taiwan is “not a vital Australian interest” and Australia should not be involved in military engagement over Taiwan. The first point is, Taiwan is not a vital Australian interest, let me repeat that, Taiwan is not a vital Australian interest. We have no alliance with Taipei, none. There is no document you can find. We do not recognise it as a sovereign state right? And under Anzus, Anzus commits us under an attack on US forces but not by US forces. We are committed under Anzus to an attack on US forces but not an attack by US forces which means Australia should not be drawn in my view into a military engagement over Taiwan, US sponsored or otherwise. As Xi Jinping said otherwise recently, we will try to resolve this harmoniously. He says the only time China attacks or gets involved with Taiwan is if the Americans and Taiwanese try to declare a change of status of Taiwan, and if it stays as is, then things will be harmonious. Keating says China will do a great deal to bring stability into the Asia region, and the US must be a part of that – the US cannot do it alone. He questions when the “ning-nongs” at the Sydney Morning Herald and the Age will notice this. Keating says the debate about China in Australia is not the full view because it is “informed by spooks”: It’s informed, our foreign policy debate now in Canberra is informed by the security agencies. You are not getting a macro view. A macro view of what China really is. China wants its front doorstep and front porch, that is Taiwan, the sea, it doesn’t want American naval forces influencing. Keating slams the G7 meetings, and the Glasgow conference for the absence of China and Russia, and reiterates his point that Australia is losing its way in seeking security through other parts of the world: My point is that, China is now so big and it is going to grow so large, it will have no precedents in modern social economic history and is therefore our challenge is to have the United States remain as a balancing and conciliatory power in Asia which I’ve said over and over again but haven’t come to a point of accommodation where it acknowledges China’s preeminence in East Asia and the Asian mainland, in which case, we can start to move towards a sensible relationship again with China. If they are in the root phase, they are in the adolescent phase of their diplomacy, they have testosterone running everywhere, the Chinese, but we have to deal with them because their power will be so profoundly in this part of the world. So, you know, here we are, running to Cornwall, to find our security in Asia. I mean, really. We are at odds with our geography and we have lost our way. Keating makes the point Australia is the central part of Southeast Asian Nations, and cannot pretend otherwise: The thing is ... The area that matters most to Australia, the area which should be our strategic habitat is the Indonesian archipelago. Across the northern reaches of Australia, a central part of Asean. This should be and in my time as prime minister is where I focus in particular, and others as well but particularly myself. This is where we matter most but instead of that we have got this sort of fiction, this thing called the Indo-Pacific like a big rectangular box, India, Japan and another was we are not focusing on the middle of the box which is Indonesia and Asean. It is like a see-saw in the park. We are not in the pivot at the middle but on the wobbly ends. This is just a fiction. There is no way India is going to fight itself with any naval military flotilla in the South China Sea to protect us from China, unless the Chinese somehow turn in a big position in the Indian Ocean. If the Chinese are not in the Indian Ocean, there is no way the Indians will be in the South China Sea. Former prime minister Paul Keating is at the National Press Club for the first time in 26 years, in conversation with Laura Tingle. The focus of his discussion is on Australia’s place in our region, which was something he was very focused on as prime minister. He says Australia “is now very much at odds with its geography and it has lost its way.” He said: We are still trying to find our security from Asia rather than in Asia so here we have the prime minister going back to Cornwall, where James Cook had left 245 years earlier and where Arthur Phillip and the first fleet had left 233 years earlier. Here we are, they, to find our security from Asia. The ignominy of it speaks volumes. We have the capacity to enjoy the region, be part of the region and to celebrate the fact we have been here. Progressive activist group GetUp is releasing a poll on Wednesday afternoon that shows overwhelming support for a robust federal integrity commission. The UComms poll of 1,472 voters found more than 85% of voters support a national anti-corruption watchdog, including more than 74% of Coalition voters. The polling found that recent political scandals, such as Christian Porter’s resignation from the ministry over a blind trust that funded his legal fees, had seen support for a national anti-corruption watchdog increase among more than 50% of voters, including more than 31% of Coalition voters. The Coalition has pledged to pass a national integrity commission in this term of government, and the attorney general is currently refining an earlier proposed bill that was slammed as a “toothless tiger”. Critics, including some Liberal MPs, want the legislation toughened up to include public hearings and to allow members of the public to refer matters for investigation. At the same time, a separate federal integrity commission bill being backed by independent MP Helen Haines and senator Rex Patrick has also been introduced to parliament. The GetUp poll finds more than 77% of voters support a national anti-corruption watchdog being able to hold public hearings, while more than 83% of voters agree that members of the public should be able to refer cases to a national anti-corruption watchdog. Overall, 46% of people say supporting a federal integrity commission would be “very important” at the next election, including 28% of coalition voters. With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Josh Taylor who will take you through the rest of the day’s news. See ya, everyone! Tweet me if any other politicians don a hard hat while I’m away. The premier is speaking from Cherbourg, an Indigenous community north of Brisbane. Cherbourg mayor, Elvie Sandow, says social media misinformation has been a significant obstacle when trying to get vaccination rates up. There’s a whole heap of reasons why. Religious reasons, social media doesn’t help. And you know, it’s our job to make it happen here and change the mindsets of our people. One of Queensland’s deputy chief health officers has confirmed that the infected Warwick man was unvaccinated and active in the community potentially for 10 days. The gentleman at the Gold Coast, a 32-year-old man, is in a hospital now and he was possibly infectious in the community for up to six days. The contact tracers are working very hard to identify any locations, any exposure and to contact anyone who may be a close contact. What we know so far is that three family members who are close contacts and one of those is a health worker, those people so far have tested negative... Similarly for the case in Warwick, unfortunately, that person was not vaccinated and that person identifies as First Nations and they were infectious in the community for up to 10 days and again we will be posting if there are any exposure sites that you need to be concerned about. If you have been to those locations, please do go and get tested. If you’re in the Gold Coast or in the Warwick area or have been south of the border into that Moree area, if you have any symptoms at all. Queensland premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has confirmed that the state has recorded not just one, but three new local Covid cases. The first is an infected 32-year-old Gold Coast man. He may have been in the community while infectious for up to six days and is currently unlinked to any known outbreaks. The second case is detected in Warwick. Now, we need to make sure that the residents of Warwick are also getting vaccinated and getting tested. They have been potentially infectious in the community for 10 days and they attended the event in Moree. So we know where that link is. We do not know at this stage where the case from the Gold Coast has come from... The third case is detected in hotel quarantine and we are not concerned about that. Recent travel from Melbourne and not infectious on the flight and was fully vaccinated. Okay, but Tasmania/Western Australia rivalry wasn’t something I had on my 2021 bingo cards. Federal opposition leader Anthony Albanese is about to start his press conference in Sydney today. I’ll bring you any noteworthy updates! New Zealand has announced 147 new cases of Covid-19 today, as the country inches closer to its 90% vaccination target. According to the ministry of health, 89 percent of New Zealanders aged over 12 years have now had their first dose of the vaccine and 79 percent are fully vaccinated. When district health boards across the country hit the 90% fully inoculated target, Ardern has said most restrictions will be eased for the vaccinated in a new “traffic light” system. So far 75% of Maori have had at least one dose and 58% are fully vaccinated. New Zealand is now averaging 154 cases a day. All of today’s cases were based in the North Island, with 131 in Auckland, 14 in Waikato, and 2 in Northland. The country has 81 people in hospital with the virus, and 11 in ICU. Days after returning from the Cop26 climate summit, the prime minister Scott Morrison has released his long-awaited policy on electric vehicles. Morrison, who in 2019 said Labor’s EV policy would “end the weekend”, on Tuesday said his plan was “built on the back of the core principles. Technology, not taxes. Choices, not mandates”. The release of the future fuels and vehicles strategy represents the first substantive announcement from the government on electric vehicles. So here is an introductory guide to what’s in it – and what’s not. To find out all the answers, check out the explainer below: And a little more: Here’s some more footage of the flooding Todd River in Alice Springs - you know, that city in the middle of the desert. Hard helmet alert! Hi-vis alert! Everyone take two big sips of their coffee. A man has been trapped, surrounded by floodwaters in Alice Springs after his car was swept off the road last night. Luckily, according to the ABC, rescue teams have secured him with ropes and a harness, but the operation is ongoing. NSW Health has also released a bit more detail on the three Covid-19 deaths recorded in the state in the last reporting period. One of the fatalities was an unvaccinated man in his 30s. Sadly, NSW Health is today reporting the deaths of three men with Covid-19. A man in his 30s from south-western Sydney died at Royal Prince Alfred hospital. He was not vaccinated and had underlying health conditions. A man in his 40s from south-western Sydney died at Liverpool hospital. He was not vaccinated and had no significant underlying health conditions. A man in his 80s from south-western Sydney died at Royal Prince Alfred hospital. He had received one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine and had underlying health conditions. NSW Health expresses its sincere condolences to their loved ones. The Victorian department of health has confirmed that the ages of the 14 people who died from Covid-19 yesterday ranged from 50 to 90. These deaths bring the total state death toll since the pandemic began to 1,206. Of the total number of deaths in the current outbreak 83% were not fully vaccinated. A flood watch has been issued for large parts of NSW, with heavy rain expected in the afternoon. NSW’s Bureau of Meteorology says major flooding possible around the North West and South West Slopes. By the way, we will be hearing from Annastacia Palaszczuk at 10.30am, Brisbane time, 11.30am, Sydney and Melbourne time. As I mentioned previously, there are reports that she will announce a new Covid-19 case on the Gold Coast, unconnected to any recent outbreaks. However, this has not yet been confirmed. Queensland’s premier reckons the state will hit 80% first-dose vaccination of its over 16 population tomorrow morning. This will spell the end of face masks being required to be worn inside, but likely not for another day. While speaking this morning, Scott Morrison told the Victorian chamber of commerce that clean technology companies apparently do not want subsidies from the government. When I was speaking to the cleantech entrepreneurs and financiers in Glasgow, I said, “What can we do?”. They didn’t ask for subsidies ... not at least at that occasion. It was, simply, ‘can you please ensure that when we develop these technologies and we seek to establish manufacturing and we seek to do all these things that we will not be tied up in all these approval processes that put cost on to these things that do not have to be there?’ This is your hourly reminder, across this very wet weekend, to NEVER EVER EVER EVER EVER DRIVE ACROSS A FLOODED ROAD! DO NOT DO IT! NOT EVEN ONCE! The Gold Coast Bulletin is reporting there are been a new Covid-19 case in the city overnight. They say it will be announced by the premier at her press conference today and is not linked to any of the recent clusters. This has not been independently confirmed by Guardian Australia but we should learn for sure, one way or the other when Annastacia Palaszczuk stands up. The New Zealand prime minister has been interrupted by a persistent heckler: her three-year-old daughter, who had “escaped” and was up past her bedtime while Jacinda Ardern was trying to give a live update on the country’s Covid response. The prime minister was conducting a livestream about shifting public health restrictions when she was interrupted by an apparently wide awake Neve. Midway through discussing increased certainty for businesses under a new Covid-framework, Ardern was distracted by something happening out-of-shot, and a faint voice could be heard off-screen asking: “Mummy?”. “You’re meant to be in bed,” the prime minister replied. “It’s bedtime darling – pop back to bed and I’ll come and see you in a second.” You can read the full, adorable report below: Alice Springs has recorded its heaviest 24 hours of rainfall for more than a decade, with 95.8mm coming down since 9am yesterday. As promised, more details on the crocodile: A Queensland man has escaped the jaws of a crocodile by stabbing it in the head with a pocket knife as it dragged him into a river on Cape York, reports AAP’s Marty Silk. Parks and Wildlife officers said the 60-year-old had been fishing on his property on the banks of a remote part of the McIvor River, near Hope Vale, last Wednesday. He saw a bull standing on part of the bank he wanted to fish from so he shooed it away. As he prepared to cast his line, a crocodile lunged out of the water and knocked him over. The reptile then clamped its jaws around his boots and started dragging him down the bank and into the river. The man grabbed a mangrove tree branch held on as the animal pulled him toward the water. Eventually he lost strength and let go, with the crocodile pulling him into the river. The man used his pocket knife to stab the crocodile in its head repeatedly before he went into the water. The reptile suddenly let go and the man scrambled back up the bank to safety. He then drove himself to Cooktown Hospital and from there he was flown to Cairns, where he is still recovering from his injuries. Department of Environment and Science experts spoke with the man in hospital on Tuesday and found his injuries consistent with a crocodile attack. They believe the animal was attracted to area by the bull. The department said due to the remote location of property and lack of public access they won’t attempt to catch the crocodile. Uh-oh! Chris Bowen has discovered Canva! OK, I will be bringing you updates ASAP on this story from Queensland, which saw a man save himself from a crocodile by stabbing the creature in the head. The Royal Australian College of General Practitioners is calling for urgent action to ramp up vaccination rates for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people as the Australian summer holiday season approaches. They say increased domestic travel brings a real risk of potentially deadly outbreaks occurring in vulnerable communities. The RACGP says Indigenous communities are critically underrepresented in the vaccination rates. 80.6% of all Australians aged over 16 are fully vaccinated with 89.4% having received at least one dose. In comparison only 54.5% of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are fully vaccinated and 66.2% have had one dose. This difference is exacerbated in areas, like WA and Queensland, that have avoided wide-scale outbreaks and lockdowns. The RACGP Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health chair, Prof Peter O’Mara, is calling on governments and communities to act urgently to correct this before the Christmas travel period. As Australia opens up and we move to a new normal of living with Covid-19 in the community, we are going to see many more positive cases. As Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people already face considerable health inequities and higher rates of chronic disease they are more at risk of severe illness and death from this virus. The fact that there remains a serious gap in vaccine coverage between Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and non-Indigenous people in our country is a national shame. We urgently need to ramp up vaccine access and education for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, particularly for younger community members and certain jurisdictions. We have already seen devastating outbreaks in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities, particularly in the eastern states, despite the considerable work that went into ensuring these communities were isolated from the virus. We know so many more people will be travelling and visiting regional and remote Australia; while the tourism is needed, it brings enormous risk to communities not protected by vaccination ... We cannot leave anyone behind. In 2019, a 29-year-old Yamatji woman – known as JC – was homeless, suffering from poor mental health and walking through Geraldton holding a kitchen knife when the police were called. Sixteen seconds after a police officer began to approach her, she was shot and later died. Last month a jury found the officer not guilty of both murder and manslaughter. In today’s episode of the Full Story podcast, Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to ABC reporter Rebecca Trigger and Noongar human rights lawyer Hannah McGlade about the life of JC, and what happened in those 16 seconds. You can listen by searching “Full Story” where ever you get your podcasts, or using the link below: The truck driver carrying the container Baluch was found inside has also been detained, the spokesman for NSW police has confirmed. The truck was stopped at Grafton just recently, just before we started this conference, in fact. That gentleman has been detained by police. He will be charged in relation to conveying the wanted person out of the jurisdiction. He will also face further inquiries about other related offences. We’re going through that trucking company with a fine-toothed comb. We understand there will be very few trucks left on the road tomorrow when we finish. Mr Baluch has a number of charges from our partners in the AFP, arising from Ironside and other inquires. NSW police spokesman: You may be aware we searched a number of houses last week and seized several hundred thousand dollars and other items connected with drug trafficking. We know for sure he had been at some of those addresses. We were close behind him all the way. We’ve identified what we will allege is a drug trafficking syndicate, which we’re now dismantling as a result of this investigation. A member from NSW police is answering questions about the logistics of Mostafa Baluch’s arrest. Spokesperson: We received information he was likely to be travelling in a truck to escape New South Wales but it came down to the diligence of the Queensland Police Service to check trucks coming through Tweed Heads and they made that discovery. They noticed some suspicious items with the container that wasn’t properly locked and other things that brought their attention. Famously, there was a knock on the side of the truck and he knocked back. He was a bit shocked and ultimately good police work secured his arrest. Reporter: So Queensland officers over the past week had been tipped for trucks? Spokesperson: No, this is a recent development. This information was quite fresh and was acted upon as soon as it came in. Reporter: They knew it was a truck, but not specifically this truck? Spokesperson: We knew there was a truck. There was a lot of police work and diligence to find it. Reporter: How many trucks were checked? Spokesperson: Several. It was a large operation. Dozens. It was a large operation. Elliott: But this is such a very, very happy day for policing, for all of the work that’s been done, the critics of the way that they’ve been responding to the work that Critchlow particularly has done, that thought Mostafa would never be brought to justice, can now he reflect on the fact that first-class, world resourcing policing will never see a bad guy get away. To say that government is thrilled would be an understatement. To say that it’s come at the right time because of the way that the international drug trade will probably evolve over the end of the Covid lockdown means that we can now go back to the world, our international agencies and the other state jurisdictions to say that policing is back when it comes to drug enforcement. The NSW police minister has also issued an apologies to international law enforcement agencies, slamming the decision to place Mostafa Baluch on bail, before commending that “ruthless” policing that lead to his recapture. David Elliott: Can I also apologise to the international law enforcement agencies whose work led to the arrest, assisted us in the arrest originally of this individual. And of course, the anxiety that’s been caused over the last two weeks because of the very questionable decision to give him bail in the first place. Credit of course to Superintendent Rob Critchlow and his team who have been ruthless over the last two weeks in making sure that they did not miss a beat when it came to monitoring and, of course, eventually capturing Mostafa. I have already been in touch with my counterpart, the minister for police in Queensland, and I’m tracking down the constable that did the famous knock on the side of the truck. He’ll get a beer and a hug from me when the borders open and if that’s not an enticement for Queensland to open the borders, I don’t know what is. NSW police minister David Elliott is out and about this morning talking about the arrest of alleged drug smuggler Mostafa Baluch who had been on the run for a number weeks. Elliott appears to be attempting to link this police operation to the rescue of four-year-old Cleo Smith in WA by saying the arrest of the alleged smuggler was protecting “the kids”. It is an absolute pleasure to be able to announce that overnight, Superintendent Critchlow and his team, alongside the Queensland police and with the support of the Australian federal police and the wonderful work that they’ve done, the New South Wales Crime Commission, we have brought back into custody a man who was seriously going to do harm to our children. And the work that’s been done over the last two weeks, the way that the police and law enforcement agencies have embraced technology. They’ve worked within their own organisations seamlessly with the other agencies, has seen this ruffle result and I think on the back of last week’s work by the West Australian police with little Cleo, we can say that these are wonderful times for policing in this country and it’s proof positive to anybody that wants to do harm to our children, who wants to be involved in the drug trade, who wants to trade in the type of activities that we’ve seen both here and overseas, you are not safe in Australia. Australia could soon be getting a new antiviral drug to fight Covid-19 after it was recently approved in the United Kingdom, reports AAP. British health authorities will soon roll out the pill molnupiravir from manufacturer Merck later this month as part of a drug trial. Australia has put out a contract out for the treatment, but it has not been approved by the country’s medical regulator. However, infectious diseases expert at the Australian National University Prof Peter Collignon told Seven Network on Tuesday that the drug looked promising. I think we will get it here. It looks like they decrease the chance of you dying and decreasing hospitalisation if you get it early. Meanwhile, AstraZeneca will ask regulators to approve an antibody treatment to give vulnerable adults extra protection against Covid-19. The company’s Evusheld has been granted provisional determination by the Therapeutic Goods Administration, meaning the company can apply to have the treatment registered for use in Australia. The long-acting antibody is not a vaccine. AstraZeneca cites data showing treatment with Evusheld led to a reduction of up to 67% in severe illness or death in mild-to-moderate infections. It also estimates its vaccine given to 585 million people has prevented more than 105,000 deaths and 620,000 hospitalisations. NSW has also published their numbers. The state recorded 216 new local Covid-19 cases. Sadly three people infected with Covid-19 have died in the last reporting period. Victoria has recorded 1,003 new Covid-19 cases today, with 14 people infected with the virus dying in the last reporting period. Scott Morrison has told the Victorian chamber of commerce that international students should be able to return to Victorian by the end of the year. Some unbelievable scenes coming from the protests across the Tasman yesterday. The Australian government’s policy response to the climate crisis was ranked last in an assessment of 60 countries released at the global climate summit in Glasgow. The Morrison government’s lack of policies, high per capita greenhouse gas emissions, weak targets, low levels of renewables and high levels of energy use, saw the country given an overall ranking of 54 among individual countries. As a major fossil fuel exporter, Australia’s resources minister, Keith Pitt, said this week the country would continue to produce as much coal as other countries will buy. You can read the full report below: Scott Morrison is doubling down on his “capitalism will solve climate change” rhetoric today, as he speaks at the Victorian chamber of commerce. OK, let’s have a chat about the weather. Basically, if you are in the eastern states, expect some heavy rain, wild winds and general misery for a decent chunk of the week. Prime minister Scott Morrison is speaking this morning at the Victorian chamber of commerce, where he is making it clear that Australia won’t be heading back into rolling, month-long lockdowns as long as he can help it. Accused Sydney drug smuggler and fugitive Mostafa Baluch has been re-captured after more than two weeks on the run. The 33-year-old was found in the early hours of Wednesday, hiding in a car on a truck travelling from NSW to Queensland, reports AAP. Acting on a tip-off, Queensland police stopped the truck as it crossed the border into the state at about 1am. Officers searched inside a container on the back of the truck and found Baluch hiding inside a grey Mercedes. He was arrested and taken to Southport Watch House, where a warrant was executed for breaching bail. NSW police organised crime squad detectives are travelling to Queensland to seek his extradition when he appears at Southport magistrates court later on Wednesday. Baluch was last seen in Bayview on Sydney’s northern beaches on 25 October, just days after he was granted bail and released from custody under strict conditions. He had been charged with a string of drug offences related to a 900kg shipment of cocaine into Australia that had a street value of $270m. The technology in the Coalition’s cut-down version of the NBN cost up to three times more than originally forecast and was closer to the initial estimated cost of a revised version of Labor’s full-fibre plan, according to figures the government has sought to keep secret for almost a decade. The previously redacted 2013 figures detailing the estimated cost of the Coalition’s alternative model – relying on trouble-plagued pay-TV cables and fibre-to-the-node technology – show the true scale of the NBN cost blowout over the past eight years. When the Coalition won government in 2013, then communications minister Malcolm Turnbull commissioned a strategic review into the national broadband network to validate switching from rolling out fibre-to-the-premises for 93% of homes to a mixture of older technology using Telstra and Optus cable networks and fibre-to-the-node which then utilised existing copper lines to premises. You can read the full, exclusive, report below: Now, speaking of the government’s proposed new emission reduction fund, wouldn’t it be great to see what the shadow energy minister has to say about it? Well, we are in luck because Chris Bowen has just appeared on ABC News breakfast to chat about just that! And he says he isn’t convinced this scheme is anything more than just a PR exercise. Firstly, of course we’ll look at the detail. Our objections have been the diversion of money for renewable energy into other technologies. The government’s spin says this is new money, but we’ll look at the details. This is all about politics. When you see the prime minister’s comments in the newspapers and the government’s backgrounding, it’s all about some sort of fight with Labor, not about doing something for the climate. It’s all spin and politics. They setting it up as a fight with Labor. Every time the government tried to change the CEFC legislation, it’s failed. They dropped it because of the National party, trying to put coal and nuclear into the CEFC legislation. This is a test for Matthew Canavan and Gerard Rennick. Are they going to make attempts to put coal and nuclear in? Thirdly and finally, just two weeks ago the prime minister said he didn’t need any new policies, it was all based on existing policy and technology, because of political pleasure, we’re seeing a policy a day. All this comes after Glasgow because the government’s feeling the pressure. David Littleproud says the government has difficulties getting workers on international agricultural visas to come “forward and being prepared to name and shame these farmers” who are exploiting their workforce. But ABC radio host Fran Kelly has questioned whether government rhetoric has contributed to that. Kelly: You talk about the cultural difficulties of not coming forward and naming and shaming. I mean, as we discussed with border force yesterday, the government has launched a campaign to try and dissuade the farmworkers ... from quitting the farm that they’re tethered to. It includes a warning, that they’re bringing shame on their families, and if they do this the scheme might be stopped, and that would harm their countrymen and women. I mean, you know, doesn’t that sound like part of the problem? They’re being told, within their cultural heritage, that things are at risk if they behave differently and step out and name and shame. Littleproud: I would suspect what that is trying to achieve is to keep those workers within the boundaries of the scheme where there are those protections. Where those workers have gone outside that scheme, then we don’t have the oversight that we should have and that’s where they can be exploited. And that’s what puts in jeopardy, our reputation internationally. And that’s why we have to continue to look at these programs. If we can’t tidy this up, then there is going to be reputational damage and that’s what we’re trying to fix and that’s what we’re working through. What we’re saying to these workers is, “Please don’t step outside the program because once you step outside the program we have less sight over your safety, over your security and it’s important you stick to that program because that’s the best way to keep you safe and it gives you a framework in which to come forward and to name and shame anyone that abuses.” Federal agricultural minister David Littleproud is speaking with ABC radio about the new agricultural visa scheme, which the ACTU has warned could place international crop workers at a higher risk of exploitation. But Littleproud isn’t happy with that characterisation: I think what the ACTU has done is a disgraceful generalisation and demonisation of Australian farmers ... Whether they come in under the agricultural visa or under the pacific schemes, they will be under the same industry awards as Australians ... The reality is, we are ramping up the accountability through the Fair Work Commission to ensure they are doing the checks, they are making sure the approved employers have been vetted. Days after flying into Glasgow to catch the opening of the Cop26 climate summit, Santos CEO Kevin Gallagher headed over to Edinburgh to watch the Wallabies play Scotland from a corporate box. The oil and gas company’s logo may have stood pride of place at the Australian pavilion at the summit, but it was the company’s sponsorship of the Wallabies that would prove a public relations coup. The deal with Rugby Australia will see the team sport the Santos logo on the top-back of their jersey at every game. Former Wallabies captain David Pocock, a strong voice within sport calling for meaningful action on climate, says: It’s hard to stomach. You can read the full report below: Good morning, everyone, its hump day here on the blog and we are starting the morning talking about climate policy. (It’s Matilda Boseley with you this morning, by the way.) Energy minister Angus Taylor says the government’s new climate billion-dollar funding announcement is “starting with the solutions”, as others raise their eyebrows at the focus on carbon capture and storage. The Morrison government is once again trying to amend the law to allow Australia’s green bank to invest in the controversial tech. Scott Morrison has just announced plans to spend $500m to help fund small-scale startups considered too risky for private finance. This would then notionally be matched by the private sector, doubling the investment. The fund will be administered by the Clean Energy Finance Corporation after the Coalition legislates new rules allowing it to invest in CCS, a controversial technology experts warn can’t be relied on to do the heavy lifting of Australia’s emissions reduction. Carbon capture and storage has been criticised by the likes of mining magnate Andrew Forrest as an unproven failure. Unsurprisingly, Labor has been critical of this new move, but Taylor has accused the opposition of picking and choosing what technologies are acceptable based on “some kind of ideological basis”: “Lots of people when it comes to climate policy want to wipe industries out. They started this position where they said we want to see resources industries gone or agriculture impacted. That’s not where we start. We started the solution. Low emissions technologies that can bring down emissions, and if any technology can contribute to that we should be looking at that ... It’s a sensible proposal, but the truth is that Labour has decided that there are some types of emissions reduction they like, and there’s some they don’t. This of course comes as Morrison’s policy response to the climate crisis was ranked last in an assessment of 60 countries released at the global climate summit in Glasgow. OK, with that, why don’t we jump right into the day?Labor has accused the Coalition of trying to start “some sort of fight” over carbon capture and storage, as it leaves open the possibility of backing changes to the Clean Energy Finance Corporation to allow investment into the controversial technology. After Wednesday’s announcement that the government would provide the CEFC $500m to fund low emissions technology, including CCS, Labor’s climate change spokesman Chris Bowen said the opposition would wait to see the details of the legislation before declaring its hand. “It’s all about some sort of fight with Labor, not about actually doing anything for the climate. It’s all about spin and politics,” Bowen told the ABC on Wednesday. “If this is genuinely new money, then we’ll look at it in that light. “I’m a pragmatist. I think the government puts too much store in it (CCS) – it’s not the answer to all our problems. It’s not an excuse … not to reduce emissions. “If it can play some role in some sectors, not just … carbon capture, use and storage, then fine.” Labor MP Josh Burns, whose Melbourne seat of Macnamara is being targeted by the Greens, was more critical. “Let’s cut through Morrison’s bs,” he said on Twitter. “His announcement today is just another attempt to take money away from renewables. Their policy is to use the Clean Energy Finance Corporation to prolong the use of fossil fuels. He hasn’t changed one bit.” The government said the $1bn “low-emissions technology commercialisation fund” would receive $500m from the government and another $500m raised by the CEFC from private investors to support early stage companies to develop new technology. Angus Taylor, the emissions reduction minister, said it could be used for “any technology that can commercially bring down emissions”, including CCS. “We don’t want to pick and choose a technology on some kind of ideological basis,” Taylor told the ABC. The Greens vowed to fight any plan to expand the CEFC’s remit to fund CCS. Advice to the Greens from the parliamentary library suggested the agency already had the authority to invest in early stage companies working in other low-emissions technology. The party leader, Adam Bandt, said it meant the government did not need to legislate unless it was planning to direct clean energy spending to CCS projects. “The only reason the Liberals want legislation is to turn the CEFC into a slush fund for coal and gas corporations,” Bandt said. “This is nothing to do with stopping climate change and everything to do with Scott Morrison rewarding the coal and gas corporations that donate to the Liberal and Labor parties.” Labor and the Greens have previously opposed the government’s decision to broaden the investment remit of the CEFC’s sister climate body, the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (Arena), to fund non-renewable energy technologies. But they ultimately failed in an attempt to block the change in parliament. Outspoken Labor right-winger Joel Fitzgibbon at the time urged his party not to side with the Greens to try and disallow the move, calling it “ideological craziness”. Bowen said Labor’s previous objections had been the diversion of money from renewable energy into other technologies, as the government sought to shift the focus from solar and wind projects into investment in hydrogen, CCS, microgrids and energy efficiency. He pointed out the government had already attempted to amend the CEFC legislation earlier this year – to create a separate $1bn grid reliability fund to, in part, invest in new gas-fired generation – but failed after Nationals MPs pushed to have coal and nuclear added to its investment remit. ‘Not a smart use of public money’ Kane Thornton, chief executive of the Clean Energy Council, said the government had released little detail about the new fund, but it would be welcome if it was on top of existing CEFC funding and used to support emerging businesses developing genuinely clean technology, and not CCS. “A whole lot of people are working on innovative things to support new renewables into the grid,” he said. “We don’t think CCS for electricity generation is a smart use of public money, and we don’t support the CEFC and Arena being expanded into CCS.” The government is a strong supporter of CCS, having dedicated $250m in direct funding and identified it one of six priority technologies under its technology investment roadmap. It drew criticism last week for hosting a CCS display by the oil and gas company Santos at the national pavilion at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. Australian governments have committed about $4bn in funding for CCS over time, but it is yet to prove commercially viable at scale. Fortescue Metals boss Andrew Forrest is among those to have criticised the technology, saying it has failed “19 out of 20 times” and the general population was entitled to be sceptical about its use. Martijn Wilder, a former chair of Arena and founding partner of the climate advisory firm Pollination, said the CEFC was not set up to invest in CCS and any change would be up to parliament. He said the technology had a short-term role to play as long as fossil fuels remained in the system, but was expensive and was not without risk. “It’s just not clear that the public should be paying for that given (CCS) should be seen as part of the cost of production of a high-emitting good which the world is trying to transition away from,” Wilder said. John Grimes, chief executive of the Smart Energy Council, said the proposed change to the CEFC appeared “yet another attempt to prop up Australia’s dying coal industry”. “Scott Morrison and his colleagues voted repeatedly and unsuccessfully to axe the Clean Energy Finance Corporation,” he said. “Now they are trying to kill it by other means.”“Have any players or team names ever been refused to be broadcast in another country as it would translate to an obscenity or offensive term?” writes Andy Brook. “If so, how did they get around it?” We haven’t found examples of hardline bans on names being broadcast, but commentators have certainly chosen to be creative with their pronunciations of particular names on occasion. Mike McCarthy kicks things off with a familiar foe. “For much of his career, Stefan Kuntz wasn’t a problem for TV stations in the UK because he played mostly in the Bundesliga at a time (the 80s and 90s) when those matches weren’t shown on British TV. However, when he was selected for Germany’s Euro 96 squad, those matches were very much being shown in the UK. I seem to recall commentators plumped for referring to him as Stefan Kunz – strategically leaving out the ‘T’.” Liam James Burton has an example of a surname from Serie A that, while not an obscenity, was deemed too upsetting for UK viewers at a time of mourning. “As noted by former member of the Guardian parish James Richardson, when Princess Diana died, commentators on Serie A games that weekend were pressed to refer to Sampdoria’s Aimo Stefano Diana simply as ‘Aimo’ to protect our ears from hurt.” Jim Hearson also flags up the awkwardness of Arsenal’s Sega deal when they played in Italy. Rob Lewis highlights a problematic Welsh name in Istanbul. “John Toshack, when managing Beşiktaş, found himself the source of amusement as ‘taşak’ – which sounds suspiciously like his name – means testicle.” And Alan Gomes finishes off with a bit of profanity-swerving in Portugal. “Broadcasters here have some trouble with Austria’s current manager, Franco Foda, whose surname is Portuguese for ‘fuck’. Throughout decades of Foda’s career, Portuguese broadcasters have contorted his name into all sorts of unnatural positions – Foo-da, Fo-day, etc – to avoid offending. In the recent Euros, the announcer gave up and conceded: ‘We’ll just call him Franco, OK?’” Managers of the month sacked very soon after (2) It seems Watford’s trigger-happy owners have sent a manager packing after winning a monthly award even quicker than Chelsea did … “Vladimir Ivic was awarded Championship manager of the month for November on 11 December 2020,” writes Ross White. “On 19 December, just eight days later, he was sacked after a diabolical performance at Huddersfield. “For the record, the fans were supportive of the decision (as were, according to Troy Deeney’s book anyway, at least some of the players), and his replacement, Xisco Muñoz, then took the club to promotion. Of course, it would only be nine months until there was mass hysteria at his (again justified) dismissal. But that’s for another opinion piece.” Short managerial handovers The question referenced “elite-level” but that proviso is a tricky one to determine so the short of it is … we’ll broaden this one out. Our own Jonathan Wilson offers: “Dennis Wise 5ft 6in to Paul Sturrock 5ft 8in at Swindon (skipping caretakers) with Willie Carson 5ft as chairman.” “Kenny Dalglish (5ft 7in) to Brendan Rodgers (claims to be 5ft 7in but I have my doubts) must be up there,” offers Dara O’Reilly. But Marcos Garcia might just have a winner with a combined height of 10ft 9in: “How about in May 2013 ,when Brian Flynn (5ft 3in) handed over to Paul Dickov (5ft 6in) at Doncaster Rovers?” Knowledge archive “Does anyone remember a children’s television series called Striker?” mused Mike Seymour in October 2007. “The star was called Kevin someone and it was about a local boys’ footie team. I also think there was a chubby, useless one who nobody picked called Soggy and a lanky American/Canadian goalie. Any ideas?” One or two, Mike. The show ran for three series on the BBC from 1975 and was written by actor Kenneth Cope, famous as the dead one in Randall And Hopkirk Deceased. As William Hogg remembers, Striker starred young Kevin Moreton as Ben Dyker, the star forward of the Brenton youth team. His popularity was ensured by both goalscoring prowess and an ability to make chip butties, but poor Ben’s life wasn’t an easy one. He lived in a caravan with his limping dad (played by future Coronation Street actor Geoffrey Hinsliff – AKA Don Brennan) who insisted his son wasn’t to play football. But, for Ben, nothing could beat pulling on Brenton’s blue strip – complete with a red and white sash – and guiding his team to the local cup final. But days before Ben could grab cup glory, his dad discovered his antics and banned him from playing. The reason? Dad Dyker had once been an ace footballer nicknamed Striker Dyker whose career was cruelly cut short by a horrific injury – hence the limp – and he didn’t want his kid to follow in his footsteps. After much cajoling, of course Ben is allowed to play in the final where, as Glynn Marshall recalled: “I would be amazed if our hero didn’t bang in a last-minute winner.” The keeper was indeed an American and Ben’s mate’s full name was Soggy Sollis (played by Simon Manley). Can you help? “Reading academy graduate Jahmari Clarke scored his first two senior goals in an away win over Birmingham over the weekend – and upon watching his post-match interview I noticed a completely irrelevant detail – he has braces. This got me thinking: is he the first player to ever score a brace while wearing braces?” – Calum Pettitt. “When Angelo Ogbonna left the first half of West Ham v Liverpool, the introduction of Craig Dawson gave the field of play the Son of John, Son of Hender, Son of Robert, Son of Daw, and Son of, er, Alis. Has there been a top-flight game with more ‘Sons’?” wonders Will Jaremko-Wright. “Max Johnston, son of Queen of the South manager Allan Johnson, scored for the side against Raith Rovers. What other sons have scored for their dad’s teams?” ponders Craig Wilson. “In the current 2.Bundesliga table, the top 10 sides are all separated by a single point. Are there other examples of similar patterns in completed league tables?” asks Niall McVeigh. “With the FA Cup tie between Yate Town and Yeovil Town, I was wondering if there has ever been a more extreme fixture on the alphabetical order between two sides,” writes Brian Cowell. “PS: shout out to my old man who played professionally for Yeovil in the 60s!” “Has there ever been an instance of two teams meeting in the English third tier, with the winners going on to suffer successive relegations and the losers going on to achieve successive promotions so that, two seasons later, the winners were in non-league and the losers in the top flight?” asks Jake Lennon. “If not, what’s the closest we’ve had? Or has the equivalent happened overseas?” Mail us your questions or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.The Azeem Rafiq revelations have not come as a great surprise to Yorkshire men and women of south Asian backgrounds, many of whom interviewed by the Guardian believe they reflect the society in which they have lived their lives. Kamran Abbasi was brought up in Yorkshire, played his cricket there, and felt he experienced racism at every turn. His book Englistan, about the immigrant experience of cricket, explores Yorkshire’s historical struggle with racism. “I don’t think the existence of racism is in dispute,” he says. “It is so normalised in many settings. As a Black or Asian person, you can fight it every time you hear it or at times choose to just let it pass as the idiotic words of somebody you don’t know and will never see again. What makes it much more upsetting is when it is persistent and it comes from so-called friends, colleagues or teammates. “In the end it doesn’t matter exactly what Michael Vaughan said, it happened on his watch, he was a senior player and ex-England captain. All the comments that happened in the dressing room or on the field weren’t a one-off. The problem is that nobody at Yorkshire said anything or tried to put an end to it.” Halima Khan, the founder and managing director of Opening Boundaries, an organisation that uses sporting initiatives as a positive driver of social change, agrees that the problem lies with the inherent structures at the club. “I’ve done a lot of work with Yorkshire, and there are some really good staff there,” she says. “All three organisations – the Yorkshire cricket board, the Yorkshire foundation and Yorkshire CCC – can be more reflective of the societies that they serve. “There is a lot of work to do in how they engage personally, structurally and organisationally. They have admitted discrimination, the telling part is that the accountability wasn’t there. Once you get beyond participation level, that’s where the inequality really starts, you have to go beyond the smoke and mirrors. “Lord Patel [the club’s new chair] has come in and done an amazing job in the time he’s been in post, he’s shown leadership and empathy and kindness, but after 18 months you end up with one person of colour apologising to another person of colour. Where is the accountability for those who have done wrong?” She thinks there are specific challenges for south Asian women trying to get into the system, that there is a lack of cultural understanding. “I read a Muslim player say they were forced to wear shorts. I just think that is a personal choice, it has no impact on the game and helps them feel safe in an environment doing the sport they love.” Taj Butt has been involved with Yorkshire cricket most of his adult life and has been the chairman of the Quaid e Azam league for 35 years. He worked for the Yorkshire Cricket Foundation, the official charity and community arm of Yorkshire County Cricket Club (YCCC), for three years, between 2014 and 2017, before resigning. “I was based at Headingley, and the culture was disappointing to see. When I arrived, there was only one other person of colour. He worked as a cleaner in the car park. It was a white, middle-class, young, laddish culture. I walked into the office and I felt like I’d walked into a youth club. I didn’t feel welcome at all. “There was a lot of stereotypical language and behaviour in regard to the Asian community. I went into it thinking we needed to have more clubs like mine [Great Horton Church] making more opportunities for young people, but they didn’t want more clubs. They wanted taxi drivers and restaurant workers playing in the park. Some of that came from the ECB and their south Asian strategy. “I was involved in some of the planning, but when the strategy came out it was totally different from what I had hoped to see. Quite a lot of investment had come from Sport England who want to see a rise in participation rates among adults. But for me it wasn’t about increasing participation, there’s huge participation in the south Asian community, the problem was progress to the next level, whereas Yorkshire saw it as a tick-box exercise about numbers.” He says racism on the pitch is less in your face than it used to be, but it hasn’t gone. He thinks people have just got more crafty, using terms like “Taliban” and “Isis”. He also believes the community itself isn’t listened to – he cites the example of the installation of a number of non-turf pitches in Bradford: “The problem is nobody in Bradford wants to play on them, they want access to grounds to play matches.” Recreationally, there are still huge problems of marginalisation. “There is a pyramid system, but most of the Asian clubs are not invited to be part of it. Asian teams like mine, we’ve got the expertise, the facilities, to be successful, but when we try and join the system, we simply don’t get accepted. When it goes to a vote at an AGM, we often get no votes at all.” Yorkshire Cricket Foundation said: “There is no place for racism in cricket. There is no place for racism at the Yorkshire Cricket Foundation. YCF strongly [denies] the claims made by Taj Butt.” • This article was amended on 12 November 2021 to set out the full name of the Yorkshire Cricket Foundation (YCF), the charitable and community arm of YCCC, and to include a statement from YCF in response to Taj Butt’s claims.Film TikTok is giving film an explosion of energy, a performative and democratised version of cinephilia that celebrates, imitates, teases, lip-syncs, mashes up and mocks – but all the time rubs up against – the movies. Susan Sontag, in Against Interpretation, called for a rich, intuitive kind of criticism that celebrates and reproduces the sensuous effect of art, instead of imposing a coldly pedagogic analysis. I think she’d have loved Film TikTok. And it’s happened over just a few years, propelled by people under the age of 25. Apart from everything else, Film TikTok may be undermining one of the most fundamental tenets of cinema: that the screen has to be “landscape” style, since anything else looks amateurish and inauthentic. British film-maker Charlie Shackleton recently talked about mentoring a group of young Australian critics and finding how utterly steeped they were in the language of TikTok: asked to take a picture of them on his phone, he recalls his chagrin for turning it sideways – “Like a fucking Lumiere brother!” Jean-Luc Godard collaged the movies in his epic essay project: Histoire(s) du Cinéma. And Film TikTok is doing something comparable, though without the conspicuous cultural weight and heft. It’s appropriating constituent elements and scenes then reshuffling them, or cutting in new goofy re-enactments. This juxtaposition is a critical act. Overwhelmingly, it’s driven by humour and comedy, and Film TikTok incidentally adores the key TikTok trope of the doppelganger — the shot-reverse-shot of the same people talking to themselves as different characters, shot slightly from below to underline the absurdity. People are always spoofing films including, inevitably, Wes Anderson, but I like the videos that approach the movies from a more oblique angle. Illeleana Karis has a fascinating account in which she pastiches movie tropes but creates her own content whose ostensible critical purpose isn’t immediately obvious: her micro-film I Am the Girl in Red is weirdly compelling. It’s … what? A critique of movie trailers? The Single White Female idea? I don’t know, but it’s great. In another video, she cuts herself into a scene in Greta Gerwig’s Little Women so that she gets to be the one rejecting a distraught Timothée Chalamet. Hunter Clark is one of the biggest movie influencers on TikTok, and arguably one of the most important film critics in the world, with 2m followers for his Hidden Movie Details account, in which he does nothing but pluck out a detail from a movie and show you some little thing you’ve missed. His geeky little insights get under your skin and his videos are absolutely addictive, telling you things you didn’t know before. His one about the “hunnybunny” scene at the beginning of Pulp Fiction was an eye-opener. Probably my favourite Film TikTok person is David Ma. He is an ad director and “food artist” who breaks down how food ads are made to his 1m followers – but also shows you the secrets behind every other kind of feature film, showing you how effects are contrived in the movies. He is brilliant on “food acting”, demonstrating how whenever someone is shown chewing, there is always a cut before the swallow – so the actor can spit the food out into a bucket. Actors can’t be expected to eat for take after take or they would get nauseous. He shows, too, how “mirror” scenes are created so that the camera crew aren’t caught in the reflection: you create a dummy image of the set and characters with body-doubles. The Terminator’s Linda Hamilton was shown opposite her twin sister for one such scene. And – to return to Pulp Fiction – he shows the machinery that created “chomp” burgers for the Travolta/Thurman dance scene: a dozen different burgers with a bite taken out of them with a set of metal jaws, so that the eating scene can be achieved with continuity through many different takes. With its audacity, disposability and cheek, Film TikTok is putting the fun back into criticism.Tom Ford answers my phone call in precisely the way I’d hoped he would: with a voice as smooth as butter and the grace of Cary Grant. We are in touch to discuss his latest project, a coffee-table book charting the past 15 years of his career – or “post-Gucci”, as those familiar with luxury fashion prefer to describe the era that has followed Ford’s departure from the Italian super brand. Tom Ford 002, which spans 444 pages, includes imagery by photographers such as Mert and Marcus and Inez &amp; Vinoodh and a foreword by Anna Wintour. The list of celebrities featured reads like the lineup of one of Ford’s fashion show front rows with Drake, Rihanna, and Jennifer Lopez among the headliners. But first, the gentleman prefers small talk. “You’re in London? How wonderful. I miss it,” he says of the city he used to call home. Texan-born Ford speaks to me from Beverly Hills, where he has lived since decamping from the UK in 2019. It is lunchtime where he is, and the sun is shining. “I do a lot of Zooms, but it’s good to talk like this. It means I didn’t have to get up and take a shower beforehand,” he says. It’s reassuring to discover that the man credited with reinventing sex appeal is enjoying a duvet day of sorts. Laid back is not a phrase commonly associated with Ford. As a designer, he remains fiercely loyal to the breed of high-octane glamour he used to transform Gucci into a billion-dollar business. His brand, which spans womenswear, menswear and cosmetics, is a status symbol for the super-rich. Its scintillating ad campaigns, instantly recognisable as Ford’s, are an extension of his aesthetic. A self-confessed “hyper Virgo”, Ford has an unforgiving eye for everything from floral displays (single-stem bunches only) to the length of a shirt cuff. He is also fashion’s starriest designer. Catwalk shows for the eponymous label he launched in 2004 attract a guest list to rival the Oscars. Julianne Moore and Rihanna are regulars. In 2013, Jay-Z named a song in his honour. Ford is at ease among Hollywood’s top tier because he is in it. After parting ways with the Gucci group, he switched from fashion to film set. Ford’s movies – A Single Man (2009) and Nocturnal Animals (2019) – were nominated for Academy Awards. Both are beautiful to watch. At home, where he lives with his nine-year-old son Jack, Ford’s life has been upended. Richard Buckley, his partner of 35 years and Jack’s other parent, died in August. It seems poignant that Ford’s new book, the result of much reflection, should appear on shelves when he is processing such loss. “When Richard saw the book, he said: ‘That’s a lot of water under the bridge’ and turned and left the room,” Ford says. A photograph of Jack is among Ford’s favourite additions to the book. “It is the only shot I have ever released of him publicly. He was five when it was taken, so no one would recognise him from it,” he says. A candid Q&amp;A with Women’s Wear Daily’s Bridget Foley is also featured. In it, Ford discusses everything from exiting Gucci to being part of the only gay couple at the golf club and describes his son as his “number one focus”. The designer also highlights the potency of good taste in the Buckley Ford family’s genes. “One time when he was five, somebody at school asked what was the worst thing you could think of. Jack said: “Brown shoes with a black belt.” Work on the book meant that Ford spent lockdown sifting through thousands of images. “It was an interesting thing to spend so much time looking back,” he tells me, “it is not something I do often.” His reluctance to take stock is a hangover from his days at Gucci, when there was no time to pause for reflection, a period that led to burnout, and he had what he has called a “mid-life crisis”. “It’s hard to look back when you’re constantly expected to produce,” he says. “I remember having dinner with Karl Lagerfeld and him telling me that I’d only understand how well things were going in the future once I had the chance to go back.” Undoubtedly, this time of contemplation has enabled Ford to recognise how much things have evolved. He cites an “obsession with political correctness” as a drawback for this generation of fashion designers. “Cancel culture inhibits design because rather than feeling free, the tendency is to start locked into a set of rules. Everything is now considered appropriation. We used to be able to celebrate other cultures. Now you can’t do that.” Ford, the elected chair of the Council of Fashion Designers of America and perhaps, the world’s chicest environmentalist, welcomes the call for the luxury world to lessen its impact on the planet. He started by doing his bit at home. “I switched to aluminium straws, got rid of single-use plastic,” he says. In 2017, Ford announced he was a vegan. “I really don’t need meat,” he says, and credits the Netflix documentary What the Health for inspiring the change in diet. He is applying the same mindset to his business – Ford’s label turns over $2bn (£1.48bn) a year, while Tom Ford Beauty turns over $1bn – paying attention to details such as packaging and workers’ rights. “People are well looked after,” he says. In Ford’s mind, true luxury fashion is sustainable by its nature. He tells me that he recently paid $90,000 for a dress he designed during his tenure at Yves Saint Laurent to add to his archive. “The clothes we make are not meant to be thrown away,” he says. Ford seems to be fascinated and repulsed by the digitalisation of fashion. “The future of fashion is increasingly cartoonish,” he says. “Instagram has broken down the rules. People dress up to take pictures of themselves to post online, everything is exaggerated – especially the eyebrows.” He recently watched Fake Famous, the HBO documentary about influencers, and found the revelation that Instagram users were using toilet seats to give the illusion of being on a plane “completely hysterical”. Can we expect to see an airport selfie of him soon? “Never!” he says. “I’m very private.” You can count on Ford to keep it classy. • Tom Ford 002, by Tom Ford, is published by Rizzoli (£95).“Make no mistake, the money is here, if the world wants to use it,” said Mark Carney, the former Bank of England governor who today serves as UN climate envoy, while also representing an alliance of financiers sitting on a pile of $130tn worth of assets. So, what does the world want? If only humanity had the power to organise a global poll based on one-human-one-vote, such a species-wide referendum would undoubtedly deliver a clear answer: “Do whatever it takes to stop emitting carbon now!” Instead, we have a decision-making process culminating in the colossal fiasco currently unfolding in Glasgow. The failure of Cop26 reflects our failed democracies on both sides of the Atlantic. President Biden arrived in Glasgow as his people back in Washington were pushing his infrastructure bill through Congress – an exercise that decoupled the bill from any serious investment in renewables and funded an array of carbon-emitting infrastructure such as expanded roads and airports. Meanwhile in the European Union, the rhetoric may be painted in bright green, but the reality is dark brown – with even Germany looking forward to copious amounts of Russian natural gas in exchange of green-lighting the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline. The EU should be creating a pan-European Renewable Energy Union, but alas our leaders are not even debating this idea. There are three reasons Cop26 is proving such a spectacular debacle. The first reason is a planet-wide collective action problem over “free-riding”. Large businesses, as well as states, take a leaf out of St Augustine’s prayer, “Lord please make me chaste but not just yet”. Everyone prefers a planet on which no one emits carbon to a planet that sizzles. But everyone also prefers to delay paying the cost of transition if they can get away with it. If the rest of the planet does the right thing, the planet is saved, even if you selfishly postpone your own conversion to environmental probity. And if the rest of the planet does not do the right thing, why be the one sucker who does? The second reason is a global coordination failure. In one sense, Carney is correct: mountain ranges of cash are lying idly in the global financial system, its ultra-wealthy owners keen to invest it in low-carbon activities. But a private investment in, say, green hydrogen will only return profits if many other investors invest in it too – and so the investors all sit around waiting for each other to be the first. Meanwhile, corporations, communities and states join this waiting game, unwilling to take the risk of committing to green hydrogen until big finance does. Tragically, there is no global coordinator to match the available money, technologies and needs. The third reason is simply: capitalism. It has always gained pace through the incessant commodification of everything, beginning with land, labour and technology before spreading to genetically modified organisms, and even a woman’s womb or an asteroid. As capitalism’s realm spread, price-less goods turned into pricey commodities. The owners of the machinery and the land necessary for the commodification of goods profited, while everyone else progressed from the wretchedness of the 19th century working class to the soothing fantasies of mindless petit-bourgeois consumerism. Everything that was good was commodified – including much of our humanity. And the bad externalities that the same production process generated were simply released into the atmosphere. To power the capitalist juggernaut, carbon stored for millennia in trees and under the surface was plundered. For two centuries immense wealth – and corresponding human misery – was produced by exploitative processes that depleted “free” natural capital, carbon in particular. Workers around the world are now paying the cost to nature that the capitalist market never bore. Free-marketeers would like us to believe that business has now yielded to science, and is ready and willing to step into the void of government inaction. We must not believe this for a moment. Yes, Carney is right that the money for the belated green transition is available, and it is ample. Those who possess it will undoubtedly invest it to supply, say, green hydrogen if we, society, pay them to do so. But at the same time, they will not voluntarily cease production processes that continue releasing carbon into the atmosphere. This is why polluters adore net zero targets: because they are a brilliant cover for not restricting emissions. In exchange for non-verifiable offsets, they are allowed to continue plundering the planet’s remaining stored carbon, until the point arrives when their marginal private cost surpasses their revenue from the last unit sold. By cynically placing net zero at its centre, Cop26 became nothing more than an expensive cover-up for continued toxic emissions. Hiding behind Cop26, the great and the good lie to the young, lie to vulnerable people and even lie to themselves by repeating the truth that the “money is there” to be invested in the planet’s salvation. What needs to be done? Two things at the very least. First, a complete shutdown of coalmines and new oil and gas rigs. If governments can lock us down to save lives during a pandemic, they can shut down the fossil fuel industry to save humanity. Second, we need a global carbon tax, to increase the relative price of everything that releases more carbon, and from which all proceeds should be returned to the poorer members of our species. To earn a shot at rising to the greatest challenge humanity has ever faced, we must first confront both the funders and the owners of the fossil fuel industries. Though this clash will not guarantee our future, it is a necessary condition for us to have one. • Yanis Varoufakis is the co-founder of DiEM25 (Democracy in Europe Movement)Growing up as a football obsessive, by the time I was 17 I thought I’d seen pretty much everything the game had to offer me. You can probably see how I became a sportswriter. Around then, I was also spending most weekday evenings hanging about parks, alleyways and pubs to state-alter in one way or another, often under the guise of watching a game. So in the summer of 1996, my parents – who’d spent a decade resisting my pleas to get Teletext – signed up to Sky, sagely rationalising that beaming industrial quantities of sport into our front room would inspire me to take school more seriously. The effect was immediate. Within weeks I was skiving triple history on a Monday afternoon to broaden my horizons with Revista De La Liga – Sol! Soool! Sol Sol! Sooooooooool!– and it was here that I got to know Ronaldo Luís Nazário de Lima. Like lots of people, I’d first clapped eyes on him in 1994 – Ronaldinho, as he was known then, was a member of Brazil’s victorious World Cup squad. Barry Davies marked our card during BBC’s coverage of the final, but he didn’t get on the pitch and the show, such as it was, was stolen by a different youngster, Viola lighting up the drabbest of matches before pulling a Josimar and vanishing without trace. Within two years, Ronaldo was installed as a common room hero, his alias arousing particular interest. Brazilians are famous for their nicknames, part of a culture that – pre-Bolsonaro – made their country the funnest in the world. Dunga means Dopey, after the dwarf; blonde-haired, blue-eyed Ricardo Rogério de Brit is known as Alemão, German; and Gabriel Gonzaga, the MMA fighter, answers to Napão, Big Nose. But though Ronaldo rocked a similarly send-uppable feature, his talent was so extreme and so consuming that only Ó Fenómeno would do; anything but Ó Fenómeno would’ve been ridiculous. My first specific memory of Ronaldo is his famous goal for Barcelona against Compostela in October 1996. But that was not the first time I’d seen him, and though I can’t place the game, I can place the feeling – the shock and awe and joy and fear and laughter and love – because it’s still in me now. He could play. I say play. The book of Genesis tells us that God blew into Adam’s nostrils with the breath of life and man became a living being. But what if he did that to a cyborg programmed with discombobulating skill, speed, power, mentality and intelligence, in order to become the acme, apogee, epitome, apotheosis and quintessence of everything a centre-forward should be? If, as David Foster Wallace wrote, watching Roger Federer was a religious experience, watching Ronaldo was a paranormal one: Federer explored the full range of human capability to reinvent our conception of the possible, whereas Ronaldo performed feats way beyond the limits of corporeality to reinvent our conception of the impossible, an emissary sent from far into the future to show us that everything we thought previously was a lie. The Brazilian greats of the past – Garrincha, Didi, Pelé, Zico – were cuddly little guys who played samba football. Ronaldo, on the other hand, was a hyperreal animation of rubber, iron and heat, the Ready Brek kid on fast forward, and though he too enjoyed the beautiful game with a smile on his face, it wasn’t an act of philosophy or ideology, it was because it was the best way to kill you and your death was amusing to him. That’s what I mean when I say play. Ronaldo only stayed with Barcelona for a season, 1996-97, scoring 34 goals in 37 games – enough to make him, at 20, the youngest recipient of Fifa’s world player of the year award. He also helped his team to the Copa del Rey and scored the clincher in the Cup Winners’ Cup final before leaving to annihilate Serie A with minimum effort and maximum prejudice, helping himself to 25 league goals as Inter finished second to Marcello Lippi’s great Juventus side. His teammates, meanwhile, were as disbelieving as the rest of us, routinely celebrating his goals by shining his shoes in an act of light-hearted deference that encapsulated the cosmic, chasmic gap between him and the rest of us pathetic earthlings. Inter also reached the final of the 1998 Uefa Cup – at the time, the richest leagues were permitted just two Champions League entries, so competition was relatively fierce. Ronaldo scored against Neuchâtel Xamax in round one, against Strasbourg in round two as Inter overturned a two-goal first-leg deficit, against Schalke in the last eight – a game in which he also committed a savage, sadistic, exhibition double-murder – and a beauty in the semi against Spartak, despite a pitch made of eiderdown. The final, to be played against Lazio in Paris, was the competition’s first over one leg. I Biancocelesti boasted the talents of Pavel Nedved, Roberto Mancini and Pierluigi Casiraghi, while Inter had Iván Zamorano, Javier Zanetti and Youri Djorkaeff, yet the game was billed as a confrontation between the world’s best striker, Ronaldo, and the world’s best defender, Alessandro Nesta. Early on, Nesta hauled Ronaldo down to let him know he was there, but very soon, he wished he wasn’t. On five minutes, Zamorano put Inter ahead, and shortly afterwards the world’s best defender was left puddled on the ground as he tried to outmuscle the world’s best striker. But the highlight of the half came when Ronaldo collected the ball on the left of the D to send a shot of terrifying power shrieking, flaming and hissing against the far angle of post and bar. On the hour, Ronaldo burned up Vladimir Jugovic, who responded with the traditional elbow to face – yellow card! – then Zanetti put Inter further ahead with a half-volley of unforgettable brilliance … whose brilliance has been largely forgotten, thanks to the brilliance of what came next. With 80 minutes gone, Francesco Moriero, who’d only been on the pitch a minute, stuck a ball in behind, just right of centre, and Ronaldo ran at Luca Marchegiani one on one. The situation was one in which all strikers would expect to score, but for Ronaldo, that wasn’t enough: he needed to emphasise the difference between him and everyone else; in the moment, Marchegiani wasn’t just Marchegiani but all of us. So we watch Ronaldo sidewinding away from the ball, allowing it perfectly into stride with eyes focused on us, before taking another touch that invites us to narrow the angle. We know he’s going around us because that’s what he does because it is how we’ll look most stupid, but we also know it doesn’t matter what we know. Ball again left to its own devices, he shimmies outside and, transfixed, we follow him, then again when he shimmies back inside, even though we’re halfway down and no longer in control of our body. Ronaldo, meanwhile, eases back from whence he came to leave us a floppy, floundering mess like the Wicked Witch of the West, desperately throwing feet while he rolls into the empty net. His sixth in the competition, the goal puts him level with luminaries such as Gary McSwegan and Robbie Winter of Dundee United, but one behind Auxerre’s Stéphane Guivarc’h. Naturally there was more, Ronaldo deploying footwork I’d love to describe, except 23 years and hundreds of viewings later, I’ve still as much clue what happened as Guerino Gottardi and Matías Almeyda did at the time; Almeyda was sent off for fouling him a few moments later. Nevertheless, it’s the goal that sustains, probably the greatest moment of perhaps Ronaldo’s greatest performance, and a beautiful restatement of football’s infinite, eternal capacity to amaze even the most jaded of 17-year-olds.When Adam Afriyie sold his political data business, DeHavilland, for £18m, only months after his 2005 election to the House of Commons, it looked as if the fledgling MP had secured a strong financial platform to support his vaulting political ambition. His 72% stake in the company netted him £13m and one of the Conservative party’s first black MPs – sometimes dubbed the “Tory Barack Obama” – was at one stage reputed to be worth £100m. Yet this week, HMRC submitted a petition to the high court to have him declared bankrupt over an unpaid bill for at least £1.7m in taxes from his crumbling business empire. Companies House filings suggest that Afriyie’s businesses collapsed owing a total of £2.3m. Afriyie’s position as an MP, in the safe Windsor constituency he has represented since his political debut, does not appear to be under imminent threat. But parliamentary rules mean that he would have to stand aside if a bankruptcy restrictions order is made against him. These can be imposed if the bankrupt refuses to cooperate with the process or is suspected of hiding assets, for example. The taxman’s petition, which Afriyie apparently intends to defend at the high court in person, relates primarily to the liquidation of IT firm Connect Support Services, set up before DeHavilland, the venture whose sale proved so lucrative back in 2005. Connect Support Services went into insolvency in 2017 and was sold by administrators to fellow IT business Cloud Direct. The Guardian understands that Afriyie expects proceeds from the sale, between £1.5m and £2m, to clear the bulk of his debts to HMRC. That sale took place in 2017. A liquidator’s report filed at Companies House more than three years later, in November 2020, shows that the company owed £1.8m to HMRC at that time. Another Afriyie business is in the taxman’s sights too. When Afriyie sold DeHavilland in 2005, he carved out and retained the company’s fast-growing news agency, now called Axonn Media, but known back then as Adfero. The company was something of a hothouse. Back in 2013, when Afriyie was under scrutiny due to rumours that he intended to challenge David Cameron for leadership of the Conservative party, one former employee lifted the lid on what he alleged was a punishing culture at Adfero. The former employee, now a Guardian staff member, spoke of being told to produce up to 30 “stories” a day for publication, in an office above a branch of Subway, churning out words on subjects as diverse as double glazing, human resources, conservatories, holidays in Dubai and garden tools. “The job boiled down to scouring the internet for stories to rewrite such that they were tailored to a client and, most importantly, could include keywords that would boost search engine optimisation,” he said. Around the same time, Adfero – which had derived its name from the Latin for “I bring news” – rebranded and became Axonn. Despite its new name, Axonn failed to adapt to the changing world of internet marketing and, from around 2014, began haemorrhaging customers and cutting staff. The company went into liquidation in 2019 and was sold in July 2019 to T&amp;D Media Group for £39,000 and 6% of sales in the first year. By the time of the liquidator’s next progress report, that 6% was worth just £19,758.76. That indicates annual turnover of less than £330,000 at Axonn, compared with nearly £7.6m in 2013. That same liquidator’s report, filed in September this year, shows that £492,000 was owed to HMRC. On Monday, a spokesperson for Afriyie said: “The [bankruptcy] petition arises for complex reasons related to Adam’s past business interests. Negotiations have been ongoing for several years and the petition is subject to legal challenge as his advisers are working towards reaching an agreement.” The spokesperson declined to offer further comment on Tuesday.The Coalition’s voter ID bill may discourage people from voting and “no evidence” has been provided regarding how it could prevent fraud, a parliamentary committee has warned. The joint committee on human rights, chaired by Nationals MP Anne Webster, issued the warning in a report on Wednesday. It called on the special minister of state, Ben Morton, to explain how the bill would be effective and its impact on vulnerable groups. If the voter integrity bill was passed, Australians would be asked to show photo or non-photo identification in order to vote. People unable to show ID could get another registered voter to vouch for them or cast a declaration vote – after providing their date of birth and signature – as a fallback. The controversial bill was introduced in the October sittings of parliament, prompting fears it could be pushed through ahead of the 2022 election with the support of One Nation, which has claimed credit for it, and Centre Alliance, which has supported it in principle but is yet to decide its position. The committee noted the bill could limit the right to participate in public affairs “if a person is unable to cast a vote … or potentially if there is a lower voter turnout because of a perception that identification is required to vote”. It suggested the bill could also limit “the right to equality and non-discrimination” as requiring proof of identity “may have a disproportionate impact on particular groups”, including homeless people or Indigenous Australians in remote communities. The committee said “protecting against voter fraud” may be a legitimate objective, but the government had not explained “why the current laws are insufficient … and why the measures address a pressing and substantial concern”. The Coalition majority on the joint standing committee on electoral matters has recommended voter ID in reviews of the 2013, 2016 and 2019 elections. But the human rights committee noted the Australian Electoral Commission had found instances of voter fraud were “vanishingly small”. The committee said that “no evidence has been provided as to how the measure will protect against voter fraud, and therefore increase public confidence in the electoral system”. “It is also not clear how voter identification requirements would be able to prevent people from voting multiple times at different locations.” The committee said it was “not clear if it may in fact reduce public confidence in the electoral system and discourage some voters from voting because of the perception that they cannot vote if they do not possess adequate identification documents”. Although the committee praised safeguards including the declaration vote, it said it was “unclear” if this option would be accessible for all if further information such as a driver’s licence or passport number was required. The committee asked Morton to provide further information about why the bill is necessary, how it would be effective, whether any modelling on turnout has been conducted, its impact on vulnerable groups, and consideration of alternatives. Nevertheless, the committee said it had “not yet formed a concluded view”. Webster told Guardian Australia her personal view was the bill contained enough safeguards and she supported it because “fraudulent behaviour should be stopped”. Labor and the Greens, who have five members on the 10-member committee, both oppose the bill. The University of Sydney’s Prof Anne Twomey has warned the bill could be challenged in court as a disproportionate measure that excludes people from voting.A mutant mashup of Squid Game, The Hunger Games and Suicide Squad, this cheap and cheerless sci-fi action film posits a future wherein wealthy hunters come to a remote island to pursue and kill human targets foolishly hoping for a big win if they survive. Apex, the company that runs the show, is represented by a hologram hostess named West (Alexia Fast), who has a posh British accent as if it’s the mid-1990s when that was still a signifier of evil. When one of Apex’s most ruthless but regular customers, multi-trillionaire Rainsford (Neal McDonough), complains that the prey have become too easy, West brings in Malone (Bruce Willis), a prisoner so notorious for his cunning and ferocity he’s been kept in solitary confinement for years. Despite this treatment, Malone seems none too distressed by those years of isolation. Indeed, he seems just as chipper and quippy as Willis always seems in crappy movies like this; moreover he is apparently quite content to spend a lot of time on his own creeping around the island forest, oddly almost never in the same shot as any of his co-stars. In fact, a lot more of the film is taken up with Rainsford and his fellow hunters alternately arguing and scheming among themselves, and then inevitably betraying one another, in order to win the dubious trophy of Malone’s head, to be rendered as a hologram post-mortem. The competing middle-aged white guys with beards and barrel chests are a fairly interchangeable lot, although Nels Lennarson puts on the most florid display of psychopathology, piped through a cheerful Ulster accent. (Megan Peta Hill gets to be the lone female hunter.) Not even the section where Malone begins “tripping balls” thanks to some psilocybin-laced blackberries manages to spruce up this tedious genre exercise. • Apex Predator is released on 12 November on digital platforms.Is the Brexit-bolstered bulletproof screen around Boris Johnson’s Conservative government about to shatter? The UK prime minister is embroiled in yet another sleaze scandal after a thwarted attempt to bend parliamentary standards rules, in order to shield a now ex-Tory MP who was found to have been lobbying for private firms. As our lead story explores this week, it’s the latest in a long list of sleaze episodes to have eroded the government’s public standing. We look at all the claims – and ask whether the next person on the standards committee’s list might be the PM himself. And, in a week when Johnson welcomed the world to the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow – before departing in a private jet – we find out how his part-statesman, part-standup patter went down with international delegates. Cop26 moved towards its final stages this week. How close is the climate conference to delivering the changes needed to limit global heating to a manageable level? Global environment editor Jonathan Watts rounds up what has been achieved in the early stages – and where efforts have fallen short. A decade has passed since the death of Jimmy Savile, the British DJ and TV presenter posthumously exposed as a sexual predator and a paedophile. But the story of the BBC reporters who risked their careers to break the news is less well-known. Poppy Sebag-Montefiore reveals a sorry tale of institutional failure at the broadcaster. Our culture reads this week include a deep delve into the world of non-fungible tokens, the digital crypto-artworks tearing up the staid norms of the art world. Then there’s an interview with Jane Campion, the feted New Zealand film director whose brooding new western, The Power of the Dog, is about to hit screens. Get the Guardian Weekly magazine delivered to your doorTwo bronze statues that guard the entrance to Zwickau train station in Saxony tell the tale of Germany’s struggle to wean itself off fossil fuels. A crouching miner cradles a lamp in a nod to the lignite, a particularly dirty form of coal, that was dug from this part of former East Germany, fuelling its factories and power stations. His companion, an engineer, represents the car industry that dominates Germany’s industrial heartland. But while mining for coal is on the way out, the country’s influential car industry, which employs more than 830,000 people, is heading in a new direction. Volkswagen’s enormous plant on the outskirts of the medieval town is the first in the German carmaker’s empire to fully embrace the future. The last internal combustion engine (ICE) car, a VW Golf estate, rolled off the line here in June 2020, as Zwickau became the first factory belonging to a volume car manufacturer to fully switch from building petrol- and diesel-guzzling cars to those powered by lithium-ion batteries. Six years after the humiliation of its global emissions scandal, the world’s largest carmaker by output is leading the charge for Germany’s carmakers, as they look to end their lengthy and lucrative love affair with hydrocarbons by going electric. Dieselgate in 2015 – where VW was found to have installed so-called defeat devices in its cars to cheat emissions tests – left an indelible mark on the company. It may also have pushed VW more quickly to a lower-emission strategy than many of its domestic and international rivals, and spurred tough new government rules. The European Union intends to end the sale of new petrol and diesel vehicles by 2035. “We started this four, five years ago when we had the discussion, what are the next steps for Volkswagen’s strategy, where are we going as a company with our customers,” recalled Andreas Walingen, Volkswagen’s chief strategy officer. “We can be open on this also; the diesel crisis really gave us, [a sense of] think about yourself, what is your purpose,” Walingen said. “We sat together and said we really have to make a change, we have to go for zero”. VW’s bet on electric prompted a €1.2bn (£1bn) investment in the Zwickau plant – out of €35bn the firm is spending on electrification – and a two-year transformation where 85% of the site was converted to produce solely electric cars. Now five all-electric models from three of the group’s brands – VW, Audi and Seat Cupra – are already being produced, and will be joined soon by a sixth, the VW ID.5, with the goal of reaching 300,000 vehicles a year from 2022. “It is running much better than expected, because the market wants electric vehicles, that’s the difference,” said Dr Stefan Loth, chairman of Volkswagen Saxony’s management board. “In 2017, not everybody thought it was the right decision, but they were anxious in case something goes wrong and nobody buys these electric vehicles, and we have a plant with little output.” VW now can’t build e-vehicles fast enough. Current problems are all about supply rather than demand, because of the ongoing global shortage of semiconductors used in everything from controlling car batteries to seats. Initially, a big concern of Zwickau’s 8,500-strong workforce was whether anyone would want to buy electric vehicles, as well as what higher levels of automation would mean for jobs. “There was fear among young and old. The same questions kept coming up. Will they still need me, what will happen to my job,” said Maik Möckel, 39, head of assembly hall 6, a cavernous space the size of 11 football pitches. The conversion left few areas untouched. Patches of factory floor had to be reinforced with steel to withstand 2 tonne electric vehicles, including their 500kg lithium-ion batteries. The conversion brought in more robots, but the carmaker has guaranteed it will maintain current employment levels in Zwickau until 2029. It was a “long road” to get the workers on board with the plant’s transformation, said Jens Rothe, head of the powerful works council at the plant, a German corporate tradition where elected workers represent their fellow employees to management and play a role in corporate decision-making. “I have always said we are the icebreaker for the whole firm,” Rothe said. It is the second significant transformation at the site owned by VW since 1990 – the iconic Trabants were once built here. The switch to electric also brought Audi production back to the town where the brand was established in 1910. VW’s investment in electrification has put it ahead of many of its rivals, according to Matthias Schmidt, a Berlin-based independent car analyst. “VW are lobbying the EU and German government to say the transition should occur quicker,” he said. “They are quite happy to destroy the competition, and if these CO2 legislation targets get moved forward. VW are way on target to meet their CO2 legislation and other car manufacturers have now got to speed up.” VW has already sold its electric vehicle platform to Ford under licence, allowing the US carmaker to build electric cars in Cologne for the European market. Yet not all German carmakers are moving at the same pace, and the rapid shift away from hydrocarbons led by VW has provoked concern about the impact on Germany’s export-led economy – and the potential for mass job losses. The head of Mercedes-owner Daimler has called for an “honest conversation” about the impact of electrification on jobs. Meanwhile, VW’s chief executive Herbert Diess has recently felt the heat from the works council at the company’s Wolfsburg headquarters over how it plans to revamp the site, as it looks to boost productivity amid the semiconductor shortage. The company is also facing competition on its home turf from US electric carmaker Tesla, which is building a factory outside Berlin, where it intends to create 10,000 jobs and produce 500,000 cars a year at its gigafactory, which will include the world’s largest battery plant. “Especially in Germany you’ve got specialist companies that have been champions of industry, specialising in specialist parts for the internal combustion engine,” Schmidt said. “Of course there are going to be job losses, but what often gets missed is there are going to be new job opportunities created as well.” Thomas Knabel, the representative of the IG Metall metalworkers’ trade union in Zwickau, said they faced difficulties in getting the region’s suppliers to take electrification seriously. “Lots of auto suppliers asked whether it would really happen. But it was clear to us that it would, and would be a huge process of change,” he said. At a national level, carmakers and the rest of German industry are waiting to see what the presence of the Greens – along with the Social Democrats (SPD) and the Free Democrats – in the new coalition government, will mean for environmental policy and its impact on industry. The three parties are in talks to form Germany’s next government, and among their challenges will be reducing use of fossil fuels – including the reliance on coal for a quarter of the country’s electricity production needs – while significantly increasing the country’s electric vehicle charging network. In Zwickau’s medieval square, locals are just grateful that the town’s biggest employer has been given a new lease of life. “We have to be pleased they rebuilt the factory. It’s definitely a great win for Zwickau, and the whole region profits from having it here,” said Hanfried Trültzsch. But at 78, he is too old to get an electric vehicle himself, laughed his wife, Hannelore. “At our age we don’t need to get an electric vehicle, I’m happy with my Mercedes.”Hundreds of people thronged the corridors at Cop26 on Monday, trying to make it into an event in one of the Scottish Event Campus’s drab plenary rooms. Passing by, I asked a man in the crowd what all the commotion was for. He responded with one word: “Obama.” The former president still maintains his rock star-ish appeal. His speech proved the biggest draw of the conference so far. But what should we make of it in the cold light of day? Much of his message was directed at young people, whom he praised as both “sophisticated consumers” and the source of the “most important energy in this movement”. He was clear: it’s up to all of us – but especially young people – to come together and keep the planet from warming beyond 1.5C. “Collectively and individually we are still falling short” he said, in the kind of grand, sweeping tones that built his career. “We have not done nearly enough to address this crisis. We are going to have to do more. Whether that happens or not to a large degree is going to depend on you.” Who precisely is “we” in this scenario? The young people who were children when Obama took office did not clear the way for a 750% explosion in crude oil exports, as he did just a few days after the Paris agreement was brokered in 2015. Nor did they boast proudly about it years later, as ever-more research mounted about the dangers of continuing to invest in fossil fuels. Speaking at a Houston, Texas gala in 2018, the former president proudly took credit for booming US fossil fuel production. “Suddenly America is the largest oil producer. That was me people,” he boasted jokingly to an industry-friendly crowd. “Say thank you.” The UN-backed 2021 Production Gap Report found that world governments are now on track to produce double the amount of fossil fuels in 2030 than is compatible with keeping warming below 1.5C. Obama’s approach to boosting gas and renewables simultaneously, which he dubbed the “All of the above” doctrine, still appears to be a guiding principle of the Biden administration. Young people also didn’t use the US Export-Import Bank to direct $34bn to 70 fossil fuel projects around the world. Neither did they deploy the National Security Administration to surveil other countries’ delegations at the climate talks in Copenhagen in 2009. And they have not joined other wealthy nations at the UN Framework Conventions on Climate Change (UNFCCC) talks to keep conversations about the enormous climate debt they owe the rest of the world off the table. Obama’s rhetoric mirrored the approach of the United States at countless climate talks. Where it tends to collapse the vast differences between and within countries, to avoid all but the most symbolic discussions of “common but differentiated responsibility”, as it says in the UNFCCC. The global north is responsible for 92% of excess carbon dioxide emissions since the dawn of the industrial age. The United States alone is responsible for 40% of those – a fact its negotiators in Republican and Democratic administrations alike have long sought to obscure. “If equity’s in,” said top Obama-era climate negotiator Todd Stern at climate talks in Durban, South Africa in 2011, “we’re out. Obama speech day was also, less glamorously, loss and damage day. Climate-vulnerable countries continue to demand real financial commitments to support them rebuilding from the damages that rising temperatures are already causing. His administration is one major reason why that’s been so difficult. “There’s one thing that we don’t accept and won’t accept in this agreement,” Stern said while negotiating the Paris agreement in 2015, “and that is the notion that there should be liability and compensation for loss and damage. That’s a line that we can’t cross.” Obama wants to continue to make lofty speeches, which are ultimately campaigning for a return to his version of business as usual – better than Trump but utterly ill-equipped to take on the climate crisis. And he can’t help but take a swings at the left. “Don’t think you can ignore politics … You can’t be too pure for it,” he scolded. “It’s part of the process that is going to deliver all of us.” Plenty of young people did get involved in electoral politics, of course. They knocked on doors and made phone calls for Bernie Sanders’ presidential campaign. He enjoyed the support of 60% of voters under 30, partly for his commitment to a $16.3tn green new deal climate programme. To hear Obama tell it, if enough people come together to raise awareness about the climate crisis and consume smartly, they will change enough hearts and minds to keep warming below 1.5C. That would be a lot easier if Obama, in his time as leader of the free world, hadn’t made the task so much harder for all those inspiring, passionate young people. • Kate Aronoff is a staff writer at The New Republic and a reporting fellow at the Climate Social Science Network. She is the author of Overheated: How Capitalism Broke The Planet – And How We Fight BackThe yellow tape of the police cordon snapped and fluttered as a chill breeze swept over the grounds of what was once one of Canada’s most notorious residential schools. The entire 500-acre property is now being treated as a huge crime scene as the long-overdue search finally begins for the children who were sent to live here – but never returned home. “I hope they find bodies because of what they did to us,” said Alfred Johnson, who attended the school in 1947. “They used us for slave labour.” On Tuesday, police and community members at the Six Nations of the Grand River began searching the grounds of the Mohawk Institute – the oldest and longest-running residential school in Canada – as they launched a grim search for the remains of children who many believe were buried here in unmarked graves. Between 1831 and 1970, thousands of Indigenous children were sent to the Mohawk Institute, as it was known, a red-brick building that sits at the end of a long, tree-lined drive. In theory, the young students were given a modern education designed to help them integrate into mainstream Canadian society. But survivors of the school – dubbed the “Mush Hole” by survivors on account of its poor food and dismal rations – have long described the forced assimilation as a regime of terror, where children were subjected to verbal abuse, sexual assault and physical violence. Using a pair of ground-penetrating radar machines, police officers and locals began the long-anticipated search after sunrise, scouring the grounds of what is now the Woodland Cultural Centre, a museum dedicated to teaching the public about the legacy of residential schools. “The survivors are the ones that heard the whispered truths about where the babies and the children are buried,” said Kimberly Murray of the Survivors’ Secretariat, a group representing community members forced to attend the school. “We must honour them and listen to their words. Modern technology and fancy machines and devices can help us record the truth. But they can never replace the first-hand knowledge of our people.” Over more than a century, at least 150,000 Indigenous children were taken from their families and forced to attend the schools, many of which were run by the Catholic church. Since May, Canada has been rocked by the discovery more than a thousand unmarked graves at the sites of church-run residential schools. The Six Nations police chief, Darren Montour, said officers were working closely with survivors and community members to investigate the “heinous allegations” made about staff at Mohawk Institute. Drawing on the stories shared by survivors, police have advised beginning the exhaustive search in an area behind the school where the stables were located. “We’ve waited long enough. Survivors have been heard and dismissed long enough,” the Six Nations chief, Mark Hill, told the Guardian in an interview. “So it feels good to be where we’re at today, seeing uniformed police searching the grounds. This is the concrete action I’ve long talked about.” The search, prompted both by stories shared in the community and the string of grim discoveries at other former residential schools, has also led to renewed calls for the government to immediately release all relevant documents. “No one can analyze and assess the records more quickly and accurately than the community themselves. The community lived through this attack on them. They do not need nor have they asked for the government to review records on their behalf,” said Murray. “The time has come for institutions to turn over all the records to communities now. No more hiding behind colonial laws.” Painstaking work will be needed to accurately identify potential burial sites, and community leaders are keenly aware of the need for cultural sensitivity in the event any remains are found. Children from 20 different communities – each with their own cultures and beliefs – were sent to the Mohawk Institute over the years. “We’re working with survivors and communities with very different cultures. We have Haudenosaunee. We have Anishinaabe. We Inuit children that attended,” said Murray. “There are bodies here. There are spirits here, and they want to move on.” For John Elliott, a Six Nations member who attended the school in 1947, the search represents a critical step forward. “We used to go to a survivor’s circle to share our stories. No camera, no phones. You just listened. And sometimes you couldn’t believe the stories you were hearing – but you knew they were true.” Elliott, now 85, arrived with his brother at the school when he was only 10. “I came here twice,” he said. “Because the first time I was sent here, I ran away on the first day, 13 miles home, on Christmas Eve. My grandfather said the government was sending here, but at the time I didn’t know what he meant.” The children were forced to work on the sprawling farm run by the Mohawk Institute, milking cows, planting crops and tending to chickens. “We had 3,000 egg-laying chickens, but all we got each morning was a single egg. Didn’t see anything else. They just sold all the rest,” he said. Elliott had been brought up speaking Mohawk, but staff at the school chopped off his long hair when he arrived and forced him to abandon his culture and his mother tongue. “I can’t speak it any more,” he said. “If you were beaten as much as I was for speaking my language, you wouldn’t speak it either.” Elliot survived countless beatings, but he has been haunted for decades by the whispered stories he would hear of other young boys who attended the Mohawk Institute but disappeared without a trace. “It’s been a long time, but those responsible have known all along what was here,” said Elliott. “I’m glad to see them get started. We’ll just have to wait and see what they find. But I know it will be something”When Nia Heard-Garris’s son found out the Covid vaccines were authorized for adults in the US late last year, he was thrilled, then asked, “But what about us? What about kids?” The eight-year-old is finally signed up for his first shot later this week. Even though he’s afraid of needles, he can’t wait to get vaccinated so he can return to a greater semblance of normal kid life – hanging out with his friends, going to school, playing sports – without worrying about getting sick or bringing the virus home. More than 360,000 children under the age of 12 have already received their first shot, according to the CDC. Doses began rolling out last week to the 28 million children in this age group. However, some American parents are still hesitant about the vaccines. In a survey in October, only 27% of parents said they would get their kids vaccinated right away – a drop from 34% who said the same in September. At the same time, 30% of parents said they would “definitely not” vaccinate their kids, up from 24% the month before. Although vaccines for kids 12 and older have been available for several months, only half of this age group has been vaccinated. Heard-Garris, a pediatrician and professor of pediatrics at Lurie Children’s hospital of Chicago and Northwestern University, understands these concerns well. She co-authored a study finding that communities hardest-hit by the pandemic also have the highest rates of hesitancy toward children’s Covid vaccines. Black parents were more likely to be hesitant than white parents, and families with public insurance and lower incomes were also more inclined to hesitate. The report also found encouraging signs: parents who received information about the vaccines from a variety of sources were less likely to have hesitations, with nearly two-thirds of parents worried about the potential long-term effects of the vaccine. Lower-income parents are particularly concerned about missing work for vaccination appointments, paying for the shots, and being unable to get the vaccine from a trusted source. Vaccines for kids ages five to 11 in the US are being administered at local pharmacies, pediatricians and family doctors’ offices, children’s hospitals and school clinics. Heard-Garris is further concerned about “kids that are not plugged into the healthcare system or a primary medical home”. The week vaccines were rolled out for five to 11 yearolds, more than 100,000 children tested positive for Covid, with 6.5 million kids testing positive since the pandemic began, according to the American Academy of Pediatric. The CDC reports 474 deaths of children between the ages of five to 18 since the beginning of the pandemic. For several months, children have accounted for one-quarter of new cases in the United States, a disproportionate burden that has persisted despite the availability of vaccines for those aged 12 and up. Jorge Caballero, a board-certified anesthesiologist and co-founder of Coders Against Covid, has found that white neighborhoods have twice as many vaccination sites as other neighborhoods. And within those neighborhoods, he told the Guardian, the sites tend to cluster in more affluent areas in what he calls “another round of prioritization for predominantly white neighborhoods”. Interest in the vaccine is roughly equal across racial and ethnic groups, but access seems to be more limited, he said. Caballero is concerned about equal access to vaccine for children and is calling for transparent data on race and ethnicity among children’s vaccinations from the CDC. These inequities mirror previous disparities around testing and adult vaccinations, he said. “We continue to repeat the same mistakes over and over and over again. We’re just not being proactive enough in terms of addressing the gaps.” “All we’re striving for is just equity,” Caballero said. Vaccine campaigns should take into consideration the ongoing effects of structural racism and systemic oppression, Heard-Garris said. “If you work three jobs and the vaccine clinic is only from eight to five, and you can’t afford to miss your job – how do we make sure that scheduling is there? If they’re already at an after-school program, can we have a vaccine clinic there?” Her son’s school, for instance, sent out an email offering appointments that were easy to book and attend, since he wouldn’t need to be pulled out of school. “The pandemic has completely disrupted not only the way of life for adults, but also children – school was not the same, the ability to go to birthday parties and connect with each other has been really disrupted,” Heard-Garris said. “Vaccines are important because they save lives, but they’re also important because of the social-emotional connections we’ve lost.”When Jon Burke went into local politics in 2014 he never imagined there would come a time when he considered carrying a rolling pin hidden inside his raincoat when he left the house – “just in case someone jumped out of a car at me with a wrench”. But his mind turned to raiding his kitchen drawers for protection last September, after Hackney council officials called him to say they had received a handwritten letter that threatened to burn down his house while he was sleeping and hurt not just him, but his wife and children. His crime? Trying to make Hackney a better, safer place – in his eyes – to walk or ride a bike, via the introduction of low traffic neighbourhoods. As the London borough’s cabinet member for transport, Burke found himself at the centre of a row that had become part of the culture wars in which four wheels were pitted against two. The anonymous letter writer made clear they were a car driver: “You fucking cunts ride a bicycle,” they observed. The council called the police but Burke, a Labour councillor, didn’t hold his breath: “We lost 265 officers from the streets of Hackney in a decade. Frankly, those left were not going to have time to dust a letter for fingerprints. I never heard from them again.” Although much of the attention has been on the threats posed to MPs since the murder of the Conservative MP Sir David Amess in October, Burke’s experience shows how ubiquitous death threats have become and how little is needed to spark them. You can, for instance, work in a GP’s surgery and be threatened with having your throat cut for not being able to offer enough face-to-face appointments. Patsy Stevenson, who attended a vigil after the murder of Sarah Everard and was arrested, said she couldn’t “count the amount of death threats I’ve had” after appearing on newspaper front pages. Even teachers are targeted. The National Association of Head Teachers (NAHT) says some of its members received death threats for teaching LGBT equality, but none would talk to the Guardian. “One head is too scarred by the experience to want to talk about it again, and the other is currently under attack so doesn’t want to bring more attention on themselves or their school,” an NAHT spokesperson says. The statistics make for frightening reading. Last year, there was a 13% increase in reports of threats to kill in England and Wales, with 42,307 threats received between April 2020 and March 2021, up from 37,347 the year before. In the past decade there has been a four-fold rise, with only 9,480 threats recorded in 2010/11, according to the annual Crime Survey. Looking further back, in 1981 there were just 620 reports of “threat or conspiracy to murder” (the old name for the offence), and just 102 in 1971. A century ago, in 1921, there were 16. Today, only a tiny proportion of cases reach court – just 1,228 in 2020, less than half of which (435) resulted in a conviction. In fact, prosecution rates have dropped over the past decade, with 1,579 cases making it to court in 2010. Most of those prosecuted made little or no attempt to hide their identities: spend any time in a magistrates court and you’ll see most “threat to kill” cases involve domestic violence. Then there are the people charged under the Communications Act 2003, for sending “grossly offensive messages by electronic communications”. In 2020/21, there were a staggering 275,628 reports of malicious communications, according to the Crime Survey of England and Wales. Of these, just 1,096 reached court in 2020, down from 1,511 in 2010. Yet Prof Neil Chakraborti, director of the Centre for Hate Studies at Leicester University, thinks even these statistics may underestimate the true scale of the problem. “In reality, the numbers are likely to be much higher because many recipients of death rates just won’t report them. There’s often a fear of retaliatory violence,” he says. Also, victims think: “It’ll be futile.” Having interviewed more than 2,000 victims of hate crime, Chakraborti puts the boom in death threats down to three things. First, social media and email have made sending a death threat extremely low effort, and immediate – you no longer have to take the trouble even to go and buy a stamp. Online communication “gives perpetrators this cloak of anonymity to be abusive and hateful, but worse than that, it gives them a sense of invincibility, too,” says Chakraborti. His first death threats were a series of letters signed by “Death Incarnate” back in the early 00s, after he published research into rural racism in England. His second explanation is the modern blame culture and the polarising culture wars playing out across all the media, which he sees as “an extension of this kind of binary, entrenched, distorted world. Blame just seems everywhere, in every context, and we can attach blame to ordinary people now.” Third, he thinks that hateful language has been normalised to such a degree that most people making death threats underestimate their power. There appear to be few consequences for those using intemperate language, whether that’s the Daily Mail calling judges “enemies of the people”, or a US president describing Mexican immigrants as “rapists”. As a result, he says, perpetrators don’t “necessarily understand the gravity of what they’re doing”. However, more recipients are speaking out against this onslaught. One of the first was the journalist and feminist campaigner Caroline Criado Perez, who in 2013 successfully campaigned to have Jane Austen on bank notes. This minor change led to hundreds of threats and two people were jailed as a result. In an interview with the Guardian she said: “I feel it’s my responsibility to maintain this defiant stance of: ‘Fuck you, you are not getting to me and you’re not going to win.’” Attacking strident women is not new. Emmeline Pankhurst received an anonymous postcard, which said of the suffragettes: “If you have no homes, no husbands, no children, no relations, why don’t you just drown yourselves?” Yet previously, only those with the highest profiles were targeted. Death threats certainly weren’t part of everyday life for public servants. Siobhan Brennan, a GP from Marple, an affluent area of Stockport, had to call police twice recently. First, when a patient said he would wait outside for her that night and “have it out with me” about his wife’s care; and then when a man phoned and threatened to cut a colleague’s throat when she told him registering as a patient wasn’t an instant process. Patients have also thrown masks at colleagues and threatened to spit on them, she added. “I was called a bitch on the phone for not prescribing inappropriate meds, too,” she says. She hears similar horror stories from GPs across the country, with some practices looking at equipping staff with bodycams to record abuse and assaults. Brennan, who has been a doctor for 25 years, says while most patients appreciate GPs’ hard work, aggression has ramped up “massively” this year. She prides herself on her toughness but admits she’s scared – “I run ultramarathons and I’m used to putting my body through hell. I don’t get afraid when I’m running in the middle of the night in the Lake District, but I have had times at the surgery when I have been terrified.” She blames sections of the media, particularly newspapers that have run front pages lambasting GPs in recent months, for whipping up emotion against doctors. She also singles out the health secretary Sajid Javid’s criticism of GPs for directing the public’s anger towards doctors. “I shouldn’t be made to feel embarrassed to say what I do for a living,” says Brennan. Doctors and teachers may be shocked to be targeted, but it is now rare to find an MP who hasn’t been sent death threats. At the end of October, the deputy Labour leader Angela Rayner talked of the “terrifying” abuse she had received as a man was sentenced for telling her to “watch your back and your kids”. The same week, her shadow cabinet colleague Naz Shah was breathing a sigh of relief after Sundas Alam, 30, a woman in her Bradford West constituency, pleaded guilty to sending her death threats. This was, in fact, the third person convicted for threatening to kill Shah, who became an MP in 2015 after a bitter battle with George Galloway. Her first serious threat was unrelated to this and was intercepted by police when she had only been in parliament for a year. At this time, Shah had been campaigning for an investigation into the suspected “honour” killing of a local girl, Samia Shahid, and “a bounty was put on my head”, she recalls. The fight has been hard on her physical and mental health. She says she had a “complete breakdown” in 2019 after receiving a particularly awful email. But she insists she will not let the threats stop her doing her job: “Then they would have won”, is how she sees it. But it can be hard on her children, now aged 10, 14 and 17. After the Shahid incident in 2016 she sat her eldest daughter down and said: “If anything happens to me, do not let this baton drop, keep on fighting. I expect you to march through Bradford for the rights of women to live violence-free.” Defendants, meanwhile, often claim they were only joking. In February 2020, a Conservative activist was jailed for nine weeks after sending messages claiming to have paid “crackheads” £100 to beat up the Labour MP Yvette Cooper and warning that “if you make peaceful revolution difficult you make a violent one inevitable”. In mitigation, Joshua Spencer’s solicitor said his client had sent the messages “in drink” and was never seriously planning an attack. After Amess’s murder, a member of Cooper’s team, Jade Botterill, said she quit under the strain of the threats, having once reported 100 in a week. Even people in the public eye to entertain, rather than effect change, do not escape, however. This autumn, Morag Crichton, a 31-year-old trainee vet from Essex, appeared on the E4 reality show Married at First Sight. She had a “blind marriage” with a Welsh firefighter called Luke. Crichton had told researchers she liked confident, muscular men. The experts thought she’d be better off with shy but thoughtful Luke, who’d had his heart broken in the past. On the show, Crichton appeared to be trying to make Luke into a totally different person, forcing him to buy new clothes costing hundreds of pounds, and saying she could only get intimate with him after drinking. The show wrapped in July and was broadcast from 30 August. The torrent of abuse was instant, says Crichton, who has been offered antidepressants and therapy to cope. At first, she was called ugly and fake. Then it “became a lot worse where it was comments, like: ‘Kill yourself. I hope you get raped. I hope you get Aids, cancer.’ One of them was even like: ‘I hope I die so I don’t have to put up with you any more.’” The vast majority of abuse came from other women, “mothers, daughters, sisters, grandmas”, making no attempt to hide their identities. The worst was anonymous. Recently, she was on a night out and received a message saying “Come outside”, which made her worry that someone was watching her. Crichton believes she was deliberately edited to look bad – a claim denied by a spokesperson for E4, who said: “Episodes can represent several days in the lives of the couples. What we broadcast is a fair reflection of the events that unfolded.” The network said it was supporting Crichton and that “robust protocols are in place” to ensure “appropriate support is available”. Sarah Schulman is the American author behind Conflict Is Not Abuse, which explored whether a culture of victimhood had led people to overstate the harm posed to them by others. She believes “the 1%” – whether major corporations or world leaders – have set the tone for an era of intolerance and aggression, by committing “every possible violation with absolutely no consequence”. This high-level lack of accountability filters down to ordinary people who feel emboldened to do or say whatever they want “because they know nothing is going to happen”, she argues. What Schulman sees as the “chaos” of the world has led to people feeling “so violated and unprotected” that they feel disproportionately threatened by people with other viewpoints. “This idea of difference is so threatening at a time when everything is polarised politically. People feel that the fact that somebody else is different means that they are in danger, because we’re in a heightened state of political paranoia,” she says. Jon Burke, who is no longer a councillor, points out the internet has also radicalised new communities of “oddballs” who may have previously been isolated, but find networks and “egg each other on”. Conspiracy theories spreading online don’t help either: after the Everard protest, Stevenson said she was accused of being a “crisis actor” paid to attend the vigil and get arrested to legitimise attacks on the police. Since the threats, Burke has left Hackney and works as a carbon reduction consultant for local authorities. “If you’re in a situation where your wife turns around and says: ‘I don’t think we should go to that shop that we go to every year with the kids to get the Christmas tree in case someone spots us on the street’, that is no way to live,” he says. “People need to ask themselves, if you were an 18-year-old woman doing a politics degree or getting into trade unionism on the shop floor, and you looked at what came with the territory of being a local councillor, would you put your hand up in the air and say: ‘I’ll do that?’” He makes the point that it is women of colour, notably his former local MP, Diane Abbott, who often draw the most abuse. “If you are from a minority ethnic background and you had a look at the kind of abuse that Diane’s been subjected to – most of which is misogynistic, or racially motivated – are you going to bother going into politics?” Changing society and the prevailing culture won’t be easy, warns Chakraborti, but social media companies must do more to deal with death threats and prove that they take them seriously. The police, too, must do “everything they can to be empathic” when a threat is reported to them. Schulman, however, believes that ultimately the solution may lie offline in reinforcing social norms in which death threats have no place. “People need to have more in-real-life gatherings, more subcultural communities. We need more congresses and festivals and galas and discussions about what their feelings are towards each other and what their standards of behaviour should be. You can’t rely on the people in power for the solutions.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or by emailing jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at befrienders.org.At the age of nine, Nalleli Cobo started getting nosebleeds so severe that she had to sleep sitting up so as not to choke on the blood. Then there were the stomach cramps, nausea, headaches and body spasms, which made walking difficult. For a time she wore a heart monitor as doctors struggled to understand what was wrong. But it wasn’t just Cobo. The nine-year-old was growing up in University Park, a low-income, majority-Latino neighborhood in Los Angeles, the smoggiest city in the US, which ranks highest in the country for deaths linked to air pollution. She and her three older siblings were raised by her Mexican mother, grandmother and two great-grandparents. (Her father was deported to Colombia when she was three.) And suddenly, almost her entire family was ill – including her mother, who developed asthma at 40, as did her grandmother at 70. It was the same story throughout the neighborhood: previously healthy children were suddenly missing school and spending hours at the emergency room, but nobody knew why. Not long afterwards a foul smell engulfed the community. It was like rotten eggs, recalls Cobo, and so nauseating that they had to keep the windows closed at all times. Sometimes it smelled like artificial guava or chocolate, mixed with rotten eggs. Cobo’s mother works for Esperanza Community Housing, and she enlisted the organisation to help investigate. It turned out the stench was caused by the oilwell located 30ft (9 metres) from the family home. The oil company Allenco had ramped up drilling. (The guava and chocolate odours were the company’s attempt to alleviate the problem.) At Esperanza’s request, the campaigner group Physicians for Social Responsibility sent a group of toxicologists to meet the community and explain the health threats posed by the oilwell. “That’s when we started connecting the dots between the oilwell, the smell and sick kids,” says Cobo. Now 20, she is speaking to me on a video call from her bedroom in LA, while cuddling her five-month-old fluffy white puppy, Albondiga, which means meatball in Spanish. “It’s when I started learning the ropes of activism.” Cobo and her mother started knocking on doors and co-founded People Not Pozos (People Not Wells) – a grassroots community group, which filed complaints to regulators, shared stories at town hall meetings and testified at city hall and other government hearings. Cobo was a natural storyteller – honest, passionate and compelling – but recalls how it wasn’t always easy to be heard. “I was often dismissed as a silly little girl, like my story didn’t matter because I didn’t know all the science or all the fancy terms.” Inspired by her mother’s activism, she refused to give up. “My mom always told me that I had to be an important member of the community. If sharing my story was going to help create change, why would I stay silent?” Cobo’s youth and persistence captured the attention of local media, lawmakers and A-list celebrities. A barrage of local and federal investigations was launched. When environmental protection officials spent a short time at the site, they too got ill. Then, on a chilly November evening in 2013, when Cobo was 12 years old, the phone rang. The family was having dinner – Mexican potato soup, she remembers. By the time Cobo’s mother put the phone down, she was crying at the extraordinary news: Allenco was suspending operations at the well. Cobo was beside herself with joy. “I started screaming: ‘We did it, we did it,’ ran to the window and opened it for some fresh air – something so basic that we hadn’t been able to do for years,” she says. The change when the drilling stopped was almost instant. “It was like day and night. My nosebleeds stopped, no more headaches or heart palpitations, I didn’t need my inhalers every day. All the kids started to feel better. I’ll never forget that moment,” says Cobo. The victories kept on coming for Cobo and her community. In September, Los Angeles County supervisors voted unanimously to phase out oil and gas drilling and ban new drill sites in the unincorporated areas of the most populous county in the US. More than 1,600 active and idle oil and gas wells, which are mostly located in communities of colour, could be closed over the next few years. But the industry is expected to oppose the unprecedented move and the fight is far from over, says Cobo. “I dream of a world where all urban oil drilling is read about in history books. A world with 100% clean renewable energy, where people can breathe the air outside without getting sick, and open their faucet and drink the water because it’s clean. That’s the world I’m fighting to achieve, a better and safer one for all of us. “A lot of times when you’re in this fight they make you feel like you’re going to lose, and there are moments when I break down and cry. But I am a person of faith, so I think about David and Goliath, and that’s how this story is going to end. Me and my community, we are David; the oil industry, the broken regulatory system, the billionaires are all Goliath, but their tactics won’t stop my community from fighting.” A 2020 analysis by the nonprofit FracTracker Alliance found that about 2.2 million people in California live within half a mile of an oil or gas well; another 5 million live within one mile. More than 60% of the 25,000 drilling permits issued by the state between 2015 and 2020 were in majority-Latino communities. In 2015, the South Central Youth Leadership Coalition, which Cobo co-founded, joined other organisations to sue the city of Los Angeles for rubber-stamping oil projects in communities of colour. As a result, the city adopted new requirements for drilling applications to ensure compliance with state environmental review rules and to protect vulnerable communities. The oil industry countersued and lost. “We won, and it was 10 times more awesome because it was the youth demanding our right to a livable future,” says Cobo, who has spoken out about environmental racism – the dumping of polluting and hazardous industries such as toxic chemical plants, fossil-fuel sites and highways in places where people of colour and indigenous communities live, work and play. “It’s heartbreaking and infuriating how these industries and billion-dollar corporations have gotten away with poisoning us. The way the oil industry sees us is as just a little speck, but we’re humans.” Cobo knows fossil fuel companies aren’t the only bad guys. “Our elected officials have a lot of power, but we vote them in and it’s their job to represent us. When they get into these positions of power, too many forget that. We need to work hard to humble them, remind them.” Amid pressure from the community, as well as growing media and celebrity attention, the city of Los Angeles filed multiple lawsuits against Allenco. In 2020, the state oil and gas regulators ordered the site to be permanently closed and secured. The company, which has said that it has invested heavily in environmental safety and should be allowed to restart operations, has appealed. (Neither the Los Angeles City Attorney’s Office nor Allenco responded to requests for comment.) As a practising Catholic, Cabo is upset that the Roman Catholic archdiocese, which owns the land, leased it to Allenco. “They teach us we must protect God’s creation, that we have to stand up for others and do what Jesus would do, so why are they being hypocrites? Ultimately the archdiocese is choosing profit over people’s health; that’s not what Jesus would do, plain and simple.” (The Los Angeles archdiocese did not respond to questions.) Stricter rules and laws concerning drilling practices have come into effect at every level of government in California – city, county and state – after years of permits being greenlit without any environmental impact assessments. But permits to extract fossil fuels are still being approved, and the problem is so much bigger than one state. Last month, when it seemed half the US was on fire or flooded, the Biden administration announced that, to comply with a court ruling, it would open millions of acres for oil and gas exploration in the Gulf of Mexico. It claimed the recent UN report warning the climate crisis was spiralling out of control was not “sufficient cause” to revise the environmental impact analysis conducted by the Trump administration. “It’s so frustrating…,” says Cobo. “The science is there, we’re being poisoned, our lives are being shortened, we’re sick, when will it be enough for them?” Cobo has met a long list of celebrities, but her personal favourite is Jane Fonda. “She’s always on it, looking to do more – she’s such a badass. Jane genuinely wants to create change; she doesn’t just turn up for the selfie.” At an event with the actor Joaquin Phoenix last year, Cobo was loudly cheered after she declared her run for the White House … in 2036. She wasn’t joking. “I’ve always wanted to be president, ever since my mom bought the Elmo book about the first female president. I think politics is such a beautiful thing, if done properly.” Inevitably, Cobo has been compared to the Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg, whom she met in 2019 at the LA climate march. Then, it seemed that Cobo was also about to become a household name, with her face on posters for the global youth climate strike. But then she got ill. In early 2020, at the age of 19, she was diagnosed with a rare type of cancer, so advanced and aggressive that surgeons removed her entire reproductive system – six organs and 22 lymph nodes – which was followed by gruelling rounds of chemotherapy and radiotherapy. It has been hugely traumatic. “The only thing I’ve ever been 1,000% sure about in my life is wanting to be a mom, so I froze my eggs before undergoing the radical hysterectomy,” she says. But she was only diagnosed after five years of struggling to get doctors to take her worsening menstrual problems seriously. Cobo wonders about the role systemic inequalities played in her getting sick, and the delay in getting treatment. She has been cancer-free for six months, but suffers from episodes of severe pain and fatigue, making it difficult for her to get out of bed some days. Yet she says she will not give up her fight. She turns 21 in December and plans to restart college in January, having missed two years, though concerns about the impact of stress on her long-term health are forcing her to rethink a lifelong ambition to become a civil rights lawyer. Instead she’s considering a career as a medical sonographer. “Even though I can’t get pregnant, I could help make sure women have the safest and healthiest pregnancy possible,” she says. Whatever she ends up doing, serving her community remains the goal.The controversial rightwing Christ Church – and its pastor, Douglas Wilson – have led an uncompromising campaign of opposition to coronavirus public health measures in Idaho, revealing the church’s powerful influence in its home city of Moscow and beyond. The campaign has included in-person protests, misinformation and encouragement of civil disobedience across media channels owned by the church, which, as the Guardian has reported, is seeking to increase its power and influence in the town as part of an aim of creating a theocracy in America. It also comes at a time when numerous far-right groups across the US are taking action against Covid-19 mandates, which have been echoed by calls for civil disobedience by more mainstream Republican figures, including office-holding politicians. With Idaho health authorities recently rationing hospital care in the face of serious infections which are overwhelmingly afflicting the unvaccinated, Wilson has continued to rail against mask and vaccination mandates on his blog, with other church members following suit in public forums. This has garnered national attention on the right, not least from Donald Trump, who signal-boosted a church protest against mask mandates on Twitter while his account was still active. Despite this campaign against restrictions, church-aligned organizations – including several founded by Wilson – along with prominent individuals and leaders within Christ Church, applied for and received PPP and PPS loans from the federal government –programs that were designed to compensate businesses for the impact of coronavirus restrictions. The loans were sourced from the Trump and Biden administrations’ efforts to compensate small businesses for lost income during the pandemic. Despite his influence, his previous condemnations of government largesse in the form of welfare, education, and foreign aid, and his characterization of fsederal Covid response as a government plot, Wilson has not publicly criticized the loans, or counseled his followers against seeking them. Wilson himself has used his widely read blog to dispute public health restrictions enacted by the city of Moscow and weave conspiracy theories about such measures. Wilson recommended that readers consider forging hypothetical government “vaccine passports” in order to move freely across state borders. In another post on his blog Wilson said that “ruling elites are picking a fight, trying to provoke unrest, and are doing so in order to be able to justify measures that are genuinely repressive”. Elsewhere, in a discussion where he told readers to demand religious exemptions from vaccinations, he wrote of governments and health authorities: “they want to be in charge of every detail of human existence. They have a lust for control and power. They are totalitarians in spirit.” Along with this public rhetoric, the Guardian has found that the campaign against restrictions was also carried out privately, in email campaigns targeting city officials, and in private meetings granted to Wilson by Moscow’s mayor, Doug Lambert. Lambert did not respond to repeated requests for comment about his and the city’s relationship to Christ Church, including detailed questions about the subject of the July meeting. In September last year, Wilson and other Christ Church employees sent emails to Lambert urging him to discontinue the city’s mask mandate. Since the first local restrictions were imposed to mitigate the Covid-19 pandemic last July, elders at Christ Church and its local offshoot, Trinity Reformed, have led public protests to the measures. Initial opposition to restrictions culminated in September last year, when Christ Church promoted an unmasked “psalm sing” protest against Moscow’s mask mandate. Psalm sing protests continued throughout the remainder of 2020, as Wilson promoted an increasingly uncompromising and at times conspiracy-minded line on his blog. A Christ Church elder, Gabriel Rench, was cited at the September protest for breaking the mask mandate, and then arrested after he refused to provide identification to police. Wilson’s son and two grandsons were charged in October with 13 misdemeanors over the placement of anti-mask stickers reading “Soviet Moscow – Enforced Because We Care”. At the time of his 2020 arrest, Rench was a candidate for Latah county commission. In local media interviews, he attributed his run in part to his belief that the city’s mask mandate was unconstitutional. Rench, who is a Christ Church deacon and has served on boards for a number of Christ Church affiliated organizations, lost the election. Rench hosts a podcast with Christ Church associate pastor Toby Sumpter and another man, David Shannon, which they publish across mainstream video sites like Facebook, as well as alt tech sites like Rumble under the banner of a company, CrossPolitic Studios, which is controlled by a Rench-owned LLC. On their podcasts and videos, and on a news aggregation service run by CrossPolitic, the men have spread anti-mask, anti-vaccine messaging, along with the church’s familiar, ultra-conservative position on gender and sexuality. After his election loss, Rench filed a lawsuit against the city over his arrest. But Rench was just the most recent local political candidate aligned with the church. In 2019, two Christ Church affiliated candidates, Kelsey Berends and James Urquidez, ran for city council, but lost to more progressive candidates. Each candidate’s funding declarations show that almost all their donations came from high-profile local business people who are also members of Christ Church. Urquidez, in particular, received a cumulative $2,000 from Christ Church elder, former chief executive of data analytics company EMSI, and newly minted property developer Andrew Crapuchettes. Church members have also made inroads into local party organizations. Jesse Sumpter – the brother of associate pastor and podcaster Toby – serves as state youth chair for the Latah county Republican party. Wilson and Christ Church have backed candidates for Idaho’s state legislature. Sam Paul graduated from church-affiliated New Saint Andrews College (NSAC) in 2014, having already commenced work at EMSI under Crapuchettes, and from 2016, according to his LinkedIn page, has worked as an “adviser” to one-time Republican candidate Carl Berglund. Berglund has been described as “far right” by a local newspaper, the Moscow-Pullman Daily News. On his blog, Wilson has compared developing world debt forgiveness to stealing; complained of the idea of education and healthcare as rights that “remember that the reception of this right by the beneficiary is paid for by the enslavement of someone else”; and in another post said that “all of these have a price tag, and the payment will not be made by the possessor of the right”. But according to records from the Small Business Administration (SBA), church-aligned organizations – including those founded by Wilson – and businesses of officeholders and prominent spokespersons for Christ Church not only took taxpayer-funded loans, but in some cases do not appear to have repaid them. The loans reveal a new dimension of the overlapping membership of Christ Church members across a range of institutions with not just local but national reach. The Association of Classical Christian Schools (ACCS), co-founded by Wilson in 1996 and still headquartered in Moscow, is an advocacy and accreditation body for “classical Christian schools” like Moscow’s Logos school, a private K-12 also co-founded by Wilson. Recent tax filings made available by ProPublica show that ACCS took out a PPP loan for $75,800, and then took out another PPS loan for the same amount in 2021, for a total of $151,600. Although SBA records show that the earlier loan was repaid, there is no indication that the subsequent loan has been. The growth of ACCS and the foundation of more colleges like NSAC led to the formation of a company, Classic Learning Initiatives, which devised the classical learning test as a means of standardized testing for Christian schools, for students seeking entry into Christian universities. SBA records show that CLI was forgiven $282,479 in PPP loans. The company features on its leadership body Ben Merkle, the president of NSAC, and Daniel Foucachon, characterized there as a “national leader in educational renewal”. Daniel Foucachon, his father Francis, and his mother Donna are all board members of Huguenot Heritage Ministries (HHM), a theological training ministry founded by the two parents. Francis Foucachon is an elder at Christ Church, and Daniel is a board member of the NSAC alumni association, having graduated from the college before working for church-aligned publisher, Canon Press. HHM received two loans of $26,400, and SBA records indicate that only one has been repaid. One of Daniel Foucachon’s companies, Roman Roads Media, which supplies Christian homeschoolers and classical Christian schools with curricula and remote learning materials, received a loan for $16,600. SBA documents did not disclose the status of that loan. Rod Story, a Christ Church member, has run a medical practice in Moscow since his resignation from a hospital in neighboring Pullman, Washington, after it began offering vaginoplasties to transgender women. Story, who resigned on the basis that “genders are God-given”, has offered an equivocal position on vaccines in church-aligned podcasts, and in his own newsletters, emphasizing that the vaccines work, but arguing, along with Wilson, for “vaccine freedom” and the power of natural immunity. Story’s practice received a loan for $27,100. The data did not disclose whether the loan had been repaid.Confidence fueled Arthur Ashe’s success in tennis. If he was confident enough, he said, he could hit the ball backwards. In 1968, he had plenty of forward momentum, going two months without losing a match. At that year’s US Open, he defeated Tom Okker to become the first Black man to win a men’s grand slam singles title. Meanwhile, Ashe had been facing both external and internal pressure to speak out on civil rights. After growing up in the segregated South, he had been concerned about a violent backlash. But after winning the US Open, he was ready to become more vocal, according to a new documentary, Citizen Ashe, directed by Rex Miller and Sam Pollard. In the film, Ashe’s brother Johnnie recalls his sibling saying, “I’m a champion now. People will listen to what I have to say. I’m the first Black man to win the US Open. I’m going to be sought out.” Miller says Ashe’s prediction soon became true. “Literally a few days after he won, he was on Meet the Press,” he says. “He decided he finally could no longer stand on the sidelines … events in the spring and summer of 1968, Dr Martin Luther King Jr’s assassination, Robert F Kennedy’s assassination, the Vietnam protests, the sit-ins, everything happening in the country, it was finally time for him to speak out.” Citizen Ashe will be screened at the Doc NYC film festival on 13 November before a wider release in December. Incorporating rare audio footage and photos of the tennis star, the film shows Ashe’s impact both on and off the court before his death at the age of 49 in 1993 from complications of Aids. The film spotlights two of his grand slam wins at opposite ends of his career – at the US Open in 1968, and at Wimbledon seven years later, in 1975, when he stunned Jimmy Connors thanks to a gameplan devised on an envelope with a committee of friends. It also explores his activism, including in South Africa, where he challenged apartheid after learning that Nelson Mandela had been jailed for trying to vote. After his Aids diagnosis, he created a foundation dedicated to defeating the virus. Throughout, there are interviews with some of the individuals who were closest to him – including his widow, Jeanne Moutoussamy-Ashe, a producer on the film; and his brother, Johnnie. “[The film] would not have happened if Jeanne was not on board,” Miller says. “She was on board fully. She made a commitment to the film,” helping him land conversations with players such as Charlie Pasarell (part of the committee that came up with the plan to beat Connors) and John McEnroe, who had a bend-but-don’t-break relationship when Ashe mentored the US Davis Cup team. “Arthur, along with Jim Brown, Kareem [Abdul-Jabbar], Bill Russell … was sort of a template for what many of today’s [stars], Colin Kaepernick, Serena and Venus Williams, Naomi Osaka, LeBron James, follow,” Pollard said. “What they’re doing now is not in a vacuum.” That film looks at the formative moments of his early years in Richmond, Virginia. Ashe said that it was natural for Black children to question if they could ever thrive in a segregated society, and that any youngster with “more than a smattering of intelligence” would leave. In Ashe’s case, he did – first for St Louis to finish high school, and then for college at UCLA. Richmond had sad memories for Ashe – he lost his mother when he was six. His father was a caretaker of a segregated playground, where young Arthur learned to play tennis and where he was discovered by a coach named Dr Robert Johnson – who also noticed the promise of Black tennis pioneer Althea Gibson. The film shows just how momentous 1968 was for both Ashe and the US, balancing multiple threads. Ashe’s tennis career was taking off – he was the first Black man selected to the US Davis Cup team. He was also in the US military as a lieutenant stationed at West Point. His brother was serving too – in Vietnam. Johnnie Ashe volunteered for another tour of duty there so his brother would not have to go. “It was a major sacrifice,” Pollard says. “You had to have a lot of love for your brother to do that.” Arthur Ashe did go on a USO tour to Vietnam in which he encountered live fire and saw injured service members, all of which affected him. “It sort of brought it home,” Johnnie Ashe says in the film. “I had done the right thing at the right time for the right reason.” Meanwhile, Arthur Ashe was also wondering if the time was right to speak out on behalf of the civil rights movement. Black athletes such as Muhammad Ali, Abdul-Jabbar, Russell and Brown were advocating on behalf of civil rights; Dr Harry Edwards called upon Ashe to do the same. But there were complicating factors. “Especially in the South, you did not want to make racial waves and put your life in danger,” Pollard says. “There was a type of entrenched segregation in America on certain issues as a Black person, particularly in the South. He knew the rules of the game. If you wanted to survive in America, you did not make waves. You did the right thing. That was what it meant to be Black at the time.” However, Pollard says that Ashe’s “level of confidence was rising. He could speak up – not like Muhammad Ali or Bill Russell, he did it Arthur Ashe’s way. Go back to what Harry Edwards says [in the film] – African American people are not monolithic, they do not do things the same way … [Ashe’s activism had] just as powerful an impact.” In March, Ashe delivered a speech on civil rights at the Church of the Redeemer in Washington DC, which got some pushback from the military brass. In April, he was driving across the George Washington Bridge when he learned from the radio that King had been assassinated. During the presidential campaign, he talked tennis with Democratic candidate Robert F Kennedy – then, in June, Kennedy was also assassinated. A few months later, Ashe was US Open champion and ready to speak out for causes he championed, from civil rights to education to ending apartheid. “He was trying to change the playing field,” Miller said. “He was still a patriot. He was in the army and thought it was the right thing to do. He was proud of it, of his brother’s service. All of these things coalesce in the moment when he won the US Open – the first Black champion, the first American champion of the [modern] US Open … It gave him a platform to speak out.”The Olympics are a spectacle beloved around the world, and the 1964 Olympic Games were no exception. Broadcast live via satellite and with some colour footage for the first time, the Summer Olympics were Japan’s chance to reintroduce itself to the world. Rapid economic, social, and technological developments had shaped the nation’s trajectory after the second world war, and being the first nation in Asia to host the Games was a grand honour that spurred further innovations that live on today. From architecture and design to engineering and transportation, these feats set the global standard for years to come. Recording time Preparations for the Olympics started early, and the challenges were formidable. Japanese watchmaker Seiko, for example, dispatched a research team to the 1960 Olympic Games in Rome to scout out its competition to be the official timekeeper of the Olympics. It was an ambitious endeavour: no watchmaker outside of Switzerland had ever held the title, and the team knew there was no time to waste. The result of Seiko’s endeavours was the world’s first fully electronic timing system that could measure events from the starting pistol until the photo finish. These systems offered precision timing with a longer duration: the implementation of a “crystal chronometer” enabled the Seiko timing instruments to reliably measure the long-distance events, and precipitated what is now known as quartz technology. As of May 1963, the bid was successful: the International Olympic Committee accepted Seiko as the competition’s first official timekeepers from outside of Switzerland. Off the back of the crystal chronometer, Seiko also produced Japan’s first wristwatch to include a built-in stopwatch function, with a precision that set the standard for years to come. Known as the Crown Chronograph, this model’s legacy lives on today: the Seiko Presage Style60s series draws inspiration from the original 1964 timepiece, creating a modern watch with a vintage feel. The Crown Chronograph’s characteristic box-shaped glass is paired with new finishing techniques to complement both the dial and the outer indexes. Nato nylon straps highlight the series’ historic heritage, and polished lugs add a visual sharpness to contrast with the watch face’s retro feel. Lasting legacy In the intervening years between the end of the second world war and the Olympic ceremony in October 1964, Japan had come into its own as a technological and economic powerhouse. Its cities were growing to contain a steadily rising population, and existing innovations went on to accelerate ahead of the Olympics. Many of these developments helped to shape Japan’s current reputation, including sleek bullet trains, a keen eye for design, and groundbreaking architecture. Marking the Games’ return to Tokyo this summer, London’s Japan House recently honoured this legacy with an exhibition curated by director of programming Simon Wright, titled Tokyo 1964: Designing Tomorrow. “Japan appeared quite triumphant on this world stage when hosting the Games, it was quite an extraordinary visual spectacle,” says Wright. He points to the Yoyogi National Gymnasium, which was designed by Kenzō Tange and built in the early 1960s for the swimming, diving, and basketball events in 1964. The ribbed suspension roof was the first of its kind in the world, and has become a distinct profile among the Tokyo skyline. An accomplishment of both design and manufacturing, the Yoyogi National Gymnasium also inspired the Olympic Stadium in Munich, and is still in use for concerts, athletic competitions, and other live events. In this summer’s Tokyo Olympics, the gymnasium was home to the handball competition, more than 50 years after it was first built. “There’s a legacy of sustainability within the architecture of the Games of 1964,” says Wright. 1964 Tokyo Olympics official poster. Photograph: Courtesy of Prince Chichibu Memorial Sports Museum An expression of modernity “Of course, Japan is famous for its high-speed rail network,” he adds. “In fact, the Shinkansen bullet train was actually created in 1964, and first ran a mere 10 days before the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games.” The results were astonishing: the Hokkaido-Shinkansen route reduced the time it took to travel between Tokyo and Osaka to four hours – a full two hours shorter than the previous rail journeys between the two metropolises. The high-speed line was paired with a new monorail that brought visitors from overseas between the airport and the city’s centre, and expressways cut across Tokyo to help visitors and locals alike navigate the city. “There was a new expression of modernity through the transportation of passengers arriving at Haneda airport to the centre of the city,” Wright says. Time after time The global impact of the 1964 Olympic Games is hard to measure: it changed architecture, transportation, and even the Games themselves. “There was a design committee of young designers who would later become icons within Japan and overseas,” Wright says, noting that it was the first time an international sporting event had a unified visual brand and language. Knowing that many visitors to Tokyo would be unfamiliar with the language, the committee designed a series of pictograms for both sports and facilities, some of which were featured in the 2020 Olympic ceremony as a celebration of the legacy of the Games of 1964. The committee also selected a font as the official typeface for the visual brand, with sleek lines and easy-to-read curves – a font that we now know as Helvetica. “It is probably one of the first major uses of the typefaces internationally,” Wright notes. “A lot of what we take for granted actually happened for the very first time in Tokyo in 1964.” Discover the Style 60s collectionThe Conservative MP Andrew Bowie has announced he will resign as a vice-chair of the party in the wake of the sleaze scandal engulfing Boris Johnson. Bowie said he requested to step down but agreed to stay in post until a successor has been appointed. He believed he could not continue to defend the government after the prime minister’s botched bid to save a colleague from suspension and overhaul the standards system. The fallout is continuing and another Tory MP, Geoffrey Cox, is also in the spotlight and has been referred to the commissioner by Labour for appearing to conduct legal work from his Commons office. Bowie’s resignation is significant as he was a key adviser to Theresa May when she was prime minister, serving as her parliamentary private secretary. He became the Conservative vice-chair for youth and the UK union in August 2019, a few months after Johnson became prime minister. Bowie was first elected in 2017 to represent West Aberdeenshire and Kincardine in the Commons. He has a wafer-thin majority of 843 votes. Another Conservative aide, Angela Richardson, temporarily lost her job for voting against the government-backed bid to reform the standards system, but got her job back when Johnson U-turned and ditched the plans.Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, earned money from legal work in the past on top of his job as an MP, the Commons register of interest shows. Starmer, a barrister and former director of public prosecutions, was paid almost £26,000 for work carried out while he was an MP but before he became Labour leader in 2020. He does not currently do legal work, as he gave up his certificate to practise when the party said in 2019 it would ban second jobs unless there were specific exemptions. Labour supports an overhaul of the rules around second jobs for MPs but has stopped short of saying they would be banned altogether. In the House of Commons on Monday, Starmer called on Boris Johnson to “ban paid directorships and consultancy roles” for MPs but the party said its policy was wider than that, in favour of banning second jobs unless there were specific exemptions. This would, for example, allow MPs to still be able to carry out professional work on the side as doctors, nurses or social workers, or write a book, but not do consultancy or legal work. Only three Labour MPs have second jobs in consultancy or as directors, compared with 90 Conservatives. Chris Bryant, the Labour MP and chair of the Commons standards committee, who is looking at the case for reform of the rules, suggested on Tuesday that political consultancy seemed to be an “inappropriate peddling of influence”. He told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “I can’t prejudge what the committee will decide but that is certainly the argument that has been made by the committee on standards in public life.” “In the end it is about whether you are using those magic letters MP, which can sometimes open doors, whether you are using that always on behalf of your constituents or whether you are using that on behalf of some commercial interest of your own.”The people of Carabanchel Alto haven’t always hated the interlopers. Once upon a time, they welcomed them, thrilling to their wildness and exoticism. Five years on, however, curiosity has given way to exasperation and the signs of one of Madrid’s most intractable turf wars are all too evident in the schoolyards, parks and gardens of this south-western corner of the Spanish capital. Lengths of tape delineate the no-go areas, burrows pock-mark embankments, trees bear scars, vegetation surrenders and, here and there, lie the bones and wizening bodies of a few of the many rabbits that seem set on reclaiming the territory they have lost in Madrid’s continuing sprawl. “When all the buildings went up and the roads were built, all the rabbits’ natural predators disappeared, leaving them alone,” says Mateo Meléndrez, a craftsman and spokesman for the Carabanchel Alto Neighbourhood Association. “The rabbit numbers now are off the scale and if you have a wet spring, the population can triple.” At the end of last month, the association and three local parents’ associations warned the rabbit situation was getting dangerously out of hand. While they have nothing against the rabbits themselves, they are growing tired of the destruction the animals are visiting on gardens, vegetable patches and saplings, and concerned about the diseases they carry, such as leishmaniasis. An outbreak of the parasitic disease 12 years ago in the nearby city of Fuenlabrada infected hundreds of people and led to the culling of tens of thousands of rabbits and hares. More than 200 infants at one school haven’t been able to use their playground since last year because of the health risks posed by rabbit urine and excrement. At another, the increasingly brazen rabbits have eaten all the carrots and onions in the educational garden. The animals have also proliferated in housing developments whose lushly irrigated lawns and flowerbeds offer a beguiling buffet, especially during the infernal Madrid summer. “In June, the whole area round the communal pool was full of excrement – your towels would be studded with it,” says María Secos Morales, the chair of the Colegio Ártica parents’ group. “The residents clubbed together to get a guy to come in with his ferrets to clear out the rabbits. He captured 12 or 13, but now we’ve spotted another 18.” As she speaks, three flashes of brown fur and white scuts shoot out of the rose bushes to chase away the sparrows that have had the temerity to descend on their territory. Secos Morales points out the holes the rabbits have dug beneath the pine trees, including one from which a dead cat was pulled. “The rabbits have no shame at all,” she says. “And it all got worse during the pandemic because no one was allowed out.” Meléndrez and many others in Carabanchel say the local council just isn’t taking the “occupation” seriously enough and needs to do more than engage in periodic captures and install the odd bit of fencing. To drive the point home, he puts on a surgical glove and takes a recently found rabbit skull out of a plastic bag to show how easily the creatures can squeeze through the new fencing around the entrance to the Pinar de San José primary school. “We can’t get all the rabbits out of the area,” says Meléndrez. “But we could put proper, rabbit-proof fences around schools and flats. It’s not like building the Escorial palace; it just needs a bit of thought. At least if the council did that, the children would be able to play in their school playgrounds.” For far too long, he adds, the problem has been ignored and the rabbits left to do what they do best. “I like rabbits and I think they should be protected,” he says. “But when the problem becomes a health issue – especially when we’ve just been though an awful pandemic with diseases spreading from animals to humans – I don’t think it’s funny.” Carabanchel district council says it is working with affected schools to keep the rabbits out and to get children back into their playgrounds, sandpits and vegetable gardens. As well as shoring up fences, it is carrying out another ferret deployment. There is, as Juan García Vicente of Ecologists in Action points out, “no magic solution” to Carabanchel’s cunicular conflict. Nor is it unique. He notes that territorial competition between humans and animals has given rise to similar urban incursions by bears in Romania, coyotes in Los Angeles and wild boar in parts of Spain and elsewhere. “It’s not that they’re invading us – it’s that we’re occupying their natural habitat in a damaging way,” he says. “We can’t act like we own everything; we need to share these spaces. It’s just about control and trying to maintain the balance.”Tens of thousands of care home residents face losing vital support as unvaccinated carers clock off for the last time before double vaccinations become mandatory. About 50,000 care home staff who have not had two doses in England will not be allowed to work from Thursday. Analysis by the Guardian suggests that on current staff/resident ratios and without other measures to tackle the problem, the care of about 30,000 people could be affected. On Wednesday, care leaders pleaded with the health secretary for an 11th hour reprieve, urging Sajid Javid to allow unvaccinated carers to keep working at least until NHS staff face mandatory vaccines from next April. In what looked certain to be a futile demand, Nadra Ahmed, executive chair of the National Care Association, which represents independent providers who are expected to be worst hit by staff shortages, said: “There is still time to bring the deadline in line with the NHS and support the sector to have a fighting chance to get through the winter months. It may avoid the closure of essential beds when we most need them as a nation.” Care operators and health leaders have warned that staff shortfalls could prevent thousands of people from being discharged from hospitals this winter, limiting admissions and clogging up wards. They say it will increase pressure on remaining care staff to work longer hours, despite many being already exhausted. One of the largest not-for-profit operators, MHA, estimates that about 750 care homes may have already stopped taking new admissions because of the staffing crisis. Seven of its homes are closed to new entrants and it is losing up to 150 staff because of the vaccine policy this week. “It is scary as we head into winter and the concern is there will be a buildup of people in hospital who can’t be discharged,” said Sam Monaghan, MHA’s chief executive. The National Care Forum said providers are running at 17% average staff vacancy rates. Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, which represents healthcare organisations, said people who were medically fit to leave risked longer hospital stays than necessary at a time when capacity was crucial. “As we head towards what could be the most challenging winter on record, we hope the government has assessed the possible knock-on impact of this policy,” he said. The Department of Health and Social Care has said councils will help care operators with staff shortages, that it has provided town halls with over £1bn of additional funding for social care this year, and that it is running a TV recruitment campaign. The National Care Forum, which represents not-for-profit care homes, said a snap survey last week showed that on average 3.5% of operators’ staff have already left as a result of resignation or dismissal, and estimate a further 4.4% might leave. Care operators fear remaining staff may be so stretched they will have no choice but to limit help with all but the most essential services, meaning trips out, games and entertainment, which create the sense of living rather than merely existing, will be reduced. On Wednesday, the Relatives and Residents Association warned that care home residents’ human rights continue to be breached as “the only group still living under stringent government restrictions whilst the rest of the country gets back to normal”. Amid anger at ongoing visiting restrictions, it has told an investigation into the issue by parliament’s joint committee on human rights that it “hears daily [on its helpline] about the devastating impact measures to manage the pandemic have had on the lives of older people”. Mandatory double vaccination for care workers in homes for older and younger adults has boosted vaccine protection, with close to nine out of 10 staff getting both jabs. But in areas including Thurrock, Nottingham and Manchester, a fifth of staff are still not fully protected. NHS staff and domiciliary care staff who look after people in their own homes will not need to be fully vaccinated until 1 April 2022, the government announced on Tuesday. The Care Quality Commission, which regulates care homes, will enforce the vaccine mandate with “a proportionate approach, to ensure the welfare and safety of people who use services”, it has told operators. “We will always treat each matter individually and consider the individual circumstances when undertaking an assessment and deciding on any possible next steps,” it said.Twenty-four countries and a group of leading car manufacturers have committed to ending the era of fossil-fuel powered vehicles by 2040 “or earlier”, in a major new commitment set at Cop26. The agreement to sell only zero-emissions vehicles from this time, unveiled at the UN climate summit in Glasgow on Wednesday, includes Canada, New Zealand, the Netherlands, Ireland and the UK, which had already agreed to phase out new petrol and diesel car sales by 2030. Ford, Mercedes, Volvo and Mercedes-Benz are among the carmakers to sign the accord, pledging to reach the goal by 2035 in “leading markets”, as have numerous cities and regional governments, including New York, London, Barcelona and the Australian Capital Territory. A further group of countries, including India and Kenya, have agreed to “work intensely towards accelerated proliferation” of zero-emissions vehicles, while a group of financiers and fleet owners have also vowed to phase out fossil fuel-powered cars. But the agreement is also notable for its absences, with the US, China and Germany, the behemoths of the global car industry, all declining to sign. Volkswagen and Toyota have also not put their name to the deal, along with BMW, which told the Financial Times there was still “considerable uncertainty about the development of global infrastructure to support a complete shift to zero-emissions vehicles”. Toyota said: “Although we refrain from joining the statement, we share the same spirit and determination to address climate change and remain open to engage and work with stakeholders. Toyota will continue to contribute by making the best efforts to achieve carbon neutrality.” Negotiators had hoped to announce a sweeping deal involving governments and car manufacturers that committed them to reaching 100% zero-emissions cars and vans by 2035. The British government, however, has hailed the agreement as a “landmark global agreement” and pointed out that in combination with existing pledges to phase out polluting cars, most notably by the European Union, it will cover nearly a third of global car sales. Before the conference UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, had said the mantra of Cop would be “coal, cash, cars and trees”; he will be hoping this deal means that all four have been covered, to some extent. Transport accounts for a fifth of global greenhouse gas emissions and the International Energy Agency has said the sale of fossil fuel-powered cars will have to cease by 2035 if the world is to avoid surpassing dangerous global heating thresholds. “Cop26 marks the end of the road for the internal combustion engine,” said Helen Clarkson, the chief executive of Climate Group. She added: “I welcome all leaders standing with us today to show the world that the shift to clean road transport is not only happening, but accelerating. “For those organisations notably absent – the climate cannot wait for you to get onboard with zero-emission vehicles. It’s time to get out of the slow lane before you miss the exit.” Steven van Weyenberg, the environment minister of the Netherlands, said it was “time to speed up” the transition to electric vehicles. “Not just for the climate,” he said. “Everyone has the right to breathe clean air. This cuts both ways – investments now will lead to more green jobs in the coming years. I call on other countries to join our effort as soon as possible.” Activists at Cop26 have called on governments to move away from all types of cars and instead transform cities and towns to become more amenable to walking, cycling and taking public transport. A protest to call for better investment in public transport is taking place in Glasgow on Thursday morning. “The evidence is clear that we cannot put all our faith in electric cars – we need a more fundamental shift in how we get around, and we have much to gain from this,” said Jools Townsend, the chair of the Sustainable Transport Alliance. “By focusing on a shift towards public, shared and community transport, walking and cycling, we can create healthier, happier communities and more equal access to opportunity, without adding to emissions and environmental problems through the manufacture of millions more cars.” A group of city mayors from around the world said last week that investment in public transport needed to double if climate breakdown was to be averted. “Without a revolution in public transport the world will miss the bus on tackling climate change,” said Anies Baswedan, governor of Jakarta. “Time is running out.”Wetherspoon’s has suffered a slump in sales below pre-pandemic levels, which the pub chain’s chairman, Tim Martin, blamed on older customers staying away because of lingering caution about the danger of Covid-19 infection. In the first 15 weeks of the financial year, sales were 8.9% below the same period of 2019, the last comparable period when trade was unaffected by coronavirus-related restrictions. Shares in JD Wetherspoon fell 4% in early trading despite the 860-strong pub chain pointing out that 2019 had been a record year for sales and highlighting signs of recovery in some parts of the country, particularly outside London. Wetherspoon’s said detailed figures on which drinks were selling well indicated that youngsters were flocking to the pub, while its more mature clientele were opting to drink at home instead. Sales of cocktails were up 45%, vodka rose by 17% and rum was up 26%. The pub chain said these drinks were all popular with younger people. Draught products, which Wetherspoon’s said were more often consumed by older customers, have been under pressure, with traditional ales down by 30% and stout down by 20%. Martin, who has been an outspoken critic of the social mixing restrictions that have hampered pub trade for much of the pandemic, said older customers had “understandably” been wary of going to the pub. Laura Hoy, an equity analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said the company could suffer in the event of a long-term trend towards younger patrons and away from its older regulars. “Wetherspoon’s tends to cater to the latter group, so a permanent shift in that direction could be bad news,” she said. “More likely is an abundance of caution among vulnerable populations as Covid continues to spread despite vaccine efforts. This attitude should wane as the pandemic comes under control but there’s no telling how long that will take.” Wetherspoon’s put an 8.1% slump in food sales down to more people working from home and eschewing the allure of its breakfasts, down by 22%, and its coffees, down by 30%. With office workers staying away, the worst affected region was London, down 17.4%, offsetting relatively buoyant trade in cities such as Liverpool, Newcastle, Nottingham and Oxford, where sales were up 11.3%. Lingering travel restrictions meant that trade was significantly lower in airports, down 38.8%, stations, down 22.4%, while sales also fell in Scotland (-12.2%) and Northern Ireland (-11.0%), where some restrictions still apply. “With no music in Wetherspoon pubs (apart from 46 trading as Lloyds), a material proportion of our trade comes from older customers, some of whom have visited pubs less frequently in recent times,” Martin said. “As outlined in our annual report, published in October 2021, there have been no outbreaks of Covid-19, as defined by the health authorities, among customers in Wetherspoon pubs. “However, some customers have been understandably cautious. Improvement in trade will therefore depend, to some extent, on the outlook for the Covid-19 virus.” Martin has been a vocal backer of Brexit but the pub chain he founded suffered shortages of some beers earlier this year, amid a shortage of delivery drivers partly caused by the UK’s exit from the EU. The company said it had experienced problems “from time to time” but that the problem had eased in recent weeks, albeit with the caveat that the hectic Christmas period was yet to come. Wetherspoon’s also said it had not suffered badly from a difficulty across the hospitality sector in finding staff. The number of employees has increased from 36,987 when pubs reopened in April 2021 to 42,240 today, it said.Good morning. A federal judge in Washington has ruled that hundreds of pages of White House records from the Trump administration can be turned over to the House committee investigating the deadly 6 January attack on the Capitol, defying objections from Donald Trump. The decision, handed down late on Tuesday by the US district judge Tanya Chutkan, clears the way for the National Archives to start transmitting the records requested by Congress as early as Friday, though attorneys for Trump immediately vowed to appeal the ruling. “The court holds that the public interest lies in permitting – not enjoining – the combined will of the legislative and executive branches to study the events that led to January 6,” Chutkan wrote in a 39-page opinion that delivered a major win to the select committee. What kind of records are they? They are among the most sensitive: visitor logs, telephone records, and other documents from the files of Trump’s former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows as well as the former deputy White House counsel Patrick Philbin. How much is there? The National Archives has indicated Trump was invoking executive privilege protections to block the release of at least 750 pages of records. What else has the panel done this week? They have issued 10 new subpoenas to Trump administration officials, including Trump’s former senior adviser Stephen Miller and press secretary Kayleigh McEnany. Jury watches drone footage of Kyle Rittenhouse shooting man dead The jury at Kyle Rittenhouse’s murder trial on Tuesday watched drone footage that showed Rittenhouse shooting Joseph Rosenbaum at close range during a night of protests in Kenosha, Wisconsin, last August. The video, zoomed in and slowed down by a forensic imaging specialist, was played as the prosecution finished presenting its case, after a week of testimony in which some witnesses seemed to bolster Rittenhouse’s claim of self-defense. Rittenhouse is a former police youth cadet from Antioch, Illinois. On the night in question, he went to Kenosha with an AR-style semi-automatic rifle and a medical kit, in response to a militia that called for protection for businesses against protesters supporting the Black Lives Matter movement. The 18-year-old is charged with two counts of homicide, one of attempted homicide and two of recklessly endangering safety, for firing his weapon near others. He is also charged with possession of a dangerous weapon by a minor, as he was 17 at the time. He has pleaded not guilty. What dis the drone footage show? It showed Rosenbaum, 36, following Rittenhouse before Rittenhouse suddenly turned and fired his rifle. Rosenbaum was shown to fall as Rittenhouse ran around a car. Theranos lab chief says Elizabeth Holmes offered ‘implausible’ explanation for odd findings The former lab director of Theranos has testified that Elizabeth Holmes gave “implausible” excuses for apparent failures in the company’s tests and personally pushed back against his concerns about its signature blood testing machines. Kingshuk Das testified on Tuesday in the high-profile case as the government heads into its 10th week of arguments against the former CEO, who faces accusations that Theranos knowingly defrauded clients and investors about its capabilities. Speaking in the courthouse in San Jose, California, Das recounted how his discovery of unusual test results met with resistance from the Theranos founder. In one particularly telling incident, Das said he found tests were turning up prostate-specific antigens for female patients. Holmes offered an explanation that a rare form of breast cancer could be behind the irregular results – an excuse Das said he said “seemed implausible”. What else did he say? “I found these instruments to be unsuitable for clinical use,” he said of the the company’s proprietary Edison devices. He also said: “These instruments were not performing from the very beginning.” US must rethink attitude to parental leave, Pete Buttigieg says The US needs a fundamental rethink of its attitudes towards parenting, according to Pete Buttigieg, who was the target of criticism from conservatives for taking leave to care for his newborn children. Buttigieg, the US transport secretary, came under attack after he took time to help care for his newborn twins, a boy and a girl, in August. Senator Tom Cotton, an Arkansas Republican, said Buttigieg was “absent during a transportation crisis” while Tucker Carlson, the Fox News host, told his audience: “Pete Buttigieg has been on leave from his job since August after adopting a child. Paternity leave, they call it, trying to figure out how to breastfeed – no word on how that went.” Carlson’s remarks were widely seen as a homophobic attack on Buttigieg, who is gay. Buttigieg told the Guardian that the US “has got some catching up to do” on paid parental leave. “We still have to contend with the view that the only justification for parental leave is for women to physically recover from pregnancy and childbirth, which is of course one very important reason, but it’s far from the only one,” he said. What else did Buttigieg say? He said he found the reaction to his parental leave baffling. “Leaving aside the hospitalization, part of me just wondered: how do they think my kids eat? They have two dads – do they think I just leave them with a can opener and directions to the fridge?” In other news … The activist and Nobel laureate Malala Yousafzai announced she had got married on Tuesday in a small ceremony in Birmingham, UK. The campaigner for girls’ education and the world’s youngest winner of the Nobel peace prize said on social media she had married her partner, Asser Malik. The Oklahoma supreme court on Tuesday overturned a $465m opioid ruling against drugmaker Johnson &amp; Johnson, finding that a lower court had wrongly interpreted the state’s public nuisance law in the first case of its kind in the US to go to trial. Chile’s president, Sebastián Piñera, has been impeached by the lower house of congress, setting up a trial in the nation’s senate over allegations he favored the sale of a family property while in office. The vote to impeach passed with the bare minimum of 78 votes needed in the 155-member chamber of deputies. The EU has condemned the president of Belarus, Alexander Lukashenko, for acting like a “gangster”, amid a worsening humanitarian crisis at the country’s border with Poland. He’s been been accused of sending refugees to the EU’s external border in an attempt to punish the bloc for criticism. Stat of the day: Food system responsible for between 21% and 37% of total global greenhouse gas emissions The UN climate talks at the Cop26 summit in Scotland are in a crunch final week, with countries under pressure to act amid warnings of disastrous global heating. But one source of emissions that is often overlooked is literally in front of us every day: our food. The steps it takes to bring food to our tables – everything from production to processing to food waste – are responsible for between 21% and 37% of total global greenhouse gas emissions, according to a 2019 report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). Here are nine charts that show why the US needs to tackle food emissions. Don’t miss this: Tom Ford on veganism, his new book and how the clothes he makes are not meant to be thrown away Tom Ford talks to The Guardian about his latest project, a coffee-table book charting the past 15 years of his career – or “post-Gucci”, as those familiar with luxury fashion prefer to describe the era that has followed Ford’s departure from the Italian super-brand. Work on the book meant that Ford spent lockdown sifting through thousands of images. “It was an interesting thing to spend so much time looking back,” he tells me, “it is not something I do often.” His reluctance to take stock is a hangover from his days at Gucci, when there was no time to pause for reflection, a period that led to burnout and a “midlife crisis”. Climate Check: Youth activists petition UN to declare ‘systemwide climate emergency’ Greta Thunberg and youth climate activists from around the world are filing a legal petition to the UN secretary general urging him to declare a “system-wide climate emergency”. As Cop26 enters its final days, climate campaigners were due to file a legal document on Wednesday calling on António Guterres to use emergency powers to match the level of response adopted for the coronavirus pandemic by pronouncing the climate crisis a global level 3 emergency – the UN’s highest category. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: why the US right loves to hate Sesame Street It’s not unusual for Ted Cruz to levy a dyspeptic jeremiad against “government propaganda” or denigrate his political enemies as “petty authoritarians who would deny you the right to make your own medical choices” or “puppet[s] … with a hand inserted up their backside”. But the Republican senator’s target this time was an actual puppet – the 8ft 2in (249cm) beloved yellow Big Bird, whose innocuous tweet about inoculations inspired a round of puppet-sneering from America’s conservative culture warriors. Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comBilly Porter, the actor best known for his role as Pray Tell in Ryan Murphy’s series Pose, will host this year’s Fashion Awards, to take place in London on 29 November. Porter – who is also a singer, director, writer, composer and playwright – has made a name for himself in fashion, too. The black bustled gown he wore to the Oscars in 2019, the gold wings at the Met Gala and the hat with remote controlled sparkly fringing for the Grammies in 2020 (this quickly became a meme), saw to his status as a style inspiration. Speaking on Zoom, he described his new gig as evidence that he has finally been embraced by the industry. “I have been a fashion person for my entire life,” he said. “To be inside of the fashion conversation for real is a manifestation of what I always dreamed could be possible.” Porter follows the actor Tracee Ellis Ross, who was the host in 2019, but the most regular frontperson has been the comedian Jack Whitehall, who had hosted the ceremony for five years. Giving the platform to Porter – who typically dresses in a gender non-conforming way – suggests fashion is shifting to be more inclusive. “It’s based on … this revolution degendering fashion,” says Porter. “You know, I’m one of the leaders inside of that conversation. And that is why I get to occupy space.” Porter says this is still a new position for him – one that can be dated to that Oscars moment two years ago. “I see my life is in two parts,” he says. “I was doing my work. I was having a particular kind of success. And then the Oscars happened. And it’s been stratospheric, household name stuff.” Fashion is not entirely onboard. “I still have resistance,” he says. “I don’t get a lot of shine from the large houses, because, quite frankly, I don’t think they know what to do with me. You know, because there is such a binary still … I’m at the intersection of something that people in positions of power are still trying to figure out how to talk about in the mainstream.” While his outfits for the awards are still to be worked out with him and his stylist Ty Hunter, he promises “they are going be cute”. Porter says he feels an affinity with younger designers. “They’re the ones that get what I’m trying to do, which is the masculine and the feminine together,” he says. “It’s not just about a man in a dress. That’s sometimes the way to express it in a moment. But it’s not just a man in a dress full stop.” Although Porter enjoys the work of a new generation, he is also influenced by contemporaries. “I’m first generation post Civil Rights movement,” he says. “I’m 52. We were in suits, wherever we went. If we were going shopping, we had to [get] dressed up with the hopes that the police wouldn’t follow us, and in the department store. I went to public [or comprehensive] school and wore a collared shirt and a tie and a blazer because my aunt Dorothy said ‘dress for the job you want not the one you have’. So I dressed up. I’m a dresser upper.” Porter recently hit the headlines due to a Sunday Times interview when he criticised US Vogue for putting Harry Styles wearing a dress on the cover of its December 2020 issue, saying that all the singer had to do was “be white and straight” while Porter had been fighting “my entire life to get to the place where I could wear a dress to the Oscars and not be gunned down”. Appearing on The Late Show with Stephen Colbert last week, Porter apologised to Styles saying “the conversation is not about you … the conversation is actually deeper than that, it is about the systems of oppression and erasure of people of colour who contribute to the culture.” This year, the Fashion Awards will be a live event once again, taking place at the Royal Albert Hall. The ceremony will be sponsored by TikTok, who also sponsored a venue at London fashion week in September. Nominees include Miuccia Prada and Raf Simons, Daniel Lee, Priya Ahluwalia and Nensi Dojaka. Members of the public are invited to purchase tickets. For the 2019 event, Julia Roberts and Rihanna were in attendance, while in 2018, Meghan, Duchess of Sussex presented an award. • This article was amended on 11 November 2021 to include the fact that Tracee Ellis Ross hosted the awards in 2019.There’s a creak of old leather (and other things) in this outrageously dated and hokey sentimental western, made from a script that had been knocking around the industry for decades; it’s a Swiss cheese of bizarre plot-holes set in 1979, clearly because that is when it was conceived. Only the residual charisma and fascination of its director-star Clint Eastwood keeps it from sinking completely, and only this living legend could get away with asking us to believe that his character is devastatingly attractive to two different younger women, his female co-stars here being 40 and 52. Eastwood plays Mike, a veteran Texan ranch-hand who lost his wife and son to a car accident and in the first scene gets fired by his grumpy boss Howard (Dwight Yoakam) on account of his subsequent addiction to pills and booze. (We never see any sign of this addiction, and if Mike is supposed to be in recovery, it’s pretty laidback: he enjoys a cold beer in one scene.) Then a year later, this same Howard has evidently revised his opinion of Mike so far as to entrust him with the job of going to Mexico and rescuing Howard’s teenage son Rafo (Eduardo Minett) from his Mexican ex-girlfriend, a kind of mob matriarch whom he believes has let the boy be abused in some nameless way. Mike heads south, gallantly declines a freely offered sexytime experience from Rafo’s raunchy mum Leta (Fernanda Urrejola), finds Rafo with absolute ease at a local cock-fight and so begins the hazardous journey home with Rafo and Rafo’s pet rooster, poignantly named “Macho” (the film’s one intentional irony) while being pursued by Leta’s goons. They have a stopover at a flyblown village where local cafe owner Marta (Natalia Traven) is also clearly smitten by the old cowboy. And so the movie continues in its absolutely predictable way, with Mike and Rafo getting on like father and son, or rather great-grandfather and great-grandson, with Rafo excited about getting to the US and freedom, while the movie asks us to forget a very strange plot development that implies Howard might send Rafo back again if the price was right. Well, it’s always good to see Eastwood, loping defiantly across the screen. • Cry Macho is released on 12 November in cinemas.For the past half-century, postmodernist thinkers have been trying to discredit truth, identity and reality. Identity is a straitjacket, and truth is just some middle-aged academic’s opinion. As for reality, it has become as obsolete as dressing for dinner. Objectivity is a myth in the service of the ruling powers. If only we could shed these illusions, we could revel in a world of infinite possibility. Instead of waking up to the same tedious old self each morning, we could flit from one identity to another as easily as David Bowie. The final liberation is that anything can mean anything else. Once you kick away fixed meanings and firm foundations, you are free to enjoy yourself. Postmodernism is meant to be fun, even if a current of nihilism runs steadily beneath it. As Stuart Jeffries suggests in this splendidly readable survey, there is something vacuous at the heart of its exuberance. Even so, postmodernism is intended to be subversive. Since civilisation works by order and authority, challenging these things is bound to seem disruptive. The trouble is that neoliberalism challenges them too. Nothing is more fluid and flexible than the marketplace. Nobody on Wall Street believes in absolute truth. The true anarchists are the free marketeers. So is postmodernism a critique of the status quo or a capitulation to it? Perhaps the ultimate postmodern irony is to be both – to sell out to the system while sending it up. It becomes impossible to distinguish the boss from the bohemian. Postmodernism may be playful, witty and depthless, but so is the British prime minister. It is unashamedly populist, defiantly embracing the everyday, but so is Nigel Farage. As Jeffries points out, Steve Jobs was “selling conformity masquerading as personal liberation”. He may have thought of himself as a hippie, but the Chinese factories that made his products had suicide nets beneath the windows of its dormitories for exploited workers. Madonna is seen by some as a feminist guerrilla fighter and by others as peddling rape fantasies, along with the most successful coffee table book (Sex) of all time. Post-truth politics may have started on the left bank of the Seine, but they ended up in the White House. Some studies of postmodernism are cultural, some are historical and a few of them are philosophical. The achievement of this book is to roll all three approaches into one. This is rare, because those who know about Sid Vicious may not be avid readers of Michel Foucault, while those who are deep in Jacques Derrida are not always fans of Chris Kraus’s I Love Dick. Jeffries packs a remarkable knowledge of postmodern culture into these pages, from punk, hip-hop, film and photography to anti-psychiatry, the Rushdie fatwa and queer theory. All this is set in the context of the neoliberalism of the 1970s, showing how a revamped capitalism gave birth to a culture of the flexible and provisional – of short-termism, endless consumption and multiple identities. Postmodernism may be a historical fact, but it finds history itself a bore. The past is simply a collection of styles to be recycled, while the future will be just like the present only with a richer array of options. There are no more grand narratives like the idea of progress, no momentous transformation to be feared or hoped for. The point is not to change the world but to parody it. History has come to an end with Ben &amp; Jerry’s and Grand Theft Auto. When two aircraft slammed into the World Trade Center, a new grand narrative – the conflict between the west and Islamism – began to unfold. For some observers, this spelled the end of the postmodern era. Jeffries himself is not so sure: it may have lost some of its youthful zest, but its malign spirit still lives on. Postmodern ideas certainly survive in the current scepticism of truth. For a whole generation of young people, simply to have a conviction is to be guilty of dogmatism. When asked about his convictions, Boris Johnson replied that he had picked up a couple of them for speeding. To suggest that someone’s opinion is false is a form of discrimination. Every viewpoint should be respected, except for racism, sexism, homophobia, elitism and antisemitism, which are deeply offensive. So they are, but how do you decide this if moral objectivity is for the birds? There are writers today who rightly insist that women have been shackled and humiliated throughout history, yet who put words like truth and reality in scare quotes. The most useless theory of knowledge is one that prevents us from saying with reasonable certainty, for example, that a great many Africans were once enslaved by the west. Yet you can find such theories of knowledge in most seminar rooms, even if those who tout them can rightly think of little more outrageous than slavery. Perhaps Jeffries’s compelling critique will help to sort them out. • Terry Eagleton’s latest book is Tragedy (Yale). Everything, All the Time, Everywhere: How We Became Postmodern by Stuart Jeffries is published by Verso (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.UK Athletics’ controversial chief executive Jo Coates was earning a salary package of £226,163 before she resigned last month, making her one of the highest paid administrators in British Olympic sport, the Guardian can reveal. The news, which is contained in the UKA accounts for the 2020-21 financial year that will be filed at Companies House later this week, is likely to upset many in the sport given her 19-month reign was characterised by turmoil, infighting and athlete dissatisfaction. That anger reached a head in September when a group of Britain’s top athletes and coaches told the World Athletics president, Sebastian Coe, of their frustration with Coates and her performance director Sara Symington. The pair also had their defenders, with Coates widely praised for her work on tougher safeguarding regulations, but a month later both were gone following a stormy UKA board meeting. UKA’s accounts show that Coates earned a £147,500 basic salary as well as another £78,663 in pension contributions between March 2020 and March 2021. During that period, UKA reported a rosier-than-expected overall deficit of £103,000 for the financial year – considerably better than in the previous two years, where the combined losses were over £1m. Those results also came about despite the organisation experiencing a £9m fall in income due to the global pandemic. However, a combination of only staging one event – the British championships in September 2020 – and dramatically reduced costs for training camps due to travel restrictions meant that UKA was able to cut its costs by just over £9m. The accounts show that UKA was also able to claim around £85,000 from a number of government schemes, including placing a number of staff members on furlough. Had it not been for unrealised foreign exchange losses of £148k – as a result of the sport holding US dollars to cover costs including those associated with international events and overseas training camps – UKA would have made a £45,000 surplus. When approached for a statement, UK Athletics confirmed that the accounts for the 2020-2021 financial year will be published on UKA.org.ukAmerican democracy’s most dangerous adversary is white supremacy. Throughout this nation’s history, white supremacy has undermined, twisted and attacked the viability of the United States. What makes white supremacy so lethal, however, is not just its presence but also the refusal to hold its adherents fully accountable for the damage they have done and continue to do to the nation. The insurrection on 6 January and the weak response are only the latest example. During the war for independence, after the British captured Savannah, the king’s forces set out to capture a wholly unprepared South Carolina. John Laurens, an aide-de-camp of George Washington, pleaded with the South Carolina government to arm the enslaved because the state didn’t have enough available white men to fight the 8,000-strong British force barreling toward Charleston. This was a crisis born of South Carolina’s decision to divert most of the state’s white men from the Continental Army to fight the Redcoats and, instead, enlist them in the militia to control the enslaved population, whom they defined as the primary threat. The response to Laurens’ plan was, therefore, “horror” and “alarm”. Umbrage even. The state’s political leaders were so appalled that they questioned whether “this union was worth fighting for at all”. The United States of America was not nearly as important as maintaining slavery. They, therefore, toyed with the idea of surrendering to the British, making a separate peace. For that flat-out refusal to fight with every resource at its command, and clear willingness to sacrifice the United States simply to maintain slavery, South Carolina suffered no consequences. It wasn’t ostracized. It wasn’t penalized. Instead, the state’s leaders were fully embraced as Founding Fathers and welcomed into the new nation’s halls of power. Several years later, at the 1787 constitutional convention, the south once again put white supremacy above the viability of the United States. In tough negotiations, South Carolina, North Carolina and Georgia’s representatives were willing to hold the nation hostage and risk its destruction unless protection of slavery and the empowering of enslavers was embedded in the constitution. The negotiators acknowledged exactly what was going on and even, sometimes, how reprehensible it was. When, for example, the delegates bowed down to the south’s demands for 20 additional years of the Atlantic slave trade, James Madison admitted that without that concession, “the southern states would not have entered into the union of America”. And, therefore, as “great as the evil is” he added “the dismemberment of the Union would be worse”. The same refrain played after the infamous three-fifths clause passed under the southern threat to walk away and, thus, scuttle the constitution and the United States. Massachusetts delegate Rufus King called the nefarious formula to determine representation in Congress one of the constitution’s “greatest blemishes” while lamenting that it “was a necessary sacrifice to the establishment of the Constitution”. *** The enslavers’ extortionist threats – white supremacy as the price for the nation to come into being – should have created a massive backlash. But it didn’t. There was no retribution, only compliance and acquiescence. The demonstrated lack of accountability for threatening the viability of the United States served only to embolden the slaveholders, who bullied, harangued and pummeled other congressional leaders, including the brutal 1856 beating of Senator Charles Sumner by southerner Preston Brooks on the Senate floor, to get their way. When the bullying and beatings no longer worked, and the nation dared elect a president opposed to slavery spreading any further, the slaveholders launched a military attack against the United States. They wanted, according to Alexander H Stephens, vice-president of the Confederate States of America, the “disintegration” of the Union. He said that the United States had to be destroyed because, unlike the US, the Confederacy’s “cornerstone rests, upon the great truth that the negro is not equal to the white man; that slavery subordination to the superior race is his natural and normal condition”. To wage its war for white supremacy, the Confederates killed and wounded more than 646,000 American soldiers. In addition to the loss of life, fending off the CSA’s devastating military assault cost the United States billions of dollars. The CSA also tried to badger and entice the British and French to ally with the Confederacy and attack the United States. For doing so much to destroy this nation, after the CSA’s defeat, the consequences were disproportionately minimal. President Andrew Johnson granted many of the Confederacy’s leaders amnesty and allowed them to resume positions of power in the government. The entrée into American society for the traitors was also paved by the way the US supreme court dismantled many of the protections put in place by Congress for post-civil war Black citizenship – the 13th, 14th and 15th amendments, as well as laws banning racial segregation and white domestic terrorism – and allowed the bureaucratic and lynching violence of Jim Crow to eviscerate the “self-evident” principles of equality. And to ensure that a narrative of white supremacy’s innocence permeated the nation’s textbooks, the Confederacy’s treachery became the “war of Northern aggression” and the south’s “Lost Cause” became nothing less than noble. The forgiveness tour continued as the states, not just in the south, allowed the erection of statues in the public square honoring those who committed treason. The 6 January invasion of the US Capitol, provoked by the lie that cities with sizable minority populations, such as Atlanta, Milwaukee and Philadelphia, “stole” the 2020 election is, at its core, white supremacists’ anger that African Americans, Hispanics, Asian Americans and Native Americans not only voted but did so decisively against Donald Trump. The invaders constructed gallows, stormed the US Capitol, wanted to hang Vice-President Mike Pence, who would not hand the election to Trump, and hunted for the speaker of the House, Nancy Pelosi. They beat police officers, yelled “nigger” at others, carried the Confederate flag through the halls of the building and decided that those defending the Capitol were the actual “traitors” who needed to be killed. This horrific attack on American democracy should have resulted in a full-throttled response. But, once again, white supremacy is able to walk away virtually unscathed. US senators and representatives who were at the rally inciting the invaders were not expelled from Congress. Similarly, in shades of the post- civil war Confederacy, several politicians who attended the incendiary event at the Ellipse were recently re-elected to office. And those who stormed the Capitol are getting charged with misdemeanors, being allowed to go on vacations out of the country, and, despite the attempt to stage a coup and overturn the results of a presidential election, getting feather-light sentences. It also took months to establish a congressional committee to investigate 6 January, but it’s already clear that its subpoenas, as Steve Bannon and Jeffrey Clark so brazenly demonstrated, can be violated and mocked at will with no consequences. And, like the Lost Cause, its adherents have tried to rewrite this assault on America as “a normal tourist visit” or simply “law-abiding, patriotic, mom and pop, young adults pushing baby carriages”. In other words, this nation has a really bad habit of letting white supremacy get away with repeated attempts to murder American democracy. It’s time to break that habit. If we don’t, they just might succeed next time. Carol Anderson is the Charles Howard Candler professor of African American studies at Emory University and the author of White Rage: The Unspoken Truth of Our Racial Divide and One Person, No Vote: How Voter Suppression is Destroying Our Democracy. She is a contributor to the GuardianBenedict Cumberbatch said he “gave ‘[himself] nicotine poisoning three times” by smoking cigarettes as part of his performance in his new film The Power of the Dog. Speaking to Esquire magazine, Cumberbatch said that his role as Phil Burbank in the adaptation of Thomas Savage’s western novel required consumption of copious amounts of rolled-up cigarettes. “Filterless rollies, just take after take after take … When you have to smoke a lot, it genuinely is horrible.” Cumberbatch also said he had to learn how to roll them with one hand, as specified in the original novel. Elsewhere in the interview, Cumberbatch explained the lengths he went to prepare himself for the role, equipping himself with the skills his character, a ranch owner in 1920s Montana, possessed. He learned ironmongery, making a horseshoe as a gift for the film’s director, Jane Campion, and woodworking, which involved carving a set of miniature wooden furniture. Also like his character, Cumberbatch said he didn’t wash himself. “I wanted that layer of stink on me. I wanted people in the room to know what I smelled like. It was hard, though. It wasn’t just in rehearsals. I was going out to eat and meet friends of Jane and stuff. I was a bit embarrassed by the cleaner, in the place I was living.” And, in true method acting style, Cumberbatch said he stopped answering to his real name. “If someone forgot … and called me Benedict, I wouldn’t move.” The Power of the Dog is released in the UK on 19 November.Prince Harry has said he warned Twitter’s boss Jack Dorsey about his platform allowing political unrest a day before the Capitol riot that led to five deaths. The Duke of Sussex made the comments at the RE:WIRED tech forum in the US. He said: “I warned him his platform was allowing a coup to be staged. That email was sent the day before. And then it happened and I haven’t heard from him since.” On the day of the 6 January riots, Donald Trump tweeted allegations of vote fraud before a rally in Washington DC. Members of the Proud Boy movement, a rightwing militia, stormed the Capitol to disrupt the official certification of Joe Biden’s victory in the White House race, as part of an attempt to overturn the election result. Harry was speaking via video chat at a session discussing whether social media was contributing to misinformation and online hatred. Dorsey, who is Twitter’s chief executive, has so far not commented. A study released in October by the social media analytics service Bot Sentinel identified 83 accounts on Twitter that it said were responsible for 70% of hateful content and misinformation aimed at Harry and his wife, Meghan. Harry said that “perhaps the most disturbing part of this [study] was the number of British journalists who were interacting with them and amplifying the lies. But they regurgitate these lies as truth.” He said social media companies were not doing enough to stop the spread of misinformation, and the internet was “being defined by hate, division and lies”. He also argued that the word “Megxit”, used by the British press to describe the couple’s decision to quit their royal duties, was misogynistic. Harry said the word was an example of online and media hatred. “Maybe people know this and maybe they don’t, but the term ‘Megxit’ was or is a misogynistic term, and it was created by a troll, amplified by royal correspondents, and it grew and grew and grew into mainstream media. But it began with a troll,” he said. He did not elaborate. Harry and Meghan moved to California last year to lead a more independent life. He has said that part of the reason for their departure was the racist treatment of Meghan, whose mother is black and whose father is white, by the British tabloid media.Finally, after just over two years of Boris Johnson as prime minister, the Conservative party is in a serious crisis. Johnson’s dreadful misjudgments over the Owen Paterson affair have unleashed mayhem, but it is not just the occupants of Downing Street who face a critical test. Labour will also be consumed with a debate about strategy and tactics – and this is a vital opportunity for Keir Starmer to seize the initiative. I have been a part of such debates in the Labour leader’s office under Ed Miliband, Jeremy Corbyn and Keir Starmer. Labour will be asking itself what next – what do we need to do to reset, and respond to the changed terrain? For a period during the first Covid-19 lockdown, Labour wrestled with how constructive or critical its opposition should be. Whatever the merits of that argument at the time, the question is now settled: a government that is prepared to act with such flagrant, corrupt arrogance has to be exposed to the most aggressively oppositional campaign, while the wounds are raw. The Tories’ nightmare means the shadow cabinet has to function at a much higher level – in full campaign mode, as if fighting a general election. Calling this what it is – corruption, rather than merely sleaze – is essential. Labour’s focus should be a relentless pursuit of new stories and angles to maintain the corruption theme kicked off by the Paterson scandal. It should be extended out into the regions and nations, and to local Tory councils, where there is no shortage of similar dodgy practices. Labour must reinforce the perception that the Conservatives treat public office as a vehicle for their own personal influence and financial gain. In his leadership campaign Starmer promised to beef up Labour HQ’s “attack” operation, and while it is not made easy by the party’s financial hardships, the need for that now could not be any greater. For opposition parties there are always precious few windows of opportunity when you can disrupt the governing party’s narrative, and do so on terms favourable to you. This is one of those rare moments. The line in Starmer’s conference speech that dismissed Boris Johnson as a “trivial” politician was not quite right. He is much worse than that, and Labour should say so. Johnson has always wanted his government to be seen as a fresh start, rather than a continuation of the governments of Cameron or May. Tory corruption drags his brand down, and dredges up memories of Tory failures past. Prior to last week’s vote, Johnson had already seen a narrowing of his polling lead on who would make the best prime minister. Overall there is a gradual dip in Tory support, and a rise in those backing Labour. An Ipsos Mori poll published on Monday had Labour unchanged on 36%, but one point ahead of the Tories, who were down four points. The bad news for Labour was the Greens polling at 11%, reflecting the recent softening of support on Labour’s green-left flank. Labour’s battle-planning over Paterson also requires some self-reflection: the party must address its standing with its own base, and with those who would desert it from a liberal, green or left perspective. Conventional wisdom puts all the emphasis on Labour winning back voters who switched to the Tories or the Brexit party in 2019. But Labour cannot allow itself to bleed votes to the Greens and Lib Dems in the process, and it needs a plan for Labour-SNP waverers too. Tory corruption provides the biggest opening yet in this parliament to fuse together a coalition of existing Labour voters, younger radical voters and Labour-Tory switchers. To bridge between a serious attack on the government over corruption, and building that successful electoral coalition requires Labour to frame the Paterson scandal as symptomatic of a wider story. Keynote speeches seem to have gone out of fashion. But this ought to be the time for an agenda-setting address from Starmer, going further than the announcements of the past few days to bring all the threads together, define Boris Johnson as part of a failing, self-serving, out-of-touch elite, and make clear that only Labour can and will clean up British politics. In the new terrain, the party has to eliminate its tendency for vagueness. It should be much clearer and more confident in pushing policies that would help clean out the Tory stable, such as banning MPs from having second jobs and abolishing the House of Lords. With the Tory government bogged down in corruption, Labour must seize the opportunity to offer a more decent alternative – to draw a huge dividing line that sends out a broader message about the state of Britain. With the Conservatives’ corrupt practices they have shown themselves incapable of looking after essential public services. Time and again they have shown they think the rules do not apply to them, while they preside over a squeeze in living standards for ordinary people. The duty of the opposition is to use the new crisis as a springboard to answer the bigger question in the minds of voters: “why Labour?” As shadow cabinet members and senior staff discuss these questions, there are two more changes they need to make to be truly battle-ready. One is internal party politics: it is time to end the war against the left of the party, which has drained away so much energy and made Labour’s finances precarious, with declining membership and a tightening of trade union donations. A unified party, taking on the corrupt Tories together, will draw in much wider support from civil society and undecided voters than a divided one. Finally, Labour must prepare for the Tory counterattack. Boris Johnson and his party will fight ferociously to hold on to their power. If Starmer can stay on the front foot and focused on attacking the Tories’ weak spots, it will make a Conservative recovery all the harder. Simon Fletcher is a former adviser to Keir Starmer, Jeremy Corbyn and Ed MilibandAdam Boulton has announced he will leave Sky News at the end of the year, with a parting suggestion that the era of big-name television news anchors is coming to an end. The veteran journalist said the Sky News boss, John Ryley, has “made it quite clear he believes the future of news is digital”, with more emphasis on the knowledge of specialist reporters and less of a role for studio-based presenters. As a result, “the direction which Sky News wants to go over the next few years is not one that’s a particularly good fit for me”, Boulton told the Times. Reflecting on the push for on-screen diversity on the UK’s television channels, he also suggested there were too many white middle-class men in television news. He said: “We all think we got there on merit. I like to think we did, but nonetheless, on balance, a disproportionate number of people like me got there on merit, if you see what I mean.” Boulton has been with the rolling news channel since its launch in February 1989, including a 25-year stint as its political editor. The 62-year-old, who is the channel’s editor-at-large and presents the morning All Out Politics show, will remain as an occasional contributor but will also look to work elsewhere. His departure comes at a time of transition for Sky News, which was an integral part of the initial channel line-up for Rupert Murdoch’s pay-TV satellite service. The channel was known for being fast to break news and gained influence by offering politicians and journalists the chance to appear on air – making it a constant presence in MPs’ offices and newspaper newsrooms. However, in common with other rolling news channels, it now has to work out how to serve audiences who are less tied to television screens and more likely to get breaking news through social media on their mobile phones. The main Sky News channel continues to have a substantial reach, with an estimated 7.5 million Britons watching some of its output in the last month. But many people dip in for only a few minutes at a time and viewing figures for individual shows can be low. As a result the much smaller rightwing upstart channel GB News sometimes pushes Sky News close in specific time slots. When Murdoch sold the entire Sky business to the US media conglomerate Comcast in 2018, the new owners agreed to subsidise the lossmaking Sky News for a decade – giving an effective deadline to find a future for the outlet. Staff at the channel have become increasingly intrigued by the role of David Rhodes, an American former boss of CBS News who joined Sky this summer and has been taking an interest in how the news service operates. The other big question at Sky News headquarters is whether any presenters could be tempted to jump ship to Murdoch’s forthcoming talkTV channel, which is due to launch next year and will be fronted by Piers Morgan.You wouldn’t blame Ofcom for feeling daunted. The world, or at least the bit of the planet that wants to clean up the internet, is watching the online safety bill and the UK communications regulator has to enforce it. Hearings into the draft bill by a joint committee came to an end last week and if you take a step back and look at what has come out of those sessions since September, it is clear that Ofcom has got a job on its hands. Quick primer: the bill covers tech firms that allow users to post their own content or to interact with one another. So that means big fish such as Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, YouTube and Snapchat have to obey it but also commercial pornography sites like OnlyFans. Search engines such as Google are also included. The bill places a duty of care on those companies to protect users from harmful content – at pain of substantial fines levied by Ofcom. The duty of care is split into three parts: preventing the proliferation of illegal content and activity such as child pornography, terrorist material and hate crimes (ie racial abuse); ensuring children are not exposed to harmful or inappropriate content; and, for the big players such as Facebook, Twitter and YouTube (described as “category 1” services), ensuring that adults are protected from legal but harmful content. The latter content category is to be defined by the culture secretary, after consultation with Ofcom, and then scrutinised by parliament before being enacted in secondary legislation. The Ofcom chief executive, Dame Melanie Dawes, had warned of being “overwhelmed” by complaints from social media users and having to deal with the “sheer legal weight” of big tech’s response to the act once it becomes law, which should happen around the end of next year. The culture secretary, Nadine Dorries, rounded off the hearings with an appearance in which she proposed a number of changes to the legislation. But even the preceding sessions had underlined the complexities and gaps in the bill. It needs to be simpler – yet there is no doubt following Dorries’s appearance that it is going to be bigger. The committee will publish its report on the bill by 10 December and Dorries has said she will look at the recommendations “very seriously indeed”. Here are some of the changes we can expect, or at least issues that the committee will address in its report, after the hearings. A permanent joint committee will oversee the act Dorries said a permanent committee of MPs and peers – modelled on the human rights joint committee – will be set up to conduct “ongoing scrutiny” of the landscape that the act will police and the role of the secretary of state and Ofcom in enforcing the bill. The body could also recommend when the secretary of state deploys secondary powers under the bill, such as giving guidance on how Ofcom should exercise its powers. There will be criminal sanctions for users and executives Dorries is definitely gunning for tech executives, telling the Facebook founder, Mark Zuckerberg, and his communications chief, Nick Clegg, to steer clear of the metaverse and concentrate on the real world. Addressing the wider tech industry, Dorries said: “Remove your harmful algorithms today and you will not be subjected – named individuals – to criminal liability and prosecution.” Getting prosecuted for failing to deal with algorithms that steer users towards harmful content is definitely not in the bill. As it stands, the bill contains provisions for a deferred power, after about two years, to impose criminal sanctions on executives if they do not respond to information requests from Ofcom accurately and in a timely manner. Dorries is now talking about bringing in criminal sanctions within three to six months for a much broader offence, of allowing their platforms to guide users towards harmful content. Is that illegal content such as racist abuse or less clear areas like legal but harmful? For users, three new criminal sanctions will be brought for the offences of: sending messages or posts that “convey a threat of serious harm”; posting misinformation – “false communications” – intended to cause non-trivial emotional, psychological or physical harm; and sending posts or messages intended to cause harm without reasonable excuse. Online advertising: in the bill or not? In his appearance before the committee, the founder of MoneySavingExpert.com, Martin Lewis, urged the government to include advertising in the bill as an area that should be regulated. “Scam ads are destroying people’s lives. People take their own lives on the back of being scammed, and it should go in the bill.” Ofcom’s Dawes suggested regulating ads alongside the Advertising Standards Authority and the committee’s chair, the Conservative MP Damian Collins, is exercised about misleading political advertising. But Dorries stated firmly last week that advertising, particularly scam ads, would be too big an addition, saying: “It needs its own bill.” Nonetheless, don’t be surprised if the committee tries to get it in or at least make firm recommendations for dealing with advertising in the bill or different legislation. Increased investigatory powers for Ofcom The information commissioner, Elizabeth Denham (Britain’s data regulator), said in her appearance that as the bill stands Ofcom does not have strong enough powers to properly audit tech firms. There had been talk in the sessions about gaining access that allows the regulator to scrutinise algorithms and demand changes to them. Denham said she was able to “look under the bonnet” of tech firms as part of the age-appropriate design code, which requires websites and apps to take the “best interests” of their child users into account. She said Ofcom’s powers under the bill needed to “bolstered by audit powers for the regulator to be able to look under the bonnet”. Currently, the bill requires companies to submit details of how their services might expose users to harmful content – and how they will combat that risk. These risk assessments will inform codes of conduct for the platforms that Ofcom will enforce but the feeling on the committee is that the regulator needs more oomph. Dorries’s strong words about algorithms and criminal liability suggest that she agrees. Tackling anonymous abuse Former Manchester United and Leeds footballer Rio Ferdinand spoke scathingly about the failure to deal with anonymous abuse during his appearance in September. A total ban on anonymous social media accounts and posts is not coming but expect some form of action. A recent opinion poll found that of those who had suffered online abuse, 72% of it was from anonymous accounts. Clean up the Internet, a campaign group calling for increased civility and respect online, has called for action on anonymous trolls in its submission to the committee, and for the bill to require platforms to demonstrate to Ofcom that they have systems in place to deal with anonymity. Clean up the Internet has called on social media platforms to give users the option of pre-emptively blocking any interactions with anonymous accounts, as well as making the verification status of users clearly visible. The group has also suggested anonymous users register their identity with platforms, who could retain that information against the account – and reveal it to law enforcement if needed. If you want to read the complete version of the newsletter please subscribe to receive TechScape in your inbox every Wednesday.In compliance with the House of Commons code of conduct, MPs are required to register financial interests they may have which are relevant to their parliamentary work. These include outside jobs, consultancy work, gifts or membership of organisations that may affect their position as members of parliament. The declarations are listed in the register of members’ interests, which is usually published annually with each new parliamentary session. It is worth keeping in mind that MPs are responsible for deciding what they think is relevant to include. For example, Boris Johnson explicitly said he would not include a free luxury holiday at a villa in Marbella owned by the Goldsmith family, which he says he has declared on a separate ministerial register. Similarly, Owen Paterson had dutifully declared all his consultancy earnings but still fell foul of the regulator because she judged he engaged in lobbying for companies he worked for.One of Spain’s best-known, beloved, and frequently abused, dishes has been given protected cultural status on the grounds that a proper paella celebrates the “art of unity and sharing”. On Tuesday, the government of Valencia – the region where paella originated – declared the dish an item of cultural significance, extolling its history and virtues in an eight-page announcement in the official gazette. “Paella is an icon of the Mediterranean diet, because of both its ingredients and its characteristics as a representation of Valencian culture,” read the declaration. “All the ingredients used in its preparation – such as fish, meat, vegetables, the justly famous and healthy olive oil and the complete grain that is rice – are part of the Mediterranean diet.” The fragrant mingling of protein, vegetables and carbohydrates, it added, “make paella one of gastronomy’s most balanced dishes”. The regional government said the new status would help promote study and research into the dish and would safeguard “the survival of this cultural item and ensure it is passed on to future generations”. Despite is hallowed status in Valencian cuisine, paella has frequently fallen victim to controversial twists – and even mechanisation. Five years ago, Jamie Oliver terrified many on the peninsula by suggesting that chorizo deserved a place in the dish, while earlier this year, a Spanish industrial engineer unveiled a robotic paella maker. The declaration, notedthat paella needed to be protected from the “distortions that could result from mass tourism”, also included a series of helpful do’s and don’ts. Heat sources are important: although orange tree wood abounds in Valencia “and gives the dish a special character and aroma”, the main thing is to ensure your fire’s not too smoky, or, if cooking on an indoor stove, to check the hob distributes the heat evenly, it said. Perhaps the most important rule of all is to never stir the rice while it is cooking. Any spatula incursions will release too much starch from the rice and leave you with a sticky paella. The government pointed out that the dish is “the symbol of a Sunday family lunch … and represents a feeling of identity and continuity that we need to protect, maintain, and pass on”. It did, however, admit that times had changed when it came to cutlery: “Tradition dictates that a paella should be eaten with a spoon (in the past they were wooden and individual), although it’s true today that that custom has fallen away and each diner may choose for themselves.” It also recalled how the dish was developed over the course of several centuries after the Arabs brought rice to Spain and the saffron trade began to flourish. “The first reference to paella – or ‘Valencian rice’ – is to be found in an 18th-century recipe manuscript, which explains how it should be prepared and notes that the rice should end up dry.”What are epics? Typically, they are defined first by their length: they are traditionally long, and poems (this being the older, oral form). They often concern male heroes fighting a good fight (against an enemy either monstrous or geopolitical), and they’re presented as a nation-building texts: think of the Iliad, the Aeneid or Beowulf. These are great, familiar stories, retranslated and adapted again and again. They’re some of the most famous texts in western literature. And epic has historically been a very top-down genre: nationalistic (the Aeneid), featuring heroes whose valour and virtue are validated by their high birth (King Arthur, Beowulf, even Aragorn in Lord of the Rings). I am fascinated by the nation-building aspect of epic, not to mention its masculine, martial traditions; it is something in which I, a woman of mixed cultural heritage, felt I had no place. My book Amnion is an attempt to challenge many of these aspects of the epic. Although it is a long poem, Amnion offers (or at least, such is my hope) a form of anti- or counter-epic: it is an attempt to honour a fractured family history and give it its due weight. Writers too numerous to name have co-opted and wrestled with the epic tradition. Below are just a few of my favourite epics – which I have been deliberately playful in defining as such. 1. Paradise Lost by John Milton Milton wanted to write a native epic for England, and the story of Adam and Eve is the result. He deliberately reprised many of the classical epics that had come before him, and I love how his poem is in such open conversation with so many of its predecessors. I love the subversively hopeful image at the end of Book 12, when Adam and Eve are expelled from the garden. “The world was all before them”, and they make their way into it “hand in hand with wandering steps and slow”. To me, this is a moment to be celebrated: this is when Adam and Eve become fully human. The world is a scary, messy place, but it’s always worth being in it – Milton thought so, and I agree. 2. Memory of Fire by Eduardo Galeano Galeano is a sadly overlooked writer in the UK. The late Uruguayan journalist’s signature form is that of long sequences of small prose poems, often concerning minuscule historical anecdotes that demonstrate resistance to oppression. These can stand as rebukes to the state-endorsed nationalism of the traditional epic. Memory of Fire, the most ostensibly epic of his works, is a history of the world told from the perspective of Latin America. The first volume, Genesis, brilliantly interweaves indigenous creation myths with the arrival of the conquistadors. 3. G by John Berger This novel, published in 1972, is an attempt to reimagine (perhaps explode) the epic for a new era of human civilisation, from a Marxist perspective. Set in Europe in the years immediately before the outbreak of the first world war, it follows the sexual exploits of a modern Don Juan (the subject of Byron’s sexual epic). “Never again will a single story be told as if it is the only one,” the book says, expanding the idea of the epic: it does away with the idea that single texts can speak for a nation or a people as a whole. Such thinking made a huge impact on 20th-century literature in the emerging notion of the “postcolonial”: it’s the guiding thought behind Salman Rushdie’s maximalist epic novel Midnight’s Children, for instance. 4. In the Skin of a Lion by Michael Ondaatje This takes Berger’s line as its epigraph. The novel follows a series of characters, immigrants or otherwise on the fringes of society, involved in the construction of Toronto’s utility buildings in the early 20th century. Ondaatje’s prose always has a worn-smooth quality, reminiscent of ancient texts. It lends his novels a heft, which he uses to ennoble the unmemorialised – unsung epic heroes, if you will. 5. Burnt Shadows by Kamila Shamsie Shamsie is, like me, a great devotee of Ondaatje, and one can see his influence here. Shamsie’s sixth novel is epic in its historical scope: it manages to interlink the bombing of Nagasaki, India’s partition and the aftermath of 9/11. Her most recent novel, Home Fire, reprises the epic-adjacent story of Antigone and is a cautionary tale of what can happen (and indeed what did, with Shamima Begum, a case that happened after Home Fire’s publication) when Britain’s over-mythologised sense of nationhood is allowed to translate into ethno-nationalist immigration policy. 6. The Grapes of Wrath by John Steinbeck The story of an epic journey, an exodus. Steinbeck was eventually awarded the world’s highest literary honour, the Nobel, for writing about the plight of migrant workers during the Great Depression. The Grapes of Wrath is the greatest of his books, and lends near-biblical proportions to his subjects, who were essentially climate refugees. 7. The Siege by Helen Dunmore Dunmore’s novel about the siege of Leningrad in the winter of 1941 is an ostensibly small story of a woman feeding her family. But Dunmore makes it epic, gives it a scale and a weight that are hard to ignore. In her hands, the quest for firewood or the rationing of honey become as gripping as any battle with a supernatural enemy. It includes some of the most vivid descriptions of food I’ve ever encountered: a late summer feast of fresh fish fried in butter with potatoes, eaten at a dacha: a portrait of a happy family, with the vast arm of history soon to muscle in. 8. The Things They Carried by Tim O’Brien The Iliad is the story of a great victory, which marked the beginning of ancient Greece’s golden age of dominion over the Mediterranean. But how can you write about defeat from the position of already being the dominant power? Tim O’Brien’s collection of autofictional interlinked short stories concerning the Vietnam war does just this. When your nation has lost its authority in the world, one path ahead is to adopt an unreliable narrator, to question the valorisation of war, the meaning of bravery, and the very concept of a hero. 9. Norma Jeane Baker of Troy by Anne Carson There’s a long tradition of using original epics as the departure point for new texts that foreground minor characters in their antecedents. Carson has been writing into the cracks of the classical corpus her whole career, but in this book she is partially following in the footsteps of HD’s Helen in Egypt, itself a modernist epic poem. Carson places Marilyn Monroe alongside Helen of Troy and investigates the incendiary, nation-shaking potential of sex appeal. 10. The Lord of the Rings by JRR Tolkien An obvious choice to end with. I have such deep love for Tolkien’s massive, moving, sweeping story. At its root, it’s a celebration of multilateralism in response to existential threat – something more relevant than ever. Tolkien’s genius lies in his ability to combine the solemn, weighty, even dry language of epic (you can see the influence of the sometimes boring Anglo-Saxon Chronicles, or indeed The Battle of Maldon, which is one long drag, looming large in his prose) with a quaint lightness of touch (the ride of the Rohirrim versus the Hobbits’ love of good food). He was able to recycle tropes from older narratives, and draw on folkloric motifs to make something utterly timeless, where everyone, great and small, has a role to play. Amnion by Stephanie Sy-Quia is published by Granta Books. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Please don’t finish JJJJJerome Ellis’s sentences. The New York composer, producer, multi-instrumentalist and writer, who has a stutter – hence the repetition of Js in his name – asks for patience from whoever he is in conversation with. “Sometimes people just walk away,” he says. “Perhaps because I didn’t adhere to t-t-the choreography t-t-that we are often used to.” These kinds of experiences have left him feeling extremely vulnerable, he tells me candidly over a video call. “So much of the pain comes from not feeling fully human. Not feeling intelligent. People thinking that I might be evading a question.” This reality is most apparent to Ellis whenever he is stopped by police. “I don’t want my Blackness to come off as a threat and I don’t want my stuttering to come off as evidence of lying.” Ellis is interested in bringing awareness to this intersection of stuttering (that he also calls disfluency) and Blackness. His latest project The Clearing is a profound and richly textured 12-track album with an accompanying book, that blends spoken word and storytelling with ambient jazz and experimental electronics to create a soundscape that is both meditative and theatrical. It weaves personal narratives, such as the audio of a bookseller hanging up the phone on him after he can’t get his words out, with historical accounts such as a story of enslaved Africans overcoming their captors via music. It first started life as an essay in the Journal of Interdisciplinary Voice Studies and later transfigured into a musical voyage. “I was interested in the role that clocks and watches played o-o-on plantations in the antebellum south. How slave masters deliberately did not let enslaved people own [them], as a way o-o-of domination and control,” says Ellis, who wanted to find the connective tissue between this history, and how ableism disadvantages people with speech impediments because they don’t adhere to certain flows of time. In Ellis’s poetic but political artwork, disfluency instead becomes a means to exist outside of ordinary time, as defined by a white-dominated world. Once he finished the essay, he began experimenting musically. “I had some sounds that I had been making in Ableton with piano, saxophone, flutes and trap-influenced drums.” Ellis has a glottal block – his stutter isn’t in stammered syllables but rather silences caught in the throat (try saying “uh oh” but not being able to go beyond the “uh”). The album captures these blocks in a way that turns them into their own instrument or artistic material; he isn’t ashamed of his disfluency and asked for his stutters to be acknowledged in these interview quotes. “On the album, I feel safe stuttering because it’s just me. I have the opportunity to score my own stutter. That felt very liberating.” Ellis was born in Connecticut, but was raised in Virginia Beach. His mother is Jamaican and his father is Grenadian. “I grew up in a very Christian household,” he says. His earliest memories are of playing music at church with his late grandfather. “He was a reverend and had a storefront church in Brooklyn,” he recounts. “When he preached, it was so intensely musical. Sometimes he would explicitly break into song, and the peaks and valleys of his speech were so dramatic. On the album, I wanted to embrace that kind of interweaving of speech and music.” His grandfather also introduced him to opera and classical music, while his father showed him “reggae, and calypso and soca”. By the age of 13, Ellis began playing the saxophone. In 2011, he obtained a BA in music theory and ethnomusicology from Columbia University and in 2015, he was awarded a Fulbright Fellowship to research samba in Salvador, Brazil. He has presented work at the Lincoln Center and has been the subject of a This American Life episode. “I just started teaching at Yale this fall. I love it,” says Ellis, who now works in the sound design programme. “One of my goals as a teacher is to create a space where we feel as free as we can. We are able to experiment, able to be vulnerable, able to improvise together. Both musically, but also how we are learning.” The concept of “clearing” for Ellis, is a way of encouraging “experiments with freedom”, as written by Saidiya Hartman in her historical study of early 20th-century Black women, Wayward Lives, Beautiful Experiments. “Her combination of scholarly rigour and lyrical language” is something Ellis aspires to. Other inspirations include the composers Steve Reich, Bach and John Coltrane: “All three of them have such vision and are not afraid of length.” The album has been a source of healing for Ellis in depathologising his disfluency, but it’s also been a channel for him to connect with something far greater than himself. There’s a line in the track titled Stepney, where the speaker Milta Vega-Cardona, discussing Ellis’s stutter, says: You create a non-linear time continuum, and access to the ancestors, Both for you and the listener. You are a conduit “I’m so grateful to [Vega-Cardona] for offering that,” says Ellis. “It’s something I’ve felt for a long time but never had the words for; that the stutter has a s-s-spiritual dimension.” Ellis was made for speaking. Even in our brief encounter, his storytelling is deeply absorbing; and as displayed on the album it opens up portals to histories and sensitivities that are impossible to forget. “Thinking back to my grandfather. He would be telling a story about Moses and it would take him 30 minutes to get through those five verses because he w-w-would tarry and linger and spin inside verses and say them over and over again and sometimes just say one [phrase] like ‘he saw, he saw, he saw’. For me, in the congregation, it opened up this window on to something else.”A specially adapted version of the Football Association’s leadership diversity code (FLDC) is being introduced throughout the women’s pyramid, the National League and the grassroots game. Launched across the men’s and women’s professional divisions last year, the voluntary charter commits clubs to achieving certain standards, including ensuring that 15% of recruits in senior leadership roles will be black, Asian or of mixed heritage and 30% female. The FA is also committed to people with disabilities representing 10% of its workforce by 2024. By widening the talent pool, it hopes to make football fairer and increasingly meritocratic. In the wake of the initiative’s expansion, James Kendall, the FA’s director of football development said: “We are deeply committed to ensuring English football thrives at all levels of the game and this is an important development in our efforts to achieve that. “We believe the code will significantly change football for the better, particularly in local communities where the game plays a crucial part in people’s lives. It will ensure clubs reap the rewards of greater engagement and collaboration with the communities they serve. We want positive, inclusive cultures to be at the heart of everything we do.” Thirteen months on from its launch, the FLDC has more than 50 signatories from the top tiers of the men’s and women’s game, including every Premier League club. To support the code, the FA has created a central platform advertising job vacancies with the intention of helping football employers reach a larger and more diverse selection of candidates. Since its inception 900 vacancies have been posted, attracting 4,600 applications, with 39% of performance role applications coming from black, Asian or minority ethnic backgrounds. Figures from 1 September 2020 to 31 August 2021 for clubs signed up to the code show targets were hit in only two of eight areas: that in senior leadership 15% of new hires (or a target set by a club based on local demographics) will be black, Asian or of mixed heritage, and that among men’s clubs 10% of senior coaching recruits will be black, Asian or of mixed heritage. Figures were described as “close to target” in four areas relating to team operations and coaching, and the target was more widely missed in two: that 30% of senior leadership hires should be women (19.8%) and 50% of new coaching hires at women’s clubs female (43.8%). The Premier League and EFL hit all their targets and the FA missed one: for 15% of new hires in women’s coaching to be black, Asian or of mixed heritage, with figures for that shown as 0%. Edleen John, the FA’s equality, diversity and inclusion director, said: “The commitment shown towards the FLDC shows there is a strong, collective desire to create long-term change and ensure the representation we see on the pitch is reflected off it. We believe that, with clear commitments and transparency, we can shape a better future for English football. We continue to encourage more clubs to sign up to the code.”When a woman reported domestic violence in her building in the Athens suburb of Dafni in July, it took 25 minutes for the police to arrive. All the neighbours could hear Anisa’s husband abusing her but the police officers did not bother to get out of the patrol car. “They just rolled down their car windows and left,” Anisa’s neighbour angrily wrote on Facebook that evening. “No stress, guys. Television only cares about the bodies. So when he kills her, I’ll tell a television channel to call you.” Less than three weeks later, Anisa was dead, murdered by her husband. Neither can be named in full as the case has yet to reach trial. In a statement to police, the perpetrator described how he was overcome with jealousy after Anisa allegedly cheated on him. “I took the knife with my right hand and entered her room. She was sleeping, and I rushed to her and lay on her, stabbing her with the knife in her neck,” he said. He later retracted his claim that Anisa was asleep when he killed her. “He finally killed her. That’s all I have to say,” their neighbour wrote on Facebook after the murder. At the time, Anisa’s murder was the sixth femicide in Greece this year. Since then, at least another six women across the country have been murdered by their partners or ex-partners. Feminist groups estimate that at least one woman in Greece dies at the hands of a man each month, often their partner or ex-partner. Of the 11 victims of femicide so far this year, two had previously tried to report their attacker for domestic violence before they were murdered, but none of the men had been charged or convicted. A third woman in the coastal city of Volos was in the process of trying to obtain a restraining order when she was stabbed to death by her ex-husband. The spate of femicides throughout this year have shone a spotlight on police failings when it comes to combatting violence against women, including accusations from victims’ families that statements from officials acted as a blueprint for would-be attackers on how to kill with impunity. Lawyers and campaigners also point to clauses in the Greek penal code that they say enable a culture of impunity around violence against women. These allow reduced sentences for those accused of homicide if they were “provoked” or the crime was committed in a rage – often referred to as a “crime of passion” – or if the accused displayed good behaviour before the incident and showed guilt afterwards. They say adding femicide as a motive to the penal code would act as a vital counterweight, denying perpetrators the opportunity to present themselves in court as innocent men suddenly overcome by emotion that justified murder. Ioanna Panagopoulou, a lawyer who represents the families of several victims of femicide, says: “No one in my entire career has ever taken full responsibility, confessing they planned the murder exactly as it happened. They try to make excuses and say it was a crime of passion or something else so they get a lesser sentence.” Panagopoulou is a forceful presence. She flips through a legal dictionary, a wall covered in religious icons behind her, as she describes how broadly courts can interpret clauses in the penal code that allow for reduced sentences for femicide. “If the person cooperates with the police afterwards, that’s considered good behaviour,” she says, adding that she receives calls about domestic violence every single day. “Most days I receive two or three,” she says, spreading her hands wide to show the scope of the problem. Families of victims say that lax punishment for femicide is just one of several ways in which the Greek state fails women, including ignoring them when they report domestic violence. Campaigners say this can prove deadly, as police inaction emboldens perpetrators and can result in femicide. Data from the Hellenic police, the national force, shows a steady rise in domestic violence reports over the past decade. “There is a culture of violence towards women,” says Anna Razou, a forensic doctor at an Athens hospital who assesses survivors of domestic violence. Razou says she has also seen a rise in complaints, including an unusual spike this year during Greece’s annual holiday month of August, which is normally a quiet period. She views this as a sign that Greek women feel increasingly compelled to report violence in the wake of Greece’s #MeToo movement, which began earlier this year. “Everyone’s talking about how important it is to stop the violence, but we can’t do that just by saying it’s bad. We need laws, and to be strict,” says Razou. She says few women she meets press charges against their abuser, and those who do often retract their claims, swayed by a culture that tells women that male violence is excusable, as well as a recently passed law that can force women to share custody of their children with their abusers. Data from the Greek justice ministry shows consistently low rates of prosecutions and convictions under a 2006 law criminalising domestic violence. An average of just 3,566 men a year have been prosecuted for domestic violence since 2016. Conviction rates are also low: on average, just 23% of men prosecuted were convicted, and the vast majority received suspended sentences. The percentage of men serving prison time after domestic violence convictions also fell from a high of 16.4% in 2016 to as low as 6% in 2019 even as convictions for domestic violence hit a five-year peak. It is this environment, campaigners say, that discourages women from reporting domestic violence at all. Anisa’s relatives believe that night in mid-July was the turning point. They say the lack of police intervention allowed the perpetrator to believe he could kill with impunity. The two officers who failed to get out of their car and investigate have since been suspended. “The murder was planned. He knew exactly what he was doing,” says Anisa’s cousin Christina, who wanted to keep her surname private. Christina, an elegant 22-year-old, tries to contain her anger, folding her delicately manicured hands as she speaks. “Then he washed his hands and cleaned himself up. He was very thorough. Then he went to the police. He did exactly what Balaskas said,” she says, referring to a senior member of Greece’s police union. Stavros Balaskas made headlines after the murder of the British-born Caroline Crouch by her husband, Charalambos “Babis” Anagnostopoulos, in June. Anagnostopoulos confessed following a month-long manhunt after initially blaming the murder on a gang of robbers, and was arrested at Crouch’s memorial service. The incident captured the Greek news cycle, so much so that most people refer to Crouch just by her first name, a byword for violence against women. For more than five weeks, Anagnostopoulos, a flight instructor, had maintained the crime was the result of a robbery, in which he and Crouch had been tied up and gagged, until he admitted he had fabricated the story to conceal the killing. In a television interview later that month, Balaskas claimed that if Anagnostopoulos had confessed immediately, he may have received a reduced sentence. “It was an unfortunate event, committed in anger, and he lost it and went crazy. If he had just called the police, he would have gotten four years in prison,” he said. “If the moment this man killed Caroline, he called [the police] and said, ‘I had a fight with my wife and I killed her,’ he would have had a different kind of treatment.” A number of femicides that occurred after Balaskas’s statement involved perpetrators immediately telling the police what they had done. Victims’ families believe his statements emboldened would-be perpetrators, enabling the idea that accused men can sway courts by displaying behaviour that match the clauses in the penal code. “Don’t advise future murderers and make their lives easier,” says Christina. Balaskas claimed the quote was taken out of context, and shrugged off any suggestion that, unintentionally or otherwise, his statement acted as a guide for violent men. “I have a name as a tough guy,” he said. “I have a reputation for this. Some people want to use this against me, but people who know me understand.” He said combating the rise in domestic violence in Greece required women to speak up. Other victims’ families say Balakas’s statement epitomises a macho culture in the Hellenic police that often fails to take domestic violence seriously, producing gaps in policing that enable femicide. “There’s no option to talk – that’s why women don’t talk. Our society is patriarchal,” says Sofia Karasachinidou, who, with her sister, Maria, is mourning their mother, who was shot by their father earlier this year. The two women say their father terrorised their family since they were young, but his brutal attacks on their mother increased after their divorce in 2017, sometimes even taking place publicly. The sisters estimate that their mother reported their father to the police at least eight times after the divorce, including once in 2018 when their father filed a counter-claim that led to the pair being held in the same cell overnight. The police, they say, then just advised their mother to avoid their father, in their Athens suburb of Agia Varvara, but offered no other solutions. In June, their father shot their mother in the shoulder and head, fatally wounding her. When Sofia arrived at the police cordon around the crime scene, she struggled to convince officers their father was responsible. “I told the police, ‘My mother called so many times. How could you let this happen?’” says Sofia. “They do nothing for domestic violence. They don’t care.” Their father turned himself in the day after the shooting and will stand trial for homicide as well as illegal possession of a firearm. The sisters fear he will receive a lenient sentence. “We are both afraid for our lives,” says Maria. The Hellenic police are attempting to change how they handle domestic violence after Greece signed the Istanbul convention on violence against women two years ago. This includes a new department to monitor how the police process domestic violence complaints as well as setting up a network of 72 police stations across the country where at least one or two officers are trained in how to treat survivors of abuse. Yet Sofia Kyriacou, an officer in the new police department, denies that the Hellenic police have historically had problems aiding survivors of domestic violence. “Sometimes it’s useful to criticise and focus on problems, but this means you will not focus on things going well,” she says. “Many police officers do their best and more within their responsibilities to help these victims.” Feminist activists paint a different picture, saying that violence against women has reached such epidemic proportions in Greece that they are left with no other option than to intervene. Traditionally at odds with a police force that Amnesty International accused of flouting international human rights law in its alleged abuse of protesters and minorities, activists said they are now working with the police to change attitudes towards domestic violence and make it easier for women to report these crimes. The feminist group Diotima says they have trained at least 150 police officers on how to identify abuse, how to listen to survivors and what the law proscribes. “Gender-based violence is one end of a continuum. The other end is femicide,” says Anna Vouyioukas of Diotima. “It’s become obvious in Greece. Domestic violence can lead to femicide, and that you cannot change because it means death.” Christina agrees. “The state does nothing for women,” she says, shaking her head. “So many femicides and they do nothing.” In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid. In Australia, the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the US, the domestic violence hotline is 1-800-799-SAFE (7233). Other international helplines may be found via www.befrienders.orgTheatre TikTok threw out a lifeline for actors during lockdown with musical spin-offs and plenty of theatrical silliness that has gathered momentum since. Sam Williams’s double-act with his grandma Judi Dench kept us laughing through the pandemic as he tried to tell her jokes and she foiled his punchlines. The duo seem to have retired but the videos are still up and enormously entertaining. The best of thespian TikTok superstars combine fabulous voices with clever comic skits: Katiejoyofosho features highly among them, composing her own parody musicals including a Broadway show in one video “after Amazon buys its own theatre” which contains regular adverts and a branded backdrop among the rousing musical solos, and another called How to Flirt if You’re a Woman in a Musical. Meanwhile, Dales_drama is an 18-year-old “musical theatre kid” who performs a mix of kooky cosplay (Peter Pettigrew from Harry Potter pops up repeatedly) and gloriously sung duets such as George Salazar’s Michael in the Bathroom (from her own bathroom) and sometimes strums along on the ukulele. TikTok makes a perfect fit for musical theatre fans as the creation of Ratatouille: The TikTok Musical proved. It began as a hashtag and culminated in a virtual concert raising millions for charity. A host of big musicals have spawned a similar cascade of video sharing: Six the Musical, which started out at the Edinburgh fringe in 2018, was heavily boosted by the social media excitement that surrounded it. The hashtag SixTheMusical has since become is its own mini industry: the official account Sixthemusical offers straight-up clips of the songs or backstage glimpses but fan videos are far more creative, with everything from memes to musical challenges and a kiddie’s incarnation of the queens (#sixthemusicalkids). Hamiltonmusical brings slick backstage videos from its Broadway, London and Australia shows. There is humour, adrenaline-fuelled pre-show song and dance and a ton of fan input on the hashtag. Julius Thomas III, as Alexander Hamilton on Broadway, dances in ruffled shirts and velvet tail-coats in the dressing room. More sensationally, Lin-Manuel Miranda freestyles on Jimmy Fallon’s phone: “You’re leaving a message for Jimmy Fallon, he’s got various talents but listen he’s got lots of shit to do so please respect the balance.” The hashtag bridgertonmusical created a big water-cooler moment over lockdown with 41m followers and 230m views. It was led by the songwriter, Abigail Barlow with her writing partner, Emily Bear, in which duetting fans reimagined the Regency-era period drama as a stage show. They drew praise from Adjoa Andoh, a star in the Netflix show, and Julia Quinn, author of the Bridgerton book series. Since then, Barlow has been confirmed as a TikTok star with 2.4m followers and a stream of catchy song, dance and lip-sync routines. There is fun popcorn fare on theatrecafeuk, the account for the Theatre Cafe in Covent Garden, London, which has live performances along its bar and corridors and features snatches of backstage or opening night action from new musicals such as Back to the Future and Frozen. Postmodern Jukebox is quirkier, with modern and contemporary pop songs performed as theatre shows from yesteryear: so Taylor Swift’s Style as if from Grease the Musical, a 1930s version of George Michael’s Careless Whisper, Britney Spears’s Oops! I Did It Again as vintage Jazz. Some offer up audition advice and insight, the best of which comes from actor and singer Christina Bennington who gives practical tips on how to become an actor (“practise, see as much as you can, follow casting directors on Twitter, attend open auditions … you can do it!”). Then there is Hannah Lowther, a fabulous ball of musical theatre energy in a Tesco uniform. A recent musical theatre graduate, she became a shelf stacker at the start of lockdown and began making musical videos with a supermarket twist to them over the pandemic (the fridges and shelves are visible in the background). Her humour and talent is clear to see as she dances in Crocs and leggings along the vegetable aisle to her revised numbers, Tesco 9-5 and Dancing Queen (“Mama Mia, here I go again, Tesco, how can I resist ya”). Last month, she announced that, after a year and a half of supermarket work, she had finally landed a part in a show, The Voices of Today and Tomorrow. Go Hannah!Though found in myriad forms on menus throughout India, the best biryanis are often said to come from Lucknow in the north-west and Hyderabad farther south, though Kolkata sometimes gets a look in, too. None, it must be said, specialises in vegetable biryani – mutton or chicken are more usual – but in a country with more than 400 million vegetarians, it’s definitely a thing. Prep and soak 45 min Cook 75 min Serves 6 500g basmati rice 25g butter 2 tbsp milk 1 generous pinch saffron 100g chana or masoor dal 4 garlic cloves Salt and pepper 2 green chillies 50g fresh coriander 2 tbsp grated ginger 2 tsp garam masala 1 tsp ground cumin ½ tsp turmeric 1 tsp chilli powder 200g whole-milk yoghurt 2 tbsp lime or lemon juice 300g cauliflower 2 carrots 300g squash 10 green beans 2 cardamom pods, lightly crushed 1 bay leaf 200g wholemeal flour 2 onions Vegetable oil, to fry To serve 2 tbsp flaked almonds 1 tbsp sultanas A few coriander or mint sprigs 1 Soak and rinse the rice Start by soaking the rice in cold water for 45 minutes, then drain and rinse until the water runs clear (soaking cuts the cooking time, which helps with flavour, while rinsing washes off some of the surface starch, so the rice is less likely to clump together later – separate, fluffy grains are the goal with basmati rice). 2 Start on the base While the rice is soaking, melt together the butter, milk and saffron in a small pan (or the microwave) and set aside. Put the dal in a medium pan, cover with cold water and bring to a boil. Skim any scum from the surface, turn down the heat, leave to simmer for about 30 minutes, or until just tender, then drain. 3 Make the spice paste Peel the garlic and mash it to a rough paste with a little salt, and trim and roughly chop the chillies and coriander. Put them all in a bowl, mini chopper or mortar, add the ginger and ground spices, and whizz or mash to a paste, adding just enough yoghurt and lemon juice to lubricate the mix. Stir in the rest of the yoghurt and lemon juice, season and set aside. 4 Prepare the veg Separate the cauliflower into florets. Peel the carrots and cut into 2cm cubes. Peel and deseed the squash, and cut the flesh into small dice. Chop the beans into roughly 2cm lengths (you can use just about any vegetables you like here, though I’d avoid anything too delicate and leafy, because it won’t stand up well to the lengthy cooking). Put all the veg in a bowl, add the yoghurt mixture, toss to coat and leave to sit. 5 Cook the rice Bring a large pan of salted water to a boil, add the drained rice, crushed cardamom pods and the bay leaf, and cook for six to eight minutes, until al dente. Drain well (I toss the rice back into the hot pan afterwards, so any lingering moisture evaporates), then mix with the dal, spices and all. 6 Par-cook the vegetable mix Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/400F/gas mark 6. Put a large casserole dish for which you have a lid (it needs to be big enough to hold all the veg and rice) over a medium-low heat. Add the vegetables and their marinade (if the yoghurt is very thick, add a splash of water to make it more saucy), and cook, stirring often, for five to seven minutes, until the vegetables are starting to soften. Check the seasoning and adjust as necessary. 7 Add the rice and seal Gently pile the rice and dal mixture on top of the vegetables, then pour the saffron-infused milk and butter mix over the surface. Mix the flour with just enough water to make a rough dough, then roll this into a long sausage. Line the rim of the casserole with the dough sausage and press the lid on top to seal. 8 Bake the rice and fry the onions Put the pot in the oven for 30 minutes. Meanwhile, finely slice the onions and blot the slices on kitchen paper to get rid of any surface moisture. Heat a deep pan a third full of oil until bubbles form around a chopstick (or similar) dipped in. Fry the onion in batches, until golden and crisp, then drain on kitchen paper. 9 Serve with a flourish For maximum theatrics, remove the lid from the casserole at the table, scatter the top of the biryani with the crisp onions, flaked almonds, sultanas and roughly chopped coriander or mint, and encourage your guests to dig in. Pickles and chutneys pair very well with biryani, as does a simple kachumber, or cucumber, tomato and onion salad. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from OcadoWelcome to The Jungle, the fictional everypub in The Choir of Man, a raucous, matey extravaganza that suggests a blend of Cheers and Five Guys Named Moe. Pints are dispensed from an onstage bar while nine burly blokes with seven beards between them croon and stomp through a jukebox’s worth of dad rock hits: You’re the Voice, I’m Gonna Be (500 Miles), Somebody to Love. It can feel at times like being trapped in Jeremy Clarkson’s CD player. Our T-shirted MC is Ben Norris, whose poetic asides provide connective tissue. When he isn’t singing the praises of the pub (“Its clarion call is ‘gather’”), he is giving his bros the hard-sell. Bartender Mark Loveday is “more beer than man”. Miles Anthony Daley, responsible for a goosebump-inducing cover of Adele’s Hello, is “secretly shy”. Daniel Harnett is “the self-appointed king of banter”. We have to take Norris’s word for all this since no one develops beyond his thumbnail sketches, which have the effect of aggressively sentimentalising the performers (“His home was the sea with Dad or a cuddle with Mum”) while keeping them at arm’s length. The atmosphere is very New Man but there are intriguing hints of caveman, too. The boast that “there’s no burgers or brioche here – it’s pork scratchings or nothing at all” recalls Al Murray’s Pub Landlord, who would certainly approve of all the testosterone on tap. Women are absent except for female audience members dragged on stage to sit ramrod-straight while being serenaded. Anyone sceptical of the show’s ingratiating, calculated warmth and synthetic bonhomie is likely to have the sensation of being present at a cult. It would be churlish, though, to deny that The Choir of Man will go down a storm with office outings, or that it contains moments of unmistakable power, such as the rousing, a cappella spin on Sia’s Chandelier. The one outright misjudgment comes when Red Hot Chili Peppers’ Under the Bridge is performed in front of a mobile urinal. Even the finest close-harmonising can’t alter the fact that we’re watching a row of men peeing in the middle of a pub. Time, gentlemen, please. The Choir of Man is at the Arts theatre, London, until 13 February.Andy Burnham has pleaded with residents of Greater Manchester not to chuck its latest fleet of hire bikes into the canal when the region’s £17m rental scheme opens this month. Burnham, the mayor of Greater Manchester and a recent convert to cycling, admitted he was nervous about the launch of the Bee Bikes after their predecessors ended up swimming with the fishes. “I would just say to people: these are your bikes, we own them. So, please look after them,” he said. “Damaging your own stuff doesn’t make sense.” He insisted he would rather they didn’t call them “Burnham Bikes” but stick to their Sunday name, inspired by Manchester’s civic symbol, the worker bee. In 2017 Manchester was the first UK city to test dockless bike hire when the Chinese firm Mobike pedalled into town. Within a year Mobike gave up, after hundreds of bikes each month ended up at the bottom of the Manchester Ship Canal and various other waterways. Others were strung up lampposts, abandoned in the Arndale shopping centre, locked in secure car parks and hidden in sheds. A startling number had their locks hacked off – and with them, their inbuilt GPS trackers. Bee Bikes are owned by Greater Manchester but will be operated for the first five years by Beryl, a private company which runs schemes in the West Midlands, Bournemouth, the Isle of Wight and beyond. They are part of Burnham’s aim to build the UK’s first carbon-neutral transport city region network by 2031, consisting of bikes, buses and trams. By summer 2022, 1,500 yellow bikes, including 300 electric models, will be available to the public in parts of Manchester, Salford and Trafford. If successful, the fleet will be expanded to cover the whole of Greater Manchester, with more electric bikes in the hilliest suburbs, according to Chris Boardman, the Olympic champion turned Greater Manchester travel commissioner. He admitted being apprehensive in the run-up to the 18 November launch. “Vandalism is something that you don’t have control over,” he said. But he stressed that Greater Manchester police (GMP) had been involved in planning the scheme, whereas Mobikes were just “dumped on the street” with minimal notice. As well as being too easy to pinch, Mobikes were also uncomfortable, having only one gear and apparently being designed for tiny people. “I’m only 5ft 8 and I still couldn’t get the saddle to go high enough,” said Boardman. The Bee Bikes have three gears and the saddle can be adjusted to suit riders between 4ft 11in and 6ft 5in (149cm to 195cm). It costs 50p to unlock a pedal bike and 5p a minute of cycling, or £1 to unlock an e-bike and 10p a minute to ride. Cycle hire stations will typically be between 300 metres and 500 metres apart, ensuring that up to 198,000 residents are never more than a five-minute walk from a bicycle. The bikes should be parked in branded docks, otherwise riders receive fines of £5 or £10 depending on how far away they abandon theirs. Unlike London’s Santander scheme, the dock does not lock the bike in place, but encourages sensible parking. If the dock is full, users can still leave their bike locked to itself nearby and not get penalised. “It means you never need miss your train because there are no spaces at the station,” said Boardman. A team of 17 Beryl staff will be whizzing around the city redistributing and fixing bikes all day and night, he added. Phil Ellis, the chief executive of Beryl, insisted he had no hesitation to pitch for the contract. “It might have seemed that Manchester is the wild west, but it wasn’t really. Vandalism was not a unique problem to the city. It happens everywhere. We were thrilled to be selected to run the scheme,” he said. Ultimately, the success of the Bee Bikes will not be simply down to how many remain roadworthy, but whether Mancunians like to ride them. A lot of that comes down to safety, said Graeme Sherriff, a researcher in healthy active cities at the University of Salford. “The cycling environment generally is also a challenge. It has to be cycleable if you have a bike hire scheme,” he said. “Currently, Greater Manchester isn’t very cycle-friendly, but it is getting better.” Boardman is trying to build 1,800 miles of safe walking and cycling routes as part of the Bee Network, but so far only a fraction of the network is complete after wranglings with Greater Manchester’s 10 councils. Cycle hire failures … Edinburgh’s Just Eat cycle hire scheme lasted three years before its operator, Serco, threw in the towel in September, saying it would not extend the contract amid higher-than-expected costs for vandalism. In 2020 about one in four of the scheme’s 550 bikes had to be repaired every week. The CEO of Mobike admitted in a company blog that more than 200,000 of its bicycles were lost to theft or vandalism in 2019. It now no longer operates outside China. Ofo, another Chinese firm, gave up on the UK in 2019 after ill-fated schemes in London, Norwich, Sheffield and Oxford. … and successes Santander Bikes, aka Boris Bikes, are the grandparents of the bike hire world, having been launched in 2010 by the then mayor of London. Londoners now have access to more than 750 docking stations and more than 14,000 bikes. This year Leicester launched what the council said would be the UK’s biggest docked electric bike-sharing scheme. Santander Cycles Leicester will eventually make 500 electric bikes available to hire from 50 locations. Next Bikes, which operates Glasgow’s Ovo bike sharing programme, expanded its scheme before Cop26 came to the city.Italy has issued an international arrest warrant for the grandfather of Eitan Biran, the sole survivor of a cable car crash who is caught up in a bitter custody battle, over the child’s alleged abduction. Prosecutors in the northern Italian city of Pavia have also filed an arrest warrant for an Israeli man who allegedly drove the car in which the six-year-old was taken to the Swiss city of Lugano, from where he was flown by private plane to Tel Aviv. Prosecutors said the alleged abduction of Eitan, who lost his parents and two-year-old brother in the Stresa-Mottarone aerial tramway crash in May, was a “premeditated strategic plan”. The move comes after an Israeli judge ruled Eitan must be returned to Italy and ordered his maternal grandfather, Shmuel Peleg, to pay about €18,000 (£15,300) in expenses and legal costs. The child’s maternal relatives appealed against the ruling; a hearing on the case will be held in Tel Aviv on Thursday. Eitan, who suffered injuries to his head and legs in the crash, went to live with his paternal aunt, Aya Biran-Nirko, in Pavia after he was discharged from hospital in June. Biran-Nirko was granted temporary custody soon after the tragedy so that Eitan, who has Italian and Israeli passports, could continue to receive the necessary medical care. However, this was contested by relatives on his mother’s side in Israel, and tensions between the two sides of the family escalated. The boy was taken to Israel in September in a private plane that prosecutors said cost €42,000. Eitan was born in Israel but had been living in Italy since he was one month old. He had been due to start school two days after his alleged abduction. Eitan’s paternal relatives claimed he had been taken away against their wishes and immediately filed a petition for his return to Italy. Peleg argued he had acted in the boy’s best interests. The prosecutor Mario Venditti told Ansa news agency: “We are waiting for the response of the Israeli authorities to the international arrest warrant. Then we will proceed with the closure of the investigation and the request for a trial.” Eitan’s great-grandparents also died in the crash, which is believed to have happened when a lead cable snapped, causing the cabin to hurtle backwards before falling about 20 metres into a wooded area below. The wreckage of the cabin was removed on Tuesday amid an ongoing investigation into the cause of the crash.The health secretary, Sajid Javid, has confirmed that NHS staff will have to be vaccinated against Covid in a bid to address the 103,000 personnel who have not yet had a single dose. The move will finally bring frontline healthcare workers inline with care staff who have to be immunised by this Friday or risk losing their jobs, although NHS staff will have until next April in the hope of avoiding a mass winter exodus. Unions and some doctors’ organisations have voiced strong opposition. In some ways, it is remarkable that requiring NHS staff who have face-to-face contact with patients to be vaccinated is even controversial. Healthcare workers have a professional duty of care not to harm patients, which is why the majority have already taken the vaccine, and few could expect to remain unvaccinated in a pandemic and to keep working with vulnerable people. However, mandating health measures is not something to be done lightly. As I’ve written before, workers – especially pregnant women and people from minority ethnic groups – must be given time to overcome fears, as well as paid time off to get the jab and sick leave for any mild side effects. That’s why staff will be offered one-to-one meetings with clinicians if they want to discuss their concerns as they make their choice. But “persuasion” cannot go on for ever. It has been almost a year since health and care workers were first given priority access to the jab. There surely comes a point when we must acknowledge that some staff will never take the vaccine without it being mandatory, and be honest about what we are asking the public to face in the meantime. Medics are not immune to doubting science or guaranteed to put their patients’ wellbeing first. Every request to give staff more time to feel comfortable with being vaccinated is another day that clinically vulnerable people’s lives are put at risk. It’s important to be clear about what Javid has mandated. No one will be forced to have the vaccine. It is simply that those staff who choose to remain unvaccinated will not have the right to a job on the frontline of the NHS. This is not unprecedented. Staff in some areas of the NHS, such as surgery, are already obliged to get vaccinated against hepatitis B. That’s because it’s widely understood that not taking sensible precautions to prevent passing on a disease to patients would be a form of neglect. The conversation around mandatory vaccines repeatedly evokes matters of “choice” and “rights”. But it is telling that there is concern in some circles only for the rights of NHS staff but not for those of clinically vulnerable people. Individual liberties, by definition, are often competing but must be balanced fairly. A healthcare worker’s right to be unvaccinated does not trump a clinically vulnerable person’s right to life. Without vaccine mandates, the burden will be placed entirely on clinically vulnerable people who will be forced to choose between risking catching Covid from hospital or skipping vital medical appointments. These are people who have had to shield away from pubs and the office for months or, for some, well over a year. The idea that they can’t feel safe even going to the doctor’s is unconscionably cruel. We are told repeatedly that such measures will lead to staff shortages across the NHS, but this is largely a distraction from longstanding causes. While it is true that obliging care staff to have a jab will unfortunately see a small minority quit, it has successfully led to a sharp rise in vaccination rates in the sector. Besides, staff shortages were an issue years before the pandemic because of underfunding and immigration rules. Those who are concerned about staff shortages would be better arguing for higher pay and better conditions. The myth that “patients are jabbed so no one else needs to be” is another straw man. Some clinically vulnerable people can’t have the vaccine because of their illness, while others will receive insufficient protection from the jab because they’re taking certain medications or because they have weak immune systems. That’s why it’s so important for frontline health workers to be vaccinated; multiple studies show it significantly reduces the risk of transmission. We don’t stop making seatbelts compulsory in cars because some people still die in accidents. Many lives are saved by them, and that’s enough reason for us all to wear them. It would be easy to see all this as an abstract ideological matter, but it is about real people and real danger. Two-thirds of all coronavirus-related deaths in the UK have been disabled people and hospital-acquired Covid has led to the deaths of at least 8,700 inpatients in England since the pandemic began. It is perhaps reflective of the low value we put on disabled and older people’s lives that it is even a debate that society should take every measure possible to protect them. Nobody would wish mandatory vaccines as a first step, but it is a reluctant necessary step in an unprecedented crisis. Critics who continue to argue that health workers should have the right to do their job unvaccinated must at the very least admit the consequences: vulnerable people will be put at risk. NHS workers have every right to turn down the vaccine – but they do not have the right to endanger their patients’ lives. • Frances Ryan is a Guardian columnistIt would be unwise for Steve Clarke to ask Craig Gordon to warn his Scotland teammates of the pitfalls associated with a trip to Moldova. The goalkeeper recalls the backdrop to a disastrous 1-1 draw in October 2004, which proved the final act of Berti Vogts’s Scotland tenure, but deliberately nothing of the game itself. “When we don’t win, I don’t remember much,” Gordon says. “If I remembered all the bad ones, I wouldn’t be in a very good place. “I remember no street lights. At that point it felt a pretty poor place. There was a big military presence. The changing area was just a room with a massive rug in the middle of the floor and school chairs scattered around the outside. So it was an eye-opener.” So, too, the response to Scotland’s hopes of reaching the 2006 World Cup being dashed within three qualifying matches. Gordon, now 38 and restored as No 1, won the fifth of his 62 caps in Chisinau. “We knew it was a bad result – we knew we needed to win,” he says. “I was fairly new to the squad so didn’t realise the level of backlash that was coming our way. Fans and media let us know all about it. We couldn’t get away from it being a poor result but the reaction was big. The performance was not at all well received back home, put it that way. It was hard to take, being just into the international team and facing that. I didn’t want to be remembered for involvement in that; I wanted to be involved in better times. “I remember thinking: ‘Well, I’m just in the team. There will be more opportunities, we will get better.’ At that point we were only six years on from France 98 so you could think about seeing Scotland in a major championship on the TV, that it would come around pretty often. Little did I know it would take so long.” Until the delayed Euro 2020 finals, to be precise. Scotland have the scent of glory in their nostrils once more. Victory in Moldova on Friday would secure a World Cup play-off place. Gordon has no temptation to draw comparisons to what came before. “It was so long ago and things are totally different,” he says. “This is a good team, we have guys who can open up defences. Perhaps years ago we were workmanlike but now we feel as if we have genuine quality with our forward-thinking players. We can create chances and score against anybody.” Gordon admits to mixed emotions over Vogts, who was ridiculed long before his sacking. “He brought a few of us into the team: Darren Fletcher, James McFadden, myself. We all got in at a young age and went on to pick up a lot of caps. Berti had stripped it right back and brought in a lot of young ones. I think he tried too much, too soon and it just didn’t gel properly. But there were moments; I remember my debut against Trinidad, winning 4-1 and the team played brilliantly. When you are playing competitive games and every result matters it is very difficult to change too much.” Towards Clarke there is undoubted respect. Gordon, the most seasoned campaigner in the Scotland squad, has witnessed more than a few fractious dressing-room scenes. Results help, of course, but the goalkeeper praises Clarke for restoring unity. “Togetherness has been important,” Gordon says. “The squad hasn’t changed much. Everyone knows their job. The manager said from the start he wanted to create a club atmosphere but you have to work extremely hard to get that. Everybody has bought into it, everybody really enjoys being away. That’s huge for any international team because it’s not nearly as easy as you would think with people coming from different clubs or different areas of the country. This is one of the best atmospheres I have known.” Gordon’s rejuvenation is in tandem with his national team’s. Out of favour and contract at Celtic at the end of the 2019-20 season, he returned to his first club, Hearts, then consigned to Scotland’s second tier. Gordon’s form has been outstanding – regarded by many as the finest of his career – and that rendered a Scotland recall straightforward after David Marshall fell out of favour at Derby. National service has always been of huge importance to Gordon. “People maybe thought Scotland was finished for me but I still had confidence that if I got myself back playing, I would have an opportunity. Any time I wasn’t in the national team I missed it. I missed the challenges it presents. You are a bunch of guys playing for the whole country, which is a big incentive.” Earlier, Gordon had been a £9m Sunderland purchase by Roy Keane. A serious knee problem – he played one game between early 2011 and being deemed worthy of a gamble by Celtic in 2014 – threatened to curtail his career. Gordon denies that his Celtic exit and the club’s subsequent struggles in the goalkeeping department have intensified his desire. “It was a good thing to get away, to go and play,” he says. “You never know what would have happened if I had stayed, whether I would have played or someone else would have come in and played ahead of me. There are so many unknowns. I don’t bother myself thinking about that. “I had that motivation at Celtic. I just wasn’t playing. That wasn’t my choice, there wasn’t much I could do about it beyond working as hard as I could. I did everything to make sure my fitness was as good as possible so that whenever I got an opportunity I could prove to people I could still play at the top level.” Gordon admits he is likely to fall short of Jim Leighton’s record 91 caps for a Scottish goalkeeper. “I should vote for that World Cup every two years – that would help,” he says with a smile. “Whatever the number is that I end up with will be a great achievement. I’m already immensely proud of the caps I have.” Qatar would be the high point of a career which has returned 13 major domestic honours. “I don’t think you can get much better than that as a Scottish player,” he says. “That would be the ultimate. I would trade a few of the medals for that.” Would it also be a fitting farewell to Scotland? “It would be a nice way to bow out but I’d like to keep playing for as long as I possibly can at the best level I possibly can. I wouldn’t say that would necessarily be the end.” Nothing in Gordon’s performance level or demeanour suggests otherwise.Pop music fans have never had it so good. After the pandemic led to a dearth of new releases, global superstars such as Adele, Ed Sheeran, Elton John, Abba and Coldplay are among the dozens of major artists that have clamoured to release new albums in the run-up to Christmas. While the deluge of A-list records is a welcome boost for retail, it’s not without its pitfalls. Smaller artists are warning they risk being drowned out, and supply problems make it more difficult than ever to get vinyl records pressed. “It’s really hard to recall a quarter four which was as jam-packed as this,” said Martin Talbot, the chief executive of the Official Charts Company. “It’s certainly a long, long time since we’ve had albums with the pulling power of Ed Sheeran, Adele, Coldplay, Abba, Elton John competing in the Official Albums Chart.” And it has created friction between the stars too, as it has forced them to compete for limited factory space to have lucrative vinyl printed. “There’s like three vinyl factories in the world,” Ed Sheeran recently told Australian radio hosts Kyle and Jackie O. “So you have to do it like really upfront – and Adele had basically booked out all the vinyl factories, so we had to get a slot and get our album in there. It was like me, Coldplay, Adele, Taylor, Abba, Elton – all of us were trying to get our vinyls printed at the same time.” Other big releases include Bruno Mars, Lana Del Rey and Lil Nas X – plus a slew of “heritage acts” such as Rod Stewart, Neil Young and Sting. “The final six to eight weeks of the year are always incredibly competitive,” Talbot said. “But in recent years the odd one or two big hitters have found themselves surrounded by Christmas albums – this year it seems like we will have a genuinely packed lineup of the biggest hitters on the planet.” Though it is difficult to ascertain why everything is being released at the same time, Talbot believes “Covid has certainly had an impact”. The pandemic has encouraged artists to delay their releases, as well as give them time – away from promos and touring – to create new material. Gennaro Castaldo, from record labels association the BPI, said there was “something extra special” about “icons of popular culture” releasing records around the same time. “The stars don’t align in such a way that often.” However, some music lovers are gloomy about these blockbuster releases – many of them from stars who have been around for decades – clogging up Spotify playlists and record store shelves. “It’s interesting to look at exactly why we’re talking about new records by Elton John and Abba in 2021,” said John Doran, editor of the Quietus. “It must be utterly dumbfounding to be confronted by stuff like this as a 17-year-old. The equivalent for me would have been opening the NME in 1988 only to read about the latest LP by Fred Astaire or Shirley Temple, while acid house was just kicking off and Public Enemy, Sonic Youth and the Pixies were releasing great records.” But Doran said it was unfair to criticise artists like Adele for their popularity. “Where Adele (via her label Columbia) needs to be heavily criticised is not in the hogging of headlines but in the overproduction of vinyl on her behalf. Vinyl as a medium was kept alive in the UK primarily by the UK dance and the independent rock and metal underground when no one else cared.” Last week, Variety reported that more than 500,000 copies of Adele’s new LP 30 have been pressed to meet demand. With waiting times now anywhere up to a year long, the magazine said Adele had to finish her album early to ensure records would be available on the same day the release hits streaming services. For Doran, a reasonable solution was for major labels to invest some of the money they make back into opening a new vinyl pressing facility or strengthening existing plants. “The world’s biggest stars aren’t ‘stealing’ attention from the underground but by leaving artists, bands and DJs without the means to make records to sell to fans, in many cases they are stealing their sole means of keeping their heads above water,” he said.When I joined Ultravox I had a little happy-snap camera, the kind that everybody owned in those days. But I was fascinated by 35mm models, how you looked through the lens and the world was slightly different. So in 1980, I bought myself a Canon A-1. Back then, Ultravox had a thing about not having photographers around, so there were very few casual backstage shots. When I toured with Thin Lizzy in the late 70s and early 80s, they had photographer Chalkie Davies with them, documenting everything. Ultravox found all that a bit intrusive, so we started taking photographs of the backstage stuff ourselves. Because of our music and the graphics and imagery, the band were considered po-faced scientists. Nobody ever saw how geeky or stupid we got, or how bored we were between the shows. There’s that famous Charlie Watts quote about how his first 25 years in the Rolling Stones was “five years playing, 20 years hanging around”. I photographed our hanging around. I was – and am – simply a happy amateur, but you get better the more you do it and realise what works. I took this shot of Paula Yates on the plane to Austria to shoot the video for the song Vienna. The budget was £17,000, which was reasonably expensive back then, but nothing like the sort of silliness that came later with the advent of MTV. Because of our love of film noir, we insisted on shooting the Vienna promo on 16mm film. Digital video was just coming in, but it looked cheap and electronic, whereas with film we could replicate the grainy effect of old films and photos. We cropped the screen at the top and bottom to make it look cinematic. None of this had been done on pop videos before. It was a one-day shoot and we flew over in the morning. It was cheaper to rent a private plane than to fly the band, plus Paula, plus Anton Corbijn – it was one of the few times we had a photographer with us – and the film crew. All the bands knew Paula through Bob Geldof and her writing for Record Mirror. We all loved her dearly so had asked her along to write about the video shoot. But the thing with having someone like Paula travelling with you is that she was such a natural-born poser. She wouldn’t sit normally. She’d always sit with a hand draped over one shoulder or be doing something fabulous. All I really had to do was point the camera and press the button. The tricky part of getting this shot with the plane window behind her was getting her lit, because all the light was coming from one side. She should have been in shadow, a silhouette. I needed to expose the near side of her face with just enough light coming through the windows on the other side of what was a very small plane. All the photographers I admired used natural light, so I captured her just as the light didn’t quite burn her out. In those days, you couldn’t look at a digital screen on the back of your camera to see the results like you can today. You’d take a few shots, make adjustments, but there was a bit of guesswork. I’m not sure what book she’s reading. She had developed this coquettish manner, but she was incredibly intelligent. So she’s probably reading Kafka or something. She wrote for Record Mirror in a PG Wodehouse style: very observational with a brilliant, comedic turn of phrase. Warren Cann, our Canadian drummer, could fall asleep anywhere, and she wrote: “He’d obviously been bitten by a tsetse fly, because he was constantly curled up in a corner.” I think she was completely oblivious to the fact that I was taking the photo. This is just how she was. I took some more shots of her in a graveyard where we were shooting the video. She was wrapped up in this furry muff and looked like a Russian princess. She looked infinitely better than any of us who were actually in the video. This shot has a haunting side, but maybe that’s just because she’s no longer with us. Also, the fact she’s in profile with the light behind her makes her look a bit heavenly. To me it looks like something you’d see in Vogue, but it was just a shot taken in a moment. I’m not even sure she ever saw it. • In a Picture Frame by Midge Ure is published on 18 November. Midge Ure’s CV Born Glasgow, 1953. Trained Happy amateur. Influences Oscar Marzaroli, David Bailey, George Hurrell. High point “A session with Hollywood photographer George Hurrell, where I was the subject.” Low point “Just about every session with tabloid photographers wanting you to do something cheesy.” Top tip “Always have your camera or phone charged – to grab the fleeting moment.”The former attorney general Geoffrey Cox has said he will submit to the judgment of the parliamentary watchdog over whether he breached a rule by working on his second job from the House of Commons, as he defended his right to advise the British Virgin Islands (BVI) authorities while a Tory MP. The MP for Torridge and West Devon has been under fire for appearing to conduct a public hearing as a lawyer while in parliament, and using a proxy vote while working in the BVI. In a statement, he said he had consulted the chief whip about voting in the Commons from abroad during lockdown and was “advised that it was appropriate”. He also said his work for the BVI authorities was “not to ‘defend’ a tax haven or, as has been inaccurately reported, to defend any wrongdoing but to assist the public inquiry in getting to the truth”. “No evidence of tax evasion or personal corruption has been adduced before the inquiry and if it had been, that person would have been required to seek their own representation,” he said. On the issue of appearing at a public hearing as a lawyer while in his parliamentary office, Cox did not take the opportunity to deny that this had taken place. His statement said: “As for the allegation that he breached the parliamentary code of conduct on one occasion, on 14 September 2021, by being in his office while participating in an online hearing in the public inquiry and voting in the House of Commons, he understands that the matter has been referred to the parliamentary commissioner and he will fully cooperate with her investigation. He does not believe that he breached the rules but will of course accept the judgment of the parliamentary commissioner or of the committee on the matter.” More generally, Cox said he had made “no secret of his professional activities” and regularly worked 70-hour weeks, always ensuring his casework for constituents was given primary importance. Cox released the statement after ministers distanced themselves from his activities, with Sajid Javid, the health secretary, saying MPs should not be using parliament for private jobs and ought to be devoting the vast majority of their time to their constituents. Javid defended the right of MPs to have second jobs but gave a clear answer that they should not be using Commons facilities to do that. He also expressed regret about having supported the government’s motion to change the standards system last week. The government has been in crisis for a week over allegations of financial sleaze after a failed attempt by No 10 to overhaul the rules around investigations into MPs, the resignation of the Tory MP Owen Paterson after he was found to have broken lobbying rules, and the latest furore over Cox. Additionally, the former Conservative leader Iain Duncan Smith is facing questions over his £25,000-a-year second job advising a multimillion-pound hand sanitiser company after he chaired a government taskforce that recommended new rules benefiting the firm. After Boris Johnson’s failed attempt to overhaul the standards rules, Andrew Bowie, a Conservative party vice-chair with portfolios for youth and the union, handed in his resignation, though he has agreed to stay in the role until a replacement is found. With Paterson having quit, the pressure is now on Cox, who is under scrutiny over his lucrative legal work on top of his job as an MP. Footage of Cox reportedly at a hearing in September showed a background similar to those of MPs’ offices. After it surfaced, Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, urged the standards commissioner to investigate, and called it “a slap in the face and an insult to British taxpayers”. Javid said he would not get into the specific case of Cox, and praised him as having been a “fantastic cabinet minister”, but said it was important that MPs “continue to spend the vast majority of their time on their parliamentary affairs and their constituency affairs”. Cox has been paid about £1m over the course of a year for legal work, including that for the BVI authorities advising on a public inquiry into corruption allegations brought by the UK Foreign Office. Javid defended the principle of second jobs but said MPs should be “completely transparent and open”. When asked by Sky News whether MPs should use their parliamentary offices for private work, he said: “No.” He added: “Of course you shouldn’t be using, whether it’s your parliamentary office … parliamentary stationery or anything that’s funded or supported by the taxpayer, of course that should not be used. I think the rules are clear and of course all MPs would be expected to observe that at all times. “I’m not the judge of this, nor should I be – it should independently judged by the parliamentary standards commissioner, so if there are particular cases then I will trust the commissioner to look at that and come to the right decision.” Cox, 61, declared his extra earnings as a barrister. But he faced criticism for the many hours spent on work unrelated to the Commons and the £150,000 he was paid for giving legal advice to the BVI. On Monday the foreign secretary, Dominic Raab, said Cox’s work overseas was “a legitimate thing to do as long as it’s properly declared” and it was quite important to have “some knowledge of what’s going on” in the BVI.Here is the latest in the always-interesting series of documentaries from pitchside-reporting maestro Gabriel Clarke, following excellent profiles of Bobby Robson and Jack Charlton: the subject is Arsenal’s long-serving manager whose initial burst of success was soured by years of fan rancour before he decided to step down in 2018 after 22 years in the job. Completing this loose trilogy about outstanding managerial careers, this time Clarke shares directing duties with French TV commentator Christian Jeanpierre – but while Wenger proves a genial and sage-like interviewee, it’s fair to say that he still remains almost as much a mystery as before. Wenger isn’t a sphinx, exactly: he has plenty to say and says it with considerable emotional articulacy. But the material essentially engages with his player management, stressing what he doesn’t do, rather than what he does – and in that sense there’s not a huge amount here indicating what he actually brought to the game, in England or elsewhere. His former players, from Dennis Bergkamp to Patrick Vieira, show him a fierce loyalty, and we hear a lot about Wenger’s confidence-instilling fatherliness and connoisseurial appreciation for a balanced team, but there’s little actual detail on what “Wengerball” is, or was, and how he achieved it. Still, the roll-call of appreciators is impressive, including erstwhile antagonist Alex Ferguson, and the film’s focus on Arsenal’s unbeaten 2003-04 season is a natural reflex. Wenger submits with good grace to the film’s artsier sequences, which involve him walking and jogging in extended Steadicam, striding ruminatively across football pitches under the lowering eye of a soaring overhead God shot, and the like. Wenger touches on the difficulties of his later years with Arsenal, admitting he stayed in the job too long, and there’s some interesting material on the nasty media hatchet job that was aimed at him early on in his Arsenal career. But unlike Robson or Charlton, he’s just a bit too guarded to give away too much of himself, for better or worse. • Arsène Wenger: Invincible is released on 11 November in cinemas.Katharine Hayhoe has wrestled with her climate footprint. The climate scientist, who is now chief scientist for the nonprofit The Nature Conservancy, was shocked when she realized how much of her personal emissions came from work travel. But are these more justifiable because her work is educating people about the climate crisis? There has long been a debate about how much individual actions matter when it comes to climate. The oil industry’s promotion of the concept of the carbon footprint has led some to believe that the whole idea is a huge distraction technique to divert attention from corporations driving the crisis. But as Greta Thunberg demonstrates, individuals can have a big impact, just not always in ways that can be measured. Part of the challenge is that we have no good way to conceptualize our impact as individuals. I came up with the concept of a “climate shadow” to try to help visualize how the sum of our life choices influences the climate emergency. Your shadow includes the car you drive and what you eat, but it’s also about where you work, how you engage in the workplace, where you invest your money and how much you talk about climate. I spoke with Hayhoe about the limitations of the carbon footprint, the impact we can have as employees and community members, and why it may be more profound than we think. The interview has been edited for clarity and length. There’s an ongoing debate about individual responsibility versus corporate responsibility when it comes to carbon emissions and the climate crisis. A lot of people feel as if there’s nothing they can do to make a difference – we’re just individuals. And yet, corporations are made up of individuals. Absolutely. I mean, look [at the climate strikes] at Amazon, that really shows the power of individual people using their voices. When you look at how change has happened before with corporations, with governments, with cities, it’s because one or two or three or four people began by using their voice, and typically they were not the people at the top. It reminds me of a story in my book about a guy who works for a big hospital in New York. He was horrified to find out that their pension fund was invested in fossil fuels when fossil fuel air pollution is responsible for almost 9m premature deaths a year. He said: “Isn’t our Hippocratic oath to do no harm?” So he talked to the pension fund about it and they said: “well, we don’t care.” Then he started a petition. He started going around the hospital talking to the doctors, the nurses, and the other people who work there, saying, “would you be interested in signing this petition?” I don’t even know if he has succeeded yet, he hadn’t when I wrote the book, but that’s what he’s doing. That’s his attempt to use his voice. Everybody has a voice, and wherever you work, you have the ability to use your voice. One of the reasons I created the climate shadow was my frustration with the carbon footprint and how it devalues actions that can’t be measured, such as voting or activism. Can you speak a little bit about the tension between higher impact actions that can’t be measured and actions that have less impact but can be measured? I think that climate shadow is such a powerful concept. Ten years ago I stepped on the carbon scale, so to speak, to measure my carbon footprint. I was genuinely shocked to find out that the biggest part of it was my travel. I was going to a lot of scientific meetings and going places to talk to people about climate change. I decided that I was going to transition most of my talks to virtual talks and when I traveled, I was going to bundle my talks. One of my last bundled trips was to Alaska, where I visited three different cities and did 28 events with an average of 75 people per event. So I spoke to about 2,000 people and I calculated that if eight individual people reduced their individual carbon footprint by 10% as a result of listening to me talk – and a 10% reduction is very easy to achieve – then that was the carbon of my flight. Now let’s extrapolate this. Say that I put solar panels on my house. That’s great. But what if my place of work transitions to clean energy? You can calculate the difference, we’re talking orders of magnitude. But my place of work is only going to transition to solar energy if someone starts the conversation. Your recent book, Saving Us, is focused on hope and fighting hopelessness. And it does seem that if we want to tackle that hopelessness, the most important thing we can do is empower people within their corporate and political groups. Can you speak to that? Somehow we see corporations as not being made up of people, but they are made up of people. Every big organization is made up of people. In some corporations, the leadership is aware of the problem but they’re not sure what to do. In some cases, they would make a change, but people just haven’t called for it. We often have the image of corporations being completely immovable, but they’re made up of people who want to do the right thing. Even in the fossil fuel industry, there are people at those corporations who want to do the right thing. Often people feel that they’re just trying to hold on to their jobs and survive. How do we navigate that so people aren’t like: ‘Oh great, now I have to also be a climate warrior on top of just trying to not get fired’? We think of climate change as a separate issue on our priority list, but the only reason you care about climate change is because of what’s already at the top of your list – keeping your job, taking care of your family, worrying about your health, worrying about your kids, worrying about the place where you live – whatever it is that you’re already worrying about. When you are taking action for climate, it’s not for climate change, it’s for you. It’s for your family, it’s for everything you love, everyone you love, every place that you love – that’s why you’re doing it. There’s a significant mind shift there, so that we don’t see it as an extra “to do” on our list.A £3bn legal action against Google over claims it secretly tracked the internet activity of millions of iPhone users has been blocked by the UK supreme court. Legal experts said the decision meant the “floodgates” remained closed to class actions on data privacy in England and Wales, although the ruling noted digital technology’s ability to cause “mass harm” to people. Richard Lloyd, a former director of the consumer group Which?, wanted to bring a US-style class action lawsuit against the search engine on behalf of about 4.4 million people in England and Wales. He claimed Google illegally misused the data of millions of iPhone users by tracking and collating their internet usage on their handsets’ Safari browser in 2011 and 2012, even when users were assured they would be opted out of such tracking by default. Lloyd and the campaign group Google You Owe Us hoped to sue the US-based company for damages equivalent to £750 per person for alleged breaches of the Data Protection Act (DPA). The high court initially ruled that Lloyd could not serve the claim on Google outside the jurisdiction of England and Wales in October 2018 – because Lloyd needed permission to serve it in the US state of Delaware where Google is incorporated – but that decision was overturned by the court of appeal in October 2019. However, on Wednesday a panel of five supreme court justices allowed an appeal by Google against that decision. Giving the lead ruling, Lord Leggatt said Lloyd’s intention that affected iPhone users could be awarded a uniform sum, without having to prove financial loss or mental distress, was “unsustainable”. Leggatt said the section of the DPA on which the claim was based referred to material damage and mental distress caused by unlawful processing of data – and not the unlawful processing itself. A catch-all lawsuit that did not detail each individual’s suffering of material damage or mental distress was therefore unsustainable. The judge said: “What gives the appearance of substance to the claim is the allegation that Google secretly tracked the internet activity of millions of Apple iPhone users for several months and used the data obtained for commercial purposes. But on analysis the claimant is seeking to recover damages without attempting to prove that this allegation is true in the case of any individual for whom damages are claimed. “Without proof of some unlawful processing of an individual’s personal data beyond the bare minimum required to bring them within the definition of the represented class, a claim on behalf of that individual has no prospect of meeting the threshold for an award of damages.” Google’s lawyers argued at a hearing in April that the landmark appeal court ruling could “open the floodgates” to vast claims brought on behalf of millions of people against companies responsible for handling people’s data. Emily Cox, the head of disputes at Stewarts law firm, said the ruling was a relief for big tech firms that handle the data of millions of people in England and Wales on a daily basis. “This decision ensures the floodgates remain firmly closed to data privacy class actions in England and Wales, much to the relief of big tech, but it also leaves consumers without a viable route to compensation for breaches of their privacy rights by large corporations and so limits access to justice.” Jonathan McDonald, a partner at the law firm Charles Russell Speechlys, said: “Had Google lost the appeal, this could have kicked open the floodgates for mass litigations in the technology sector.” Google You Owe Us and Lloyd claimed Google bypassed privacy settings on Apple iPhone handsets between August 2011 and February 2012 and used the data gathered to divide people into categories for advertisers. They said “browser-generated information” collected by Google included racial or ethnic origin, physical and mental health, political affiliations or opinions, sexual interests and social class. Google’s lawyers said there was no suggestion the so-called Safari workaround had resulted in any information being disclosed to third parties. Lloyd said: “We are bitterly disappointed that the supreme court has failed to do enough to protect the public from Google and other big tech firms who break the law.” A Google spokesperson said: “This claim was related to events that took place a decade ago and that we addressed at the time. People want to know that they are safe and secure online, which is why for years we’ve focused on building products and infrastructure that respect and protect people’s privacy.” Meanwhile, a top EU court on Wednesday rejected Google’s appeal against a €2.4bn (£2.1bn) fine from regulators who found the tech giant had abused its massive online reach by giving its own shopping recommendations an illegal advantage in its search results. The European Commission, the EU’s executive arm, punished Google in 2017 for unfairly favouring its own shopping service over competitors. The European court of justice’s general court ruled it “largely dismisses” Google’s appeal against that antitrust penalty and upheld the fine.The Jeff Bezos-backed electric carmaker Rivian is aiming for a market value of $65bn (£48bn) when shares start trading in New York on Wednesday, in one of the biggest-ever stock market floats. Rivian announced late on Tuesday that its shares would start trading at $78 each, significantly above the $52 a share lower end of the range it had first targeted. It sold 153m shares, more than the 135m it aimed for initially. The increased offer price means Rivian will raise $11.9bn, putting it among the top 10 initial public offerings of all time in the US, according to data from Dealogic. More than 20 investment banks are involved in running the sale, led by Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs and JP Morgan. The raised price reflects the huge demand for shares in electric carmakers on the day that a series of carmakers and countries pledged to move away from fossil fuels by 2040 or earlier at the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow. The surge in interest has propelled Tesla, the electric car pioneer, into the ranks of the world’s trillion-dollar public companies. A $65bn valuation would put Rivian roughly equal with BMW, the German carmaker that delivered 2.3m cars in 2020. Unlike BMW or Tesla, Rivian is yet to record meaningful revenues, let alone profits. It revealed losses over 2019 and 2020 of $1.4bn plus borrowing of $2.5bn when it filed for the offering in October. However, Rivian has the advantage of backing from Amazon, founded by Jeff Bezos, the world’s second-richest person after the Tesla boss, Elon Musk. Bezos rode in one of Rivian’s prototype electric SUVs to the launchpad of his spacecraft in July, in effect providing advertising to the carmaker. Amazon owns 22% of Rivian’s shares and has committed to buying 100,000 electric delivery vehicles from the startup by 2025. Rivian can sell delivery vans only to Amazon for four years. Rivian’s debut product, the R1, will be available in pickup or SUV varieties, competing with Tesla’s Model X and electric SUVs from older manufacturers such as Ford and Audi as well as newer entrants including the US’s Fisker and Canoo or China’s NIO. Rivian will manufacture the R1 and commercial vans at a factory in Normal, Illinois. However, Irvine in California is home to the car’s engineering and design, including crucial work on propulsion and battery technology. The company could make revenues of between $20bn and $25bn by 2025 if it achieves its aim of 350,000 vehicles produced annually at that plant, according to Chris McNally, an automotive analyst at Evercore ISI investment bank.The first time I visited the Courtauld Gallery, I managed to spill paint on the floor in front of Claude Monet’s 1873 Autumn Effect at Argenteuil. Almost 100 years after Monet painted this placid but flaring river scene, the young Searle was perpetrating his own autumn effect on the gallery floor. In the early 1970s, the Courtauld was housed on the top floor of a building on Bloomsbury’s Woburn Square, part of the University of London, and art students were still given dispensation to copy the works, although thankfully few were as messy as me. Fifty years later, on the top floor of the newly remodelled and renovated Courtauld Gallery at Somerset House, which reopens to the public on 19 November after a two-year closure, I’m in front of that Monet again. Returning to artworks over a long period of time is a good way of checking in on yourself. The gallery now has new floors, and no one drags easels and paints into the rooms now. The space is much more public, with ticketing desks, cafe and shop, better access and more open displays than two years, let alone half a century, ago. Until now the Courtauld had always felt a bit cramped, underlit and old-fashioned – despite the quality of both its permanent collection and its temporary exhibitions. Some, doubtless, will miss the studious dimness of the lighting, the paintings hung on chains, the lights attached to the picture frames. The ghosts of the old Royal Academy, which was housed in these same rooms in the latter part of the 18th and early 19th centuries, still somehow inhabited these spaces, and the vertiginous spiral staircase, which Thomas Rowlandson caricatured in a bawdy 1811 slapstick scene of crowds climbing, and tumbling, to see the Academy’s annual Summer Exhibition, never felt far away. “This crude and sexist satire targeted both the unruly visitors and the lofty pretentions of the Royal Academy … this tension between the the ideal and the real visitor was a constant feature of the Academy’s time at Somerset House,” reads an illustrated wall-panel. Not so now perhaps. Who is the Courtauld’s ideal visitor? Curiosity seems to be the key. Textile magnate, collector and philanthropist Samuel Courtauld, who founded both the gallery and the Courtauld Institute in 1932, believed that art should be accessible. One gallery takes us through British drawings and watercolours, and we go from a mid 17th-century drawing of heralds in ceremonial garb to a Thomas Gainsborough landscape with sheep and cattle, and from Somerset House seen from a windy Thames in 1788, the waves bracing through the arch directly on the river (before the Embankment was built), to a highly detailed watercolour study of a chaffinch’s nest. Finally, a glowering self-portrait by the Vorticist Wyndham Lewis stares back across the room, as if he’d like to break things. Moving through the galleries – from early Renaissance to late, from Gothic ivories to Islamic metalwork to the Bloomsbury Group, we might all get a bit overheated. In the room devoted to the Northern Renaissance a slightly mad allegorical 1550 portrait of English naval officer John Luttrell, naked and up to his waist in a naval battle with the French, by Flemish painter Hans Eworth, hangs over a fireplace. Somehow this does not detract from Pieter Bruegel the Elder’s almost contemporaneous Christ and the Woman Taken in Adultery, whose stilled action takes place in gradations of grey, or Lucas Cranach the Elder’s 1526 Adam and Eve, one of the best of about 50 versions of the subject that Cranach and his workshop churned out. The fall of man was clearly a nice earner. The Courtauld is still keen to keep its own past, as well as the history of the paintings, sculptures, drawings and other objects, alive. Art history, after all, is as much about not forgetting, and the accumulation of histories and stories in their widest sense, as it is about interpretation. Personal and cultural memory are key. If we are going to remember that Goya’s subject, in his 1798 portrait of Francisco de Saavedra, is a progressive man of the Enlightenment, then we also deserve to learn that the two young men nearby, in Tilly Kettle’s portrait of Charles and John Sealy, worked for the East India Company, “which relied on forced labour and carried enslaved people from Africa to Asia”. The Courtauld’s collections come from multiple sources. From the collector Arthur Lee (once first Lord of the Admiralty), Thomas Gambier Parry (whose own fortune was also derived from the East India Company), and from Austrian Count Antoine Seilern, who donated his Bruegels’ and his Rubens and much besides, including the huge triptych by his fellow Austrian Oskar Kokoschka, which Seilern commissioned, and which decorated a ceiling in the Count’s home. At the Courtauld, Kokoschka’s exhausting painting is hung opposite photographs by Lee Miller of the artist at work, performing for the camera. Kokoschka’s Myth of Prometheus is itself a wearying expressionist self-parody. It makes Cecily Brown’s new commissioned work at the top of the stairwell look almost delicate, with its echoes of works from the collection, a dripping palette, and jumble of painterly riffs, faces and male figures treading through the mix. I can’t take her painting very seriously, and I’d swap all that paint for the new group of donations made by Linda Karshan. Henri Michaux’s juddering mescaline drawings, three Philip Guston works on paper (which take us from abstract intimations of heads to the Ku Klux Klan), a faint but quivering Cy Twombly, like a whispered secret (from Twombly’s best, late 1950s period), and the sudden surprise of a small oil on card work by Joseph Beuys, with its arrangement of little triangles, that inexplicably stopped me dead. It’s all too much, but not so much that one is left numbed. The scale of the galleries, the historical sweep and variety of the collection, the surprises at every turn keep you alert and keep you looking, whether at a great, trowelled-on Cézanne, an angel’s wing as gaudy as a tropical bird, the hall of mirrors and reflections in the virtual world of Manet’s Bar at the Folies-Bergère, or the self-absorbed loiterers and anglers in Seurat’s studies of river and light and frittered time. Cézanne’s card players are still intent on their game. Van Gogh with his bandaged ear and Seurat’s performer at her mirror with her powder puff – one thing leads to another then another. Samuel Courtauld’s great collection of impressionist paintings have never looked so good in the open, light-filled spaces on the Courtauld’s top floor. What’s not to love here? I cannot love Gauguin but I’m not asked to. Even those things I don’t much care for are welcome to their place, though I’m happier to walk by and leave them to it. The collection has never felt so visible, so refreshed. The stars in Rubens’ 1635 nocturnal landscape might be thousands of light years away, but they’re right there on the surface, peppering the foliage on the trees, a cursory dusting on the night. The twigs and branches in the foreground of Sandro Botticelli’s 1490s holy trinity are growing translucent, sinking into the earth. Everything is in the present and everything filled with time. Magnificent. The Courtauld Gallery, London, reopens on 19 November.We’re keen to hear what would make young people in the UK interested in becoming an MP, and whether there is anything they would like to see change before they would consider a career as an elected representative in parliament. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.“Remember my face,” Sii-am Hamilton told the crowd gathered on Finnieston Street near the high fencing that surrounds the Cop26 summit on Tuesday morning. “Remember because it’s not if, it’s when you will go missing, if you are involved in land rights.” The rally for murdered and missing indigenous women, girls and two-spirit people heard a painful litany of lost loved ones from witnesses from Alaska to the Amazon, and the legacy of their absence for families and communities. “Say their names,” said Delee Nikal, a Wet’suwet’en activist. “Do not forgot our sisters who have been stolen.” Like her fellow speakers, she was explicit: “The femicide is directly linked to the ecocide … there needs to be more awareness that these extractive industries, all that is affecting our climate and destroying our territories, is intertwined with violence against our women and girls.” In Canada, Indigenous women and girls are targeted for violence more than any other group, and are 12 times more likely to go missing or be killed. In the US, the justice department found that Native American women faced murder rates more than 10 times the national average. But this abuse does not happen free of context: in 2019, Canada’s national inquiry into missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls accepted the link between “boomtown” and “man camp” environments that emerged around resource extraction projects and violence against Indigenous women and girls, as well as increased sex industry activities in those areas. And still this has yet to translate into genuine recognition by the leaders at the UN summit or indeed the wider environmental movement, Hamilton, from British Columbia, said after the rally. “At larger international events like this one and even at home, I don’t think that people understand just how dangerous the lives of Indigenous women have gotten. Our conversations shift towards catchy phrases like ‘net zero’ or ‘1.5’, which don’t represent just how violent the experience of growing up in an extractive world has become.” The fear Hamilton expressed at the rally was, she said, “really natural”. Over the past year she has been involved in direct activism at Fairy Creek, protesting against the logging of old-growth forest in southern Vancouver Island. “And this year alone I’ve watched so much violence, towards specifically young Indigenous women and girls, at the hands of the police. I’ve watched so many people have their bones broken, their hair ripped out, their eyes gouged.” She said articulating and sharing these struggles with women from different countries and communities could be at once reassuring and devastating. “It makes you feel less isolated when you’re meeting so many other people who are experiencing similar forms of violence. No matter what kind of extractive industry is attacking a community, it has same rippling effect on women.” She added: “It makes you feel less lonely, but at the same time it creates this different type of rage that I really can’t describe – knowing that there are so many women missing, it’s not just in Canada, and it’s not just in Mexico, it’s all over the world. Wherever you find people that are struggling for the land, you will find missing women.”Shares in ITV soared on Wednesday after the broadcaster said it was on track to enjoy the best year for advertising revenues in its 66-year history, as businesses pour money into marketing to drive a post-pandemic recovery. Investors sent shares in ITV – which said it was now performing more strongly than in 2019 before the pandemic – up more than 13%, making the broadcaster the strongest performing stock among the FTSE 100. The UK’s biggest free-to-air commercial broadcaster said total advertising revenue for the first nine months surged 30% year on year to £1.3bn. The company expects total ad revenues for the year, including the growing income from ads on its streaming service, ITV Hub, to be up by 24% compared with 2020 to hit an all-time high. The period in the run-up to Christmas is expected to be even better, with record amounts forecast to be spent on advertising. ITV said that in the final three months of the year – when it usually makes about 30% of its annual ad income – revenues will be up as much as 13% year on year. “2021 looks set to have the highest revenue in ITV’s history,” said Carolyn McCall, the chief executive of ITV. “By any standards ITV has had an outstanding nine months.” Total revenues including ITV Studios, which makes and sells shows such as Coronation Street, Line of Duty and Come Dine With Me, rose 28% year on year to £2.38bn in the first nine months of 2020. This is 8% higher than in 2019. ITV Studios, which grew revenues by 32% to £1.2bn in the first nine months, has created hits for its channels this year including Love Island, The Real Manhunt: The Night Stalker and Vera. It has also produced the crime drama Vigil for the BBC, Physical for Apple TV+ and season two of Snowpiercer for Netflix. “Revenue from each business is up both on last year and 2019,” said McCall, who said content spend would hit £1.16bn next year thanks to programming including football’s World Cup and investment in dramas. The broadcaster said the share of total TV viewing taken by its main ITV channel increased in the first nine months. However, total viewing including across its digital channel portfolio fell 5% year on year. McCall said ITV Hub was becoming an “increasingly scaled digital business” with monthly active users up a fifth year on year in the first nine months to 9.6 million, and online viewing climbing 39% year on year to 494m hours. As a result video-on-demand (VOD) advertising grew 54% year on year across the period. “ITV is witnessing a strong year and it’s clear that a mix of live linear and VOD-based advertising strategies are delivering positive returns,” said Simon Willis, the chief investment officer at GroupM, the media division of the advertising and marketing service group WPP. “Advertisers will welcome these results as ITV’s continued transformation will enable them to harness more opportunities across its services and enable them to reach consumers more effectively.”MPs and music industry bodies have criticised the pay of Sir Lucian Grainge, chairman and CEO of Universal Music Group (UMG), who is set to earn more in 2021 than all songwriters did combined from streams and sales of their music in the UK in 2019. Grainge’s pay this year is buoyed by one-off cash bonuses that total an estimated £123m, following UMG’s successful stock market flotation in September, and the sale of an additional 10% stake of UMG to Chinese company Tencent. They could push his total earnings for 2021 over £150m, the figure that the Intellectual Property Office, a UK government body, calculated, using average royalty rates, that composers and lyricists earned in 2019 from streaming, downloads and sales in the UK. Conservative MP Esther McVey said: “It’s shocking that record label owners are earning more out of artists’ works than the artists themselves … We’ve got to put this right, to fix streaming so that it pays more like radio and get back to the notion of fair day’s pay for a fair day’s work.” She voiced support for a change in copyright law around music streaming, that would bring royalty payments more in line with how payments are made for radio plays. It would change the current system, where streaming royalties are set through agreements between streaming companies and record labels. As well as revenue from touring and merchandise, songwriters and performers do have other potential revenue streams besides streaming royalties, such as the rights they earn from their music being performed on radio or in public, or licensed for use elsewhere. But these revenues tend to skew towards the most successful artists, and many musicians have complained that the shift towards streaming and away from physical sales has harmed their income. Labour MP Jo Stevens, shadow secretary of state for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS), said: “When music lovers stream their favourite tracks, they expect those who made the music to be fairly paid. But the reality is artists get a pitiful amount while streaming sites and record companies cash in.” She also called for a change in legislation. A cross-party group of MPs are bringing a bill to be considered in parliament on 3 December, entitled Copyright (Rights and Remuneration of Musicians, Etc), that will put forward the suggested legislative changes. Last month, 44 Conservative MPs led by McVey signed a letter calling for the changes, arguing: “These huge and often foreign-owned multinational corporations have done astronomically well this past year compared to artists.” In April, a group of musicians including Paul McCartney and Kate Bush gave their support for the change in legislation. The Musicians’ Union and songwriter body the Ivors Academy also voiced criticism of Grainge’s pay. Crispin Hunt, chair of the Ivors Academy, said: “This is evidence of a business which is completely out of control. For songwriters who are struggling to make a living, there’s only one word for it – obscene.” In a quarterly earnings announcement last month, UMG revenues grew year on year by 17.4%. Investors reacted with confidence to the company’s flotation on Amsterdam’s Euronext stock exchange in September: its shares surged to €25.10 from a €18.50 reference price on the first day of trading, and are currently priced at €26.98. Speaking to the company’s investors on the earnings call, Grainge – who has not commented on the criticism of his pay – predicted “unprecedented opportunity for further growth. Given that fans now have access to essentially all of the world’s music in the palm of their hands, and that consumer demand for music across cultures, eras, languages, and genres is at historic highs, I remain unwavering in my confidence that the path we’re on will lead us on to greater heights.” He acknowledged the difficulties around streaming for artists: “When every single day, approximately 60,000 tracks are uploaded to Spotify alone, the reality is it’s harder than ever for artists to cut through all of the noise to find and expand their audience. That is exactly why we place the utmost priority on maximising opportunities for artists to bring their music to the world and to connect with fans in increasingly rich ways.”Priti Patel, the UK home secretary, has given support to a police investigation of protests outside the London School of Economics on Tuesday night that led to the Israeli ambassador being led away at speed with heavy police protection after addressing a meeting with students. A large group of protesters gathered outside the building at which Tzipi Hotovely spoke. Video from the scene showed security guards rushing Hotovely, who was clutching a bouquet of flowers, into a vehicle, while others tried to fend off a group of jeering and booing activists, who chanted, “Shame on you!” At least one protester tried to rush towards her. Patel tweeted that she was “disgusted” by the treatment of the Israeli ambassador, and that antisemitism had no place in Britain, adding that she would continue to do everything possible “to keep the Jewish community safe from intimidation, harassment and abuse”. She said she had been in touch with the ambassador and that the police had her full support in investigating the matter. Hotovely said afterwards: “We will not give in to thuggery and violence. The state of Israel will send its representatives to every stage.” Sharing the video, the education secretary, Nadhim Zahawi, said it was “deeply disturbing”, adding that he was “so sorry” to Hotovely. The Middle East minister, James Cleverly, said: “We value open debate and peaceful protest. The aggressive and threatening behaviour directed at Israeli ambassador Hotovely last night was unacceptable.” All sides accept that Hotovely was able to make her case to a room full of students for 90 minutes, and there is video of her answering questions in an orderly way. The protests outside specifically targeted Hotovely, saying she had “advocated for settler colonialism, engaged in Islamophobic rhetoric and has perpetuated anti-Palestinian racism”. Israel’s diplomatic practice allows for a small number of ambassadors not to hail from the professional diplomatic corps, and she is a former close political ally of the previous Israeli prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu, previously acting as his deputy foreign minister. There had been speculation that the newly elected coalition government might seek to replace her as UK ambassador, but instead she was given a firm pledge of support. On Thursday, the LSE debating society was due to host Husam Zomlot, the head of the Palestinian mission to the UK, but he cancelled in the wake of the Hotovely incident, the debating society said. “We received a phone call from the Palestinian mission where the ambassador asked us to reschedule since he ‘wishes to return to his alma matter [The LSE] when there is a healthier environment [for him to speak],” the society said in a statement. “We wish to emphasise that this was not a decision made by the LSE, LSE Students Union or the LSE SU Debate Society.” The Israeli embassy issued a statement saying of Hotovely’s event: “It was a successful, open and fruitful discussion that went ahead as planned. Outside the venue, there was a demonstration organised by Palestinian and Islamic societies across London universities. British police maintained order at the scene. “The violence we witnessed when the ambassador left the premises after the talk will not deter Israeli diplomats from engaging in meaningful dialogue with all parts of British society.” The LSE said: “Intimidation or threats of violence are completely unacceptable,” adding it would be reviewing its processes around such events. But it added: “The event, which attracted some protest outside, lasted approximately 90 minutes, with the ambassador speaking, taking questions from the audience and leaving on schedule. “Free speech and freedom of expression underpins everything we do at LSE. Students, staff and visitors are strongly encouraged to discuss and debate the most pressing issues around the world, but this must be in a mutually respectful manner. Intimidation or threats of violence are completely unacceptable.” • This article was amended on 10 November 2021. LSE’s debate society was due to host Husam Zomlot on Thursday 11 November, not “next week” as an earlier version said.A lost, never-before-heard psychedelic pop song featuring George Harrison and Ringo Starr has been unearthed in a Birmingham loft. Radhe Shaam was written and produced by broadcaster and journalist Suresh Joshi in 1968 for a documentary film, East Meets West. The recording took place at Trident Studios in London, where Harrison and Starr were recording Hey Jude with the Beatles and offered to contribute guitar and drum work to the song. Beginning with a pealing riff from Harrison and underpinned by a steady backbeat from Starr, the song features Hindi-language vocals by singer Aashish Khan, but gives plenty of space for both Beatles to add highly distinctive playing. Harrison delivers a long, searching and joyous guitar solo, while Starr adds his characteristic drum rolls and fills. Joshi rediscovered the recording at his home during lockdown. “It was lost and found many times … suddenly the lockdown was a blessing in disguise,” he told BBC Merseyside, where the song received its first play. Joshi said he met Harrison at the studio because, as an Indian, “I stood out like a sore thumb … we started talking about philosophy in general.” Harrison’s interest in Indian culture had been deepened by the Beatles’ trip to Rishikesh earlier in 1968, where, led by Harrison, they studied transcendental meditation. Harrison divulged to Joshi the friction that was already appearing in the band ahead of their 1969 split: “He said he was the underdog … that he had lost his confidence.” A charity release of Radhe Shaam is being planned. “Leave it to humanity – that’s what George wanted to do,” Joshi said.The draft text is the most important document that will emerge from the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. Unlike the last major climate conference, in Paris in 2015, what emerges here will not be a new treaty, but a series of decisions and resolutions that build on the Paris accord. Those Cop decisions have legal force in the context of the Paris agreement, so this is a powerful document. But it is also a document that can only be accepted by the consensus of all parties, therefore much of the language is cautious and some is ambiguous or open to interpretation, to the frustration of the countries who want to move faster. The document was drafted by the UK presidency, but does not represent the UK’s view – rather, it is a reflection of what the UK has been told by all the parties in Glasgow. Delegations here are now consulting with the leaders of their countries and other senior officials. The key aim for Cop26 is to “keep 1.5C alive”. There are a few notable victories in this text: a mention of phasing out coal and fossil fuel subsidies – the first time that has appeared in a Cop decision – and strong language on the scientific imperative to stay within 1.5C of global heating. But whether this text is enough to achieve that overarching goal is still up for debate. Katie White, the executive director of campaigns at WWF, said: “It’s essential that we recognise this as the start line, not the finish. If we are to come close to reaching our 1.5C target in time, ambition and momentum need to accelerate across the board.” Here are some of the key elements in the seven-page draft: I. Science 1. Recognizes the importance of the best available science for effective climate action and policymaking; 2. Welcomes the contribution of Working Group I to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Assessment Report and looks forward to the related forthcoming Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change reports; 3. Expresses alarm and concern that human activities have caused around 1.1 °C of warming to date, that impacts are already being felt in every region, and that the carbon budget consistent with achieving the Paris Agreement temperature goal is being rapidly depleted; 4. Stresses the urgency of increased ambition and action in relation to mitigation, adaptation and finance in this critical decade to address the gaps in the implementation of the long-term goals of the Paris Agreement; After the preamble, the first part of the text restates the scientific imperative to tackle the climate crisis. This section refers to the IPCC report that came out in August, the starkest warning yet that the 1.5C threshold is a vital planetary boundary, beyond which some of the impacts of extreme weather are likely to become irreversible, and that we are running out of time to cut emissions and stay within 1.5C. II. Adaptation 5. Notes with serious concern the finding from the contribution of Working Group I to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Sixth Assessment Report that every additional increment of global warming worsens climate and weather extremes and their impacts on people and nature; 6. Recognizes that adaptation needs will continue to increase with the severity of impacts in line with rising temperatures; 7. Emphasizes the urgency of scaling up action and support to enhance adaptive capacity and reduce vulnerability to climate change … 10. Reaffirms that, pursuant to Article 7, paragraph 13, of the Paris Agreement, continuous and enhanced international support shall be provided to developing country Parties including for developing and implementing their national adaptation plans, adaptation communications and other actions; It is also significant that adaptation comes so high up. This is a key concern of developing countries. Extreme weather has affected every continent in the past year, from wildfires in the US and Australia to floods in Europe and China. For developing countries, preparing for these impacts is near-impossible without additional finance from the rich world. Developing countries feel strongly that the importance of adaptation has been ignored up to now, so for the Cop “cover decision”, which summarises countries’ commitments, to address this as a priority is an important win for them. III. Adaptation finance 14. Notes with serious concern that the current provision of climate finance for adaptation is insufficient to respond to worsening climate change impacts in developing country Parties; 15. Urges developed country Parties to urgently scale up their provision of climate finance for adaptation so as to respond to the needs of developing country Parties as part of a global effort; 16. Recalls Article 9, paragraph 4, of the Paris Agreement and calls upon developed country Parties to at least double their collective provision of climate finance for adaptation to developing country Parties as a step towards achieving a balance between mitigation and adaptation in the provision of scaled-up financial resources; These are the key paragraphs for developing countries, which want the finance they receive for adaption to be at least doubled from current levels. They will want to ensure this commitment stays in future drafts, or is strengthened further. IV. Mitigation 22. Reaffirms the Paris Agreement temperature goal of holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C above pre-industrial levels; 23. Recognizes that the impacts of climate change will be much lower at the temperature increase of 1.5 °C compared to 2 °C and resolves to pursue efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C, recognizing that this requires meaningful and effective action by all Parties in this critical decade on the basis of the best available scientific knowledge, reflecting common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities in the light of different national circumstances; 24. Also recognizes that limiting global warming to 1.5 °C by 2100 requires rapid, deep and sustained reductions in global greenhouse gas emissions, including reducing global carbon dioxide emissions by 45 per cent by 2030 relative to the 2010 level and to net zero around mid-century; 25. Welcomes efforts by Parties to communicate new or updated nationally determined contributions and long-term low-emission development strategies that demonstrate progress towards achievement of the Paris Agreement temperature goal, and further welcomes commitments to reduce emissions in high-emitting sectors and achieve net zero emissions by or around mid-century; 26. Notes with serious concern the synthesis report on nationally determined contributions under the Paris Agreement, according to which the aggregate greenhouse gas emission level, taking into account implementation of all submitted nationally determined contributions is estimated to be 13.7 per cent above the 2010 level in 2030; Mitigation is UN-speak for cutting emissions, so these are the key paragraphs. It is significant that this part of the text explicitly recognises the IPCC advice that emissions cuts of 45% are needed by 2030 – to have that stated so clearly, rather than alluded to vaguely, is a big win for those who want to focus on 1.5C rather than the upper limit of 2C in the Paris agreement. The NDCs – nationally determined contributions, which are countries’ national plans and targets for cutting or curbing greenhouse gas emissions in the next decade – are at the heart of the Paris agreement and are the key focus if the world is to stay within 1.5C. We know that the NDCs presented at Cop26 are inadequate to stay within 1.5C – research by Climate Action Tracker on Tuesday found that current 2030 plans would take us to disastrous heating of 2.4C. The explicit reference to the UN synthesis report – basically, an assessment of countries’ national plans by the UN, similar to the Climate Action Tracker research – is also important, as is the explicit mention of how far countries are above the 2010 level of emissions. In among the legalese and the jargon, this adds up to a clear warning – we are not doing well enough on emissions cuts and must do better. 27. Emphasizes the urgent need for Parties to increase their efforts to collectively reduce emissions through accelerated action and implementation of domestic mitigation measures in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 2, of the Paris Agreement; 28. Decides to establish a work programme to urgently scale-up mitigation ambition and implementation during the critical decade of the 2020s; 29. Urges Parties that have not yet submitted new or updated nationally determined contributions in accordance with decision 1/CP.21, paragraphs 23-24 to do so as soon as possible in advance of the twenty-seventh session of the Conference of the Parties (November 2022); Setting up a work programme may not sound like much, but in United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change terms this is dynamite. Having a work programme means that this item is permanently on the agenda for Cops and cannot be ignored. So every time there is a Cop – which is every year – this gap between what countries are aiming for in their NDCs and the level of emissions cuts needed to stay within 1.5C and 2C will be addressed. This is a big step forward. Some will be disappointed that the language on bringing forward NDCs is only “urging” rather than mandating, but the work programme is a definite win. 30. Recalls Article 4, paragraphs 3 and 11, of the Paris Agreement, and urges Parties to revisit and strengthen the 2030 targets in their nationally determined contributions, as necessary to align with the Paris Agreement temperature goal by the end of 2022; 31. Requests the secretariat to produce an updated version of the synthesis report on nationally determined contributions under the Paris Agreement annually; 32. Decides to convene an annual high-level ministerial round table on pre-2030 ambition, beginning at CMA 4 (November 2022); 33. Urges Parties that have not yet done so to communicate, by CMA 4 (November 2022), long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies in accordance with Article 4, paragraph 19, of the Paris Agreement that set out pathways with plans and policies towards just transitions to net zero emissions by or around mid-century in line with the Paris Agreement temperature goal; 34. Notes the importance of aligning nationally determined contributions with long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies; And here’s potentially the most important paragraph in the whole document. Under the Paris agreement, countries need only revise their NDCs every five years. This is not enough to stay within 1.5C, as under that framework we would be stuck with the current inadequate NDCs – which imply heating of 2.4C, according to Climate Action Tracker – until 2030 effectively, because in 2025 under the Paris agreement the discussion will move on to post-2030 targets. Scientists say we need to cut emissions by 45% this decade, for a 1.5C limit to be viable, so if countries stick rigidly to the Paris timetable the 1.5C threshold will almost certainly be breached. Developing countries, and some major developed economies, are desperate for countries to be forced to come back to the negotiating table yearly until the NDCs are aligned with 1.5C. Paragraph 30 of this document is what would achieve that aim. Some are unhappy that it is urging rather than mandating, and some are concerned that the reference to the Paris temperature goals could be interpreted as 2C rather than the all-important 1.5C. But a reference to the Paris temperature goals includes 1.5C, proponents argue, and this was probably the strongest language available to ensure this gets through. This text would bring countries back to the table next year for their NDCs to be subject to scrutiny and with a clear focus on updating them. 35. Invites Parties to regularly update strategies in line with the best available science; 36. Requests the secretariat to prepare a synthesis report on long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies under the Paris Agreement for consideration by the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement at its fourth session (November 2022); 37. Calls upon Parties to accelerate the phasing-out of coal and subsidies for fossil fuels; 38. Invites Parties to consider further opportunities to reduce non-carbon dioxide greenhouse gas emissions; 39. Emphasizes the critical importance of nature-based solutions and ecosystem-based approaches, including protecting and restoring forests, to reducing emissions, enhancing removals and protecting biodiversity; Here is another major step forward – for the first time, a recognition that the dirtiest fossil fuel, coal, must be phased out. There has never been an explicit reference before in a Cop decision to the need to phase out coal or other fossil fuels. That may seem an incredible omission, given that fossil fuels are at the heart of the problem here, but this process moves by consensus and powerful vested interests for fossil fuels from oil-producing countries – Saudi Arabia, Russia, Australia have been the prime movers but others have also been involved – have ensured that mention of fossil fuels has been kept out. This reference is likely to be fiercely fought over, but its presence in the text sends a strong message, and was welcomed by green campaigners and developing countries. If it stays in, it sets a new and important precedent at these talks. 40. Invites the Secretary-General of the United Nations to convene world leaders in 2023 to consider ambition to 2030; 41. Recognizes that enhanced support for developing country Parties will allow for higher ambition in their actions; Another means of strengthening NDCs, by having world leaders return to the table in 2023. That is also the year of the “global stocktake” under Paris, which is another means of forcing countries to revise their NDCs in line with 1.5C and scientific advice. So this par, though weak, is also helpful to the 1.5C effort. V. Finance, technology transfer and capacity-building for mitigation and adaptation 42. Urges developed country Parties to provide financial resources to assist developing country Parties with respect to both mitigation and adaptation, in continuation of their existing obligations under the Convention, and encourages other Parties to provide or continue to provide such support voluntarily; 43. Acknowledges the growing need of developing country Parties, in particular due to the increasing impacts of climate change and increased indebtedness as a consequence of the coronavirus disease 2019 pandemic, and calls for greater support to be channelled through grants and other highly concessional forms of finance; 44. Emphasizes the need to mobilize climate finance from all sources to reach the level needed to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement, including significantly enhanced support for developing country Parties, beyond USD 100 billion per year; Finance is also a key sticking point for developing countries. They have been infuriated by the failure of the rich world to meet a totemic target of providing $100bn a year to the poor world to help them cut emissions and cope with the impacts of extreme weather – a promise made in 2009, that was supposed to be fulfilled by 2020. Instead, according to the latest OECD figures, that target was missed by $20bn in 2019. More recent findings from Germany and Canada suggest the target will be met in 2023, and by 2025 finance will reach $119bn, bringing the average from 2020 to 2025 above $100bn a year. But developing countries are angry that there is not more explicit acknowledgement of this failure, and that rich countries appear reluctant to engage in discussing how finance can be increased in future. VI. Loss and damage 60. Acknowledges that climate change has already and will increasingly cause loss and damage and, as temperatures rise, impacts from climate and weather extremes, as well as slow onset events, will pose an ever-greater social, economic and environmental threat; 61. Reiterates the urgency of scaling up action and support, including finance, technology transfer and capacity-building, for implementing approaches for averting, minimizing and addressing loss and damage associated with the adverse effects of climate change in developing country Parties that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change; The phrase “loss and damage” refers to the impacts of extreme weather that are so catastrophic that they cannot be prepared for or adapted to. For many developing countries, this is totemic – and this is the first time that loss and damage has been directly addressed in a Cop decision in this way. However, the issue is contentious as some developing countries interpret loss and damage as implying they should receive compensation for the impacts of extreme weather upon them. Developed countries will not agree to any language that contains that term. At the last Cop in 2019, a mechanism for addressing loss and damage was formulated. The Santiago Network would help with communications and sharing information and solutions to loss and damage, but it is not a funding mechanism. That’s what is missing here – a way of funding the loss and damage that has been inflicted on the world’s poor by a problem they did the least to cause. VII Implementation 67. Resolves to move swiftly with the full implementation and delivery of the Paris Agreement; 68. Welcomes the start of the global stocktake and expresses its determination for the process to be comprehensive and inclusive, address necessary structural and systemic change, and increase ambition as part of a global effort based on equity and the best available science; 69. Encourages the high-level champions to support the effective participation of nonParty stakeholders in the global stocktake; 70. [Placeholder - welcome completion of the Paris Rulebook] Placeholder means a piece of text is still missing, and this one says it all – six years after the signing of the Paris agreement, the rulebook required to bring all of its provisions into force is still incomplete. The UK hosts face an uphill task in agreeing all elements of the Paris rulebook at this Cop. There are still ongoing discussions over carbon markets and their role in cutting emissions (under article 6 of the Paris accord) and over how countries must verify and report on their emissions, known as transparency and accountability. If the UK can get the outstanding elements of the Paris rulebook finalised at this Cop, it would be an extraordinary achievement. Without it, however, the Cop can still be a success if enough progress is made on the substantive issues on improving NDCs and keeping 1.5C alive.Demand for jeans, jogging bottoms and workwear have helped Marks &amp; Spencer to a long-awaited turnaround of its clothing business that helped the group forecast profits of £500m for the full year. Shares in the high street retailer rose more than 20% at one point on Wednesday morning on the back of the results, which showed the group swinging to a pre-tax profit of £187m for the six months to October, compared with a loss of almost £88m during the same period in 2020. The figure also blew past pre-pandemic profits of £159m, and its chief executive, Steve Rowe, said it was “clear that underlying performance is improving”. M&amp;S said its strong performance reflected a 10% jump in food sales as well as “substantial improvement” across its once-struggling clothing and homeware business. It said a “re-engineering” of the division, which has included paring down its offering to a more focused range of items and reducing promotions, was “now demonstrating its potential to reverse years of decline”. The company’s clothing business has been struggling since before the coronavirus pandemic, with sales falling for eight years. It faced additional challenges at the start of the outbreak when non-essential retailers were forced to close their high street shops to customers during lockdown. The retailer said it had sold more than 2m pairs of women’s jeans in the six months to October, and recorded a 50% jump in sales across its Goodmove activewear brand after an advertising campaign featuring the British 1,500-metre champion Revée Walcott Nolan. Formalwear also made gains as customers returned to the office, helping suit sales increase 3%. Overall, sales from the revamped clothing and home business were down 1% over the six months to October, although online sales continued to grow, rising 61% over the period. It helped offset a near 18% decline in high street sales. However, the revamp has helped Marks &amp; Spencer raise its profits outlook for the second time in less than three months. The group expects full-year underlying profits to beat expectations, now guiding for about £500m compared with £403m in 2020. M&amp;S had already upgraded its guidance in August to above £350m – the first upwards calibration of its profits outlook this century. Rowe also credited the overall performance to a “Covid bounceback” but warned that the retailer was still facing headwinds, including from Brexit and the pandemic, that could continue into next year. “Well-publicised supply chain pressure, combined with pandemic supply interruptions, rising labour costs, EU border challenges and tax increases means the cost incline becomes steeper in the second half and steeper again in the 2022-23 year,” he said. “That will increase the importance of our productivity plans, store rotation and technology investment.” M&amp;S said some of these higher costs would be passed on to shoppers, with price increases expected to pick up pace. But Rowe said rises so far had been less than half the 2.1% inflation seen in the wider UK grocery market. “Our inflation will be in line with the market or less than the market,” he said. The retailer is increasing pay to attract and retain workers, “which will put pressure on costs in the remainder of our financial year”. Despite supply chain difficulties, Rowe said shoppers would not be faced with big gaps in its ranges in the run-up to Christmas, although slippers were in short supply. Last week, M&amp;S had sold out of more than 40% of its online festive season food-ordering range – including the biggest turkeys, puddings and its brussels sprout gratin, as shoppers tried to get a head start on holiday shopping. However, it said it expected fresh deliveries to arrive throughout November and December.Trump is in power. No, really – Trump is in power! Has the world gone mad? And how do I find my place in it? Milk and Gall uses the frightening sense of dislocation that many felt with the election of Donald Trump to frame the equally jolting experience that is new motherhood. It’s just a shame Mathilde Dratwa’s play is being staged a year later than originally planned, which would have meant a run that coincided with the chaotic and frightening final days of Trump’s presidency. The piece risks feeling slightly dated as a result – but this is still a striking debut with a wonderfully confident, surreal swagger to it. Dratwa is based in New York and the play unfolds in a Brooklyn apartment, which looks impressively accurate (designer Mona Camille has a sharp eye for detail) then cracks and splinters as new mum Vera’s world begins to implode. Vera asks Alexa how to talk to her baby – and Alexa starts to talk back, only the advice she offers grows increasingly strange. An FBI agent storms into the living room on the hunt for a lost mother; a model baby is eaten alive and, in one particularly memorable moment, Hillary Clinton crawls out of the TV and bursts into song. Director Lisa Spirling handles the comic flourishes with control and panache and encourages lively performances from her cast of five. MyAnna Buring is physically compelling as new mum Vera: every movement is accompanied by a wince in the early days following her C-section and there’s a striking disconnect between the ferocity of Vera’s speech and the fragility of her body. The whole ensemble is strong but Jenny Galloway almost stops time with her comic timing as she rattles through a host of kooky cameos. Lots of the laughter comes with the sting of truth but the dislocated scenes never quite add up to something bigger. Vera’s potential post-partum depression is mentioned but rarely felt and the dramatic encounters between Vera and her family and friends feel underpowered; a sideshow to the stronger and more truthful comic skits. At Theatre 503, London, until 27 NovemberThere is always a sense of deja vu with Call of Duty games. For almost 20 years, they have led us through so many bombed-out cities, treacherous canyon passes and collapsing multi-storey buildings, the whole run now merges into one apocalyptic mega battle. By taking us back to the origin of the series – the second world war – Vanguard hammers this sense of familiarity home. This is a very traditional, extremely familiar and almost nostalgic Call of Duty instalment. For the entertaining Campaign mode, we’re thrust into a covert mission involving an international task force of six differently skilled soldiers attempting to infiltrate a German submarine base to uncover a Nazi plan known as Operation Phoenix. As this is taking place in Germany in 1945 and features rogue SS officers (one brilliantly played by Dominic Monaghan, the nature of a plan named Phoenix should not be too hard to guess, but we still have to fight through around six hours of hectic, bullet-riddled missions to get there. In a twist of cinematic narrative grace, the squad – let’s call them the Dirty Half-Dozen – is captured early on, and most of the game is a series of flashbacks giving us the origin stories of each of the characters. There’s cynical Russian sniper Polina Petrova, gung ho American pilot, Wade Jackson and conscientious British special forces officer Arthur Kingsley, and with them we whiz through key second world war flashpoints from Tobruk to Normandy, ticking off staple CoD set-pieces as we go. There’s a last stand against waves of incoming enemies, a flight combat bit, a tank bit, and you get to try out a range of authentic period weapons. What keeps it all together is a tight script that keeps the noninteractive sequences to a minimum, explores issues of diversity and personal tragedy in war and actually makes us care about this band of inglorious stereotypes. Alongside the single-player Campaign is the usual range of online multiplayer options. Team Deathmatch and Domination are here, alongside newcomers such as Champion Hill, a sort of mini team-based Battle Royale organised into short elimination rounds. The pace of combat is almost ludicrously fast, and for your first few days of play your average lifespan between respawns will be roughly two seconds. You arrive, look about a bit, take one step … and then a 14-year-old wielding a tricked-out MP 40 submachine gun will riddle you with bullets. Repeat. Repeat again. The 20 or so maps are mostly very traditional three-lane set-ups, channelling the action through mountain-top Nazi meeting houses, north African villages and submarine bases – none have significantly interesting features or clever interactive elements, but they do the job. The Zombies mode (another mainstay of the CoD series), takes the usual recipe – a team of players battling hordes of the undead – and makes changes. In previous instalments, the action was very round-based: you had to survive waves of progressively tough enemies. Now there are objectives to fight through, including patrol missions where you have to follow a glowing artefact, and a quest where you must harvest rune stones from fallen foes and feed them into the Sin Eater obelisk – the most literal interpretation of the “fetch quest” archetype that we’ve encountered in the series. It really messes with the rhythm and tension of the mode and you lose that pure sense of making a desperate last stand against the undead. You can still upgrade your weapons and unlock supernatural abilities, but the progression system feels a little lightweight and unfocused. There will be tweaks and new features in the near future, but it feels like they need to come sooner rather than later. Call of Duty: Vanguard is the video game equivalent of an old war film that you’ve seen many times before, but still enjoy watching with a feeling of nostalgic comfort that armed conflict perhaps should not provide. It won’t set the world alight, but gives you the opportunity to blow a lot of it up – which is, after all, what we want from this series. • Call of Duty: Vanguard is out now; £59.99.Efforts to combat a looming debt crisis in the world’s poorest countries are being hindered by a lack of up-to-date, reliable figures showing how much individual nations owe, the World Bank has said. The Washington-based institution highlighted “massive gaps” in the data, with 40% of low-income countries failing to publish any figures on their sovereign debt in the past two years. At a time when the global pandemic has driven debt to dangerously high levels, a World Bank report said estimates “cobbled together” from a variety of sources made it harder to deal with the problem. The Bank, which released figures last month showing a 12% jump in poor-country debt during 2020, said monitoring the situation relied on a patchwork of databases with different standards and definitions and different degrees of reliability. Inconsistencies were leading to large variations in publicly available tallies of debt in low-income economies – the equivalent of as much as 30% of a country’s national output, in some instances. David Malpass, the World Bank’s president, said the report was sobering and made the case for urgent reform. “The poorest countries will emerge from the Covid-19 pandemic with the largest debt burdens in the last few decades but limited debt transparency will delay critical debt reconciliation and restructuring,” he said. Last month, Malpass said that of the of the 74 countries eligible for soft loans and grants through his institution’s International Development Association arm, more than half were “in external debt distress or at high risk of it”. The World Bank said of the countries that had published data in the past two years, many had limited the data to central government debt. Many commodity-rich developing countries have been relying increasingly on resource-backed loans – in which they secure finance from lenders by putting up future revenue streams as collateral. Resource-backed loans accounted for almost 10% of new borrowing in sub-Saharan Africa between 2004 and 2018, the Bank said. More than 15 countries had such debt but none provided details on the collateral arrangements. The bank’s report, Debt Transparency in Developing Economies, expressed concern that low-income countries were starting to use central-bank repurchases and foreign-currency swaps to support external borrowing rather than as tools of monetary policy. “These operations do not show up in government debt statistics, and the databases of international financial institutions do not capture them either,” Malpass said. “Improving debt transparency requires a sound public debt-management legal framework, integrated debt recording and management systems, and improvements in the global debt monitoring. International financial institutions, debtors, creditors and other stakeholders, such as credit-rating agencies and civil society, all have a key role to play in fostering debt transparency.” The bank said it had long considered debt transparency a crucial step in countries’ development strategies because being open led to new investment, improved accountability and helped reduce corruption. All countries that borrow from the organisation – more than 100 in total – were required to report details of external debt owed by any public agency.Far from being irresponsible Covid spreaders, the vast majority of students at English universities have been vaccinated at least once and would request a test if they had symptoms, according to a survey. Students’ wellbeing has suffered this autumn, however, with a third of those surveyed reporting that their mental health had deteriorated since the start of term, the report by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) says. The survey found the average life satisfaction score among students was 6.6 out of 10, significantly lower than among 16- to 29-year-olds in general, who scored 7.0, and the overall adult population in Great Britain, at 7.1. The ONS report says mental health has worsened as the term has progressed, with 32% of students reporting that their wellbeing has deteriorated, compared with 26% in late September. It is better than it was last May, when half of students who took part in the survey said their mental health had deteriorated. Most students at that time were studying online owing to lockdown restrictions, while this term students have returned to campuses for more face-to-face teaching. On vaccination, the survey – which is based on experimental data drawn from responses from almost 1,000 students in England during October and November – found that 91% of respondents had been vaccinated against Covid at least once. The proportion of students who have been double-vaccinated was 85%, up from 78% in late September. Of the 8% who said they had not been vaccinated, almost a third (32%) said they were fairly or very likely to take a vaccine if offered. Students also showed they were willing to test for Covid: 92% said they would request a test if they developed symptoms, and 49% said they had taken a test in the previous seven days. Meanwhile, 57% said they would stay at home for 10 days if they developed symptoms. Last year students were often accused of spreading the virus by holding parties in breach of restrictions, and some were fined and threatened with exclusion from their university studies. Tim Gibbs, the head of the ONS student Covid-19 insights survey, said: “It is encouraging, the majority of students report being vaccinated against Covid-19, and many would get tested if they developed symptoms. However, a third of students sadly reported their mental health and wellbeing had worsened since the start of the autumn term.” Nick Hillman, the director of the Higher Education Policy Institute thinktank, said: “This shows that students are largely very sensible – they are getting tested and vaccinated and they are trying to progress with their studies as best they can. But they are not finding life as easy as they had hoped because student life continues to be so disrupted by Covid. Going away to university is a big transition point at the best of times; it is extra stressful in the very odd times in which we live.” Students at 58 institutions face the possibility of further disruption to their studies because of threatened strike action by university staff who voted in favour of industrial action in two ballots over pensions and pay and working conditions. The University and College Union will meet later this week to decide on its plans. • This article was amended on 15 November 2021. An earlier headline – “Nine in 10 university students in England have had at least one Covid jab” – was stated as fact rather than attributed to the findings of a study.Humanity finds itself at a low ebb. Years of entrenched division mean that we can no longer find a single thing to agree upon. We are happy to tear each other apart for the slightest ideological incursion, howling shrieks of outrage whenever anyone fails to slot into the narrow grid system of our increasingly binary worldview. It is a tragedy, but it doesn’t have to be this way. What if a brave shining knight came charging in on a golden steed, presenting us with a truth so simple and undeniable that it could reunite all of humanity as we know it? Wouldn’t that be amazing? Well, stop dreaming. The actor, screenwriter and producer Paul Rudd has just been named as the sexiest man alive. We are saved. People magazine, which has since 1985 compiled a forensically scrutinised sexiness ranking of all the world’s men, has announced that Paul Rudd has finally done it. Out of all the men who are currently alive, Rudd is objectively sexier than all of them. Sexier than Michael B Jordan, who was named as the sexiest man alive last year. Sexier than John Legend, who was named as the sexiest man alive in 2019. Sexier than Chris Hemsworth, Bradley Cooper, Jude Law, Nick Nolte or John F Kennedy Jr, who were named as the sexiest men alive in 2014, 2011, 2004, 1992 and 1988 respectively. Sexier even than Johnny Depp, who was named as the sexiest man alive on two different occasions despite, you know, everything. All those hunky bimbos can get in the bin, because Paul Rudd just out-sexied the whole damn lot of them with one hand tied behind his back. In response to his new award, Rudd told People: “I’m going to lean into it hard. I’m going to own this. I’m not going to try to be like: ‘Oh, I’m so modest’. I’m getting business cards made … I’m hoping now that I’ll finally be invited to some of those sexy dinners with Clooney and Pitt and B Jordan. And I figure I’ll be on a lot more yachts”. Which might sound as if he’s exaggerating for comic effect. But he is not. Because Paul Rudd really is the sexiest man alive. Rudd has always managed to be handsome in a manner that borders on the miraculous. Not only is there his seemingly supernatural inability to age – he is only five years younger than Nigel Farage, for instance, who has spent the last decade looking like the botched results of a scientific quest to fuse Crazy Frog with the concept of gout – but he also radiates dangerous levels of easygoing charm. There is no mysterious darkness to Paul Rudd. There is no hint that he would ever attempt to steal your wife even though everyone knows your wife would leave you for him in a second. And ever since he joined the Marvel payroll, Rudd’s sexiness has only expanded. He’s still the same goofball he always was, except that now he is contractually obliged to briefly show a six-pack onscreen once per movie. This newly showcased physical fitness means that Rudd has now achieved the rarefied status of four-quadrant sexiness. He’s nice to look at. He has good hair. He’s funny. He’s weird enough to make an Ant-Man trailer that consists of nothing but he and Michael Douglas slapping their thighs and shouting the word “ants” over and over with increasingly deranged intensity. This, ladies and gentlemen, is what the word sexy was created for. Even his relatively advanced years no longer matter. Rudd isn’t the oldest sexiest man alive ever – Harrison Ford was 56 when he was awarded the title in 1998, and Sean Connery was 59 when he was crowned in 1989 – but who cares about the piffling matter of age? Rudd will be sexy when he’s 70, and when he’s 90. His body could be dug up by robots a thousand years from now and his ruined corpse would still be a thousand times sexier than you on your best day. Seriously, ask anyone if they have a crush on Paul Rudd, and the only people who will reply negatively are either liars or sociopaths. Sure, you might find people who will claim that the entire notion of world’s sexiest man is a sham, a half-baked publicist-assisted con job designed to boost the circulation of a wilting publication while amplifying the winner’s latest project (Rudd’s new Ghostbusters movie is released a week from now, coincidentally). But this isn’t a time for cynicism. May we all swoon at his feet for ever.Male lions don’t do childcare. They don’t hunt. And yet they get first dibs on the carcasses the lionesses have spent all day chasing across the savannah. True, their manes look magnificent, but only in the sense that Prince Charles looks good in uniform and medals, even though everyone knows a lackey squeezes toothpaste on his toothbrush. In the first episode of the Netflix series Animal, we see a panting lioness waiting her turn at the proverbial wildebeest leg, while her lord and master sates himself. Can lionesses roll their eyes? I am sure I caught a hint of ironically raised eyebrow. Why there hasn’t been a #miaowtoo movement is beyond me. Do lionesses even miaow? I am none the wiser after watching this globe-trotting hour of big cats slaughtering other wildlife in various fetching locales. Despite the use of the latest technology, including gimbals and drones, it is not clear to me what Animal adds to our understanding of the natural world, besides having celebrities do the voiceovers (a mixed blessing, as sometimes the narration is so flat that it feels as if they literally phoned it in). That said, I quite like Rebel Wilson narrating two male koalas brawling over a female in a tree, and dog-loving Bryan Cranston explaining the hunting strategies of canine packs as if we are Jesse Pinkman and he Walter White, meticulously lecturing on how to cook pure meth. David Attenborough needn’t feel his day job is under threat, though. As for Rashida Jones, I am very happy to believe any old guff she tells me, but the actor’s opening voiceover is hard to swallow. “Nothing captures our imagination like a big cat,” she tells us. Oh come on, Rashida. Why did those poets bother getting up in the morning? We have much to learn from cats, but documentaries such as this prevent us from learning the truth about their existence. Cats do not feel the need to examine their lives, because they know they are worth living, as the philosopher John Gray explains in Feline Philosophy. Even if they could operate TV cameras, cats would never make documentaries about humans. Nor would they make dramas about themselves, because they are too busy living unreflectively. Human pathos, by contrast, is such that we keep examining our own lives, but also keep making TV shows examining other animals’ lives in a self-defeating quest to find the meaning of life. That said, I would be more likely to watch Tiger King 2 if it was made from the tigers’ perspective. Animal is nothing if not visually arresting. One night in the Okavango Delta in Botswana, we observe a lioness as she leaves her cubs to fend for themselves while she seeks breakfast. Lions have night vision six times better than ours – and the show is virtuosic in simulating what the night world looks like to them. Here, every living thing – hunter, hunted and circling hyenas – seems illuminated from within, like the suspicious glass of milk lit with a lightbulb that Cary Grant carried upstairs with leonine menace to his wife, Joan Fontaine, in Alfred Hitchcock’s Suspicion. The doomed wildebeest’s eyes are intense beacons of light, but dim as it succumbs to the lioness. Then more pairs of eyes pop up in this black-and-white spectral landscape: a clan of hyenas looking to harass the lioness and cheat her of her prey. Watching the series, it isn’t so much my imagination that is fired up, however, as my sense of personal inadequacy. As a five-month-old snow leopard cub stalks an ibex on a narrow ledge above a ridiculously terrifying Himalayan precipice, I contemplate my shortcomings. I don’t have a head for heights, nor a tail to act as a counterbalance, still less impossibly cute dappled paws. As for competence in acquiring dinner, I recently lost the will to live when there was an empty space on the supermarket shelf where the oat milk should have been. Nothing cheers me up more in this series than the cub waving its paw fatuously at a just-out-of-reach ibex. Cut to the mother, who is monitoring the development of her offspring’s hunting prowess. I don’t know if ibexes who have cheated death can high-five their peers, but probably not. And they don’t make shows about ibexes or wildebeest. Just as history is never written by the losers, so wildlife documentaries rarely give the prey’s perspective. If humans were more compassionate, we would make different documentaries – not so much about the thrill of the kill as the horror.Identifying what customers really want when it comes to their wardrobes is a conundrum that has been plaguing Marks &amp; Spencer bosses for decades. While the chain has had its eureka moments (that pink coat, which felt like it was better known than the prime minister in 2013 and a suede skirt blessed by model and style plate Alexa Chung) it has been locked in a long-running identity crisis. A couple of years ago, the high street retailer was struggling, with clothing sales plunging amid a reputation for “frumpiness” and buying errors that meant those lines that were popular sold out. But now M&amp;S has announced an impressive turnaround in profits thanks to its booming online and food retail offerings, while the decline in sales at its clothing and homeware business has narrowed to 1%. M&amp;S has long faced the tricky dilemma – made extra complex by its broad customer group – of continuing to deliver to its longstanding customers who come for good tights and a pair of slacks with an elasticated waistband, while simultaneously enticing a new, fashion-inspired shopper into stores. Its recent successes are a result of a decision to simplify that process. Certainly, a plan to offer a streamlined selection has had a positive impact on sales. Rather than attempting to be everything to everyone, M&amp;S’s new tactic has been to cut back the noise. Today’s customer is offered less in the way of choice and more in the way of carefully thought through products. The shift toward creating a core collection fits neatly into a post-pandemic world in which people want less trend-led fashion and endless variation in favour of versatile clothing that suits a flexible lifestyle. The success of its activewear line – sales were up 50% on the same period last year and up 115% on 2019-20 – which spans everything from hooded sweats and working-from-home ready trackpants to workout gear – is also reflective of an M&amp;S customer seeking a wardrobe to suit her new lifestyle. The success of the chain’s denim offering – more than 2m pairs of women’s jeans were sold in the first half of the year – is also evidence that a focus on casualwear is paying off. Of course, if M&amp;S is going to attract shoppers of all ages and demographics, it needs to keep its hat in the fashion game by appealing to those motivated by current trends. An increasing number of partnerships with other brands, including Hobbs, Jaeger, and emerging labels like British-based Albaray – available in many M&amp;S stores – enables them to offer more scope while taking less financial risks. Collections loaded with democratic fashion buys (see long sleeve dresses and suiting that can be worn to the office and beyond) suggests a design team that is taking fewer risks than in previous seasons. Its long-running partnership with Holly Willoughby, known for her “safe but stylish” wardrobe choices, encapsulates this sweet spot. Earlier this week, the TV personality posted a picture of herself wearing a star print dress from the store’s newly launched Christmas collection triggering an increase in sales. A single-breasted teddy coat, which appears in the newly aired Christmas TV ad, is also a hit.Before Hidetaka Miyazaki was given the job of salvaging his company’s embattled medieval fantasy game Demon’s Souls (2009), he was just another rank-and-file designer. For a child who grew up a voracious reader of sword-and-sorcery genre fiction, directing a grimy fantasy game was a dream. I find a great sense of poetic satisfaction in the fact that Miyazaki – now in his mid 40s and the president of developer FromSoftware, having propelled the company to global success with his demanding, distinctive, haunting and unforgettable games Dark Souls, Bloodborne and Sekiro – has been working with George RR Martin on a fantasy game. It feels like a full-circle moment for the boy who, when he couldn’t understand parts of the fantasy novels he brought home from his local library, used his own imagination to bridge the gaps. Martin’s role on Elden Ring was completed some time ago – he workshopped the characters and their relationships, which Miyazaki and his team then integrated into the game. Aside from all the swords, Elden Ring bears almost no resemblance to Game of Thrones (it does have dragons, but if there is any complex politicking, skullduggery or mass-murder at weddings to be found here, it’s later in the game than the five hours I played). This game is more fantastical: your character can summon ethereal blades and lightning strikes, characters talk in reverent jargon about “sites of grace” and “the Tarnished”, and your horse is a corporeal ghost. After learning the basics of attacking and defending yourself, you emerge into a world called the Lands Between, where eerily glowing trees extend into the sky like mountains, bathing the forested land below in golden light. From there the map is yours. A few steps outside the tutorial cave, I found a patronising monk sitting on top of a hill. Spotting an intimidating-looking knight on horseback down the obvious path in front of me, I shouldered a broadsword and headed around him instead, creeping through a wood where knights ambled around with lit torches. They led me to another cave full of wolves, at the end of which I found my first boss, a beastman: a shrieking, whirling tangle of pelts and blades. Miraculously, I finished him off on my first try – but then, flush with success, I thought I’d have a go at that big mounted guy in the gleaming armour outside and swiftly got stomped to death. Ah. This is a FromSoftware game, after all. Fighting is brutal and strategic – no mashing a button and hoping for the best here. You have to be on your toes and ready for a guard or parry. What surprised me about Elden Ring is that it doesn’t feel forbidding. As much as I love Miyazaki and FromSoftware’s other games, I find them intensely stressful to play, at least the first time around. You never know what’s down the next decrepit castle corridor or at the bottom of the next crumbling staircase, but you can be fairly sure that it will be horrible and it will probably kill you, leaving you with a daunting run back to where you were. In Elden Ring the sense of open space negates this somehow. I was intrigued rather than afraid of what I might find if I followed the light of a campfire, or hauled open a long-closed dungeon doorway, or summoned my steed and rode off towards an area of the world I hadn’t yet explored. Being able to zip around the map also made a world of difference – there was no harrowing journey to be repeated over and over after meeting each of my inevitable demises. Perhaps this is 12 years’ worth of Souls experience talking, but I also didn’t find it off-puttingly difficult. Or at least not in the same way as FromSoftware’s most recent game, the punishingly hard samurai-horror Sekiro: Shadows Die Twice. Elden Ring’s bosses are formidable, and I don’t mind admitting that I got nowhere with the demo’s final gatekeeper, Margit, a hideous giant with bits of tree growing out of his face, who has not only a giant sword and a scorpion’s tail to smash you up with but also a magical dagger that he summons out of thin air, which really seems like overkill. But I was never ambushed by the challenge. I always knew when I was in a dangerous area or about to face a particularly hard opponent and, crucially, I could run away if I wanted to. This is more like The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild, in that you can get yourself into and out of trouble with delightful ease, escaping sticky situations and returning later when you’re feeling braver. Breath of the Wild kept surfacing in my memory as I played Elden Ring, along with the 10-year-old Bethesda fantasy classic, Skyrim. At least in the previewed sections, this has a high-fantasy aesthetic vibe, with colour and light and gold-glinting sunshine in place of other Miyazaki games’ oppressive, unrelenting darkness. And the way the world is laid out, with enticing structures just visible in the distance, and caves and catacombs and tucked-away little pockets of land that provide ideal hiding places for interesting creatures or treasure, encourages adventurousness and curiosity rather than hesitance and terror. Elden Ring has multiplayer: like in Dark Souls, you can summon other players to help you, or invade their worlds to duel them. I couldn’t get it to work over the few days I had access to this demo, but because I didn’t end up stuck on one particular boss or area, I was more than happy trying things out on my own. There’s also a minimalism to what’s on screen that makes the imaginary world conjured here feel bigger, more absorbing. Your health and stamina bars and the icons showing your equipped weapons and items disappear when they’re not needed, letting you concentrate on what you can see ahead of you, whether you’re tearing across the landscape on your horned, spectral steed or crouched in long grass, creeping up on an encampment of soldiers. Don’t get me wrong, there’s an abundance of overwhelming information nestled in the menus – there are just so many stats and different items, all accompanied by opaque text descriptions that players will enjoy piecing together into comprehensible lore. But while you’re playing, you are not bombarded with visual information. Margit, the gatekeeper to the castle at the edge of this section of Elden Ring’s map, hides at the top of a windswept hill. To get to him, you have to make your way through barricades, past giants, and through some atmospherically terrible weather. I found a lake that was home to a dragon, and catacombs that spooked me too much to delve too deep. These sound like fantasy tropes, but there is nothing generic about Elden Ring’s alluringly creepy and subversive art direction, or the way it makes you feel when you’re fighting its creatures, sword in hand and heart in mouth. Exploring the Lands Between, I was struck by how much this felt like an adventure rather than a gauntlet. It’s like a collision between two of my favourite games of the last decade – Dark Souls and Zelda: Breath of the Wild – and that is a comparison that should excite anyone. Elden Ring is out 25 February 2022 on Xbox, Playstation 4/5 and PC; a network test version will be playable for selected players from 12-15 November.Inflation has surged in the US, China and Germany. In the US, consumer prices rose at an annual rate of 6.2% in October amid global supply shortages, the highest since 1990, while the core rate excluding food and energy picked up to 4.6%, the highest since 1991. There was a fresh jump in gasoline prices which had levelled off in recent weeks, while prices for hotel rooms and car rentals bounced back amid a recovery in travel, and new and used car prices also rose. Inflation in China rose to a tamer 1.5% annual rate last month, but this was a doubling from 0.7%, while German inflation came in at 4.5% in October versus 4.1% in September. Wall Street is down while the major European indices have also edged lower, with the notable exceptions of the UK’s FTSE 100 index, up 0.6%, and Italy’s FTSE MiB, up 0.4%. Here are today’s other main stories: Efforts to combat a looming debt crisis in the world’s poorest countries are being hindered by a lack of up-to-date, reliable figures showing how much individual nations owe, the World Bank has said. Demand for jeans, jogging bottoms and workwear have helped Marks &amp; Spencer to a long-awaited turnaround of its clothing business, prompting the group to forecast profits of £500m for the full year, its second profit upgrade in three months (and this century). Its share price jumped by more than 15%. Out of the frump slump: how M&amp;S lifted itself back into profit Twenty-four countries and a group of leading car manufacturers have committed to ending the era of fossil-fuel powered vehicles by 2040 “or earlier”, in a major new commitment set at Cop26. The Jeff Bezos-backed electric carmaker Rivian is aiming for a market value of $65bn (£48bn) when shares start trading in New York on Wednesday, in one of the biggest-ever stock market floats. Shares in ITV soared 14% on Wednesday after the broadcaster said it was on track to enjoy the best year for advertising revenues in its 66-year history, as businesses pour money into marketing to drive a post-pandemic recovery. Wetherspoon’s has suffered a slump in sales below pre-pandemic levels, which the pub chain’s chairman, Tim Martin, blamed on older customers staying away because of lingering caution about the danger of Covid-19 infection. Thank you for reading and commenting. We’ll be back tomorrow. Bye! - JK Here is our full story on US inflation: Andrew Hunter, senior US economist at Capital Economics, said: The 0.9% month-on-month surge in consumer prices in October illustrates that the upward pressure from supply shortages remains intense and that, even when those effects eventually fade, rising cyclical pressures are likely to keep inflation unusually high. The biggest concern for the Fed should be signs that longer-lasting cyclical inflation pressures are continuing to build rapidly, with CPI rent of primary residence and owners’ equivalent rent both posting strong gains of 0.4% m/m. As the improving labour market and prior gains in house prices continue to feed through, a further acceleration in shelter inflation looks nailed on. Headline prices were also boosted by a huge 0.8% m/m rise in food away from home prices and, with leisure sector wage growth continuing to surge, that also has further to run. The bottom line is that, while it remains difficult to predict how far or for how long the various “transitory” factors will boost inflation, there is mounting evidence that inflationary pressures are building throughout the economy. That underlines our view that inflation will remain elevated for much longer than Fed officials expect. Meanwhile, Tesla has fallen out of the $1trn club again after sharp share price declines today and yesterday. The US electric carmaker broke through a trillion dollars in market capitalisation late in October, becoming the fifth US company to join a club that includes Apple, Microsoft, Amazon and Alphabet. Tesla shares are falling as investors gear up for the chief executive Elon Musk’s proposed sale of about a tenth of his holdings after he held a Twitter poll on it. Musk, the world’s richest person, tweeted on Saturday that he would offload 10% of his stock if users of the social media network approved the proposal. The opening bell has rung on Wall Street: Dow Jones down 58 points, or 0.16%, at 36,261 S&amp;P 500 down 19 points, or 0.4%, at 4,665 Nasdaq down 132 points, or 0.83%, at 15,754 Karen Ward, chief market strategist EMEA at J.P. Morgan Asset Management, said: The rise in US inflation was again greater than expected and the upside surprise on core inflation is particularly noteworthy. We don’t however think this will prompt a hawkish shift from the Fed. Like other developed world central banks – the Fed have settled on the narrative that headline inflation is being boosted by short-term factors; that elevated energy and raw material prices, production and transport issues in emerging markets, and domestic labour shortages will all resolve themselves in the fullness of time. I am not convinced these shortages – particularly in the labour market - will resolve themselves quickly and government bond curves should be steepening on the basis that eventually the Fed will have to do more. It shouldn’t however deter appetite for stocks at this stage. Today’s print essentially tells us firms have pricing power which is good for corporate earnings. US stock futures are pointing to a lower open on Wall Street in 20 minutes’ time, suggesting declines of 0.34% (S&amp;P 500) to 0.66% (Nasdaq). The dollar has gained 0.4% against a basket of currencies, and 10-year US government bond yields rose. The price of spot gold rose 1.1% to $1,853 an ounce. Gold is seen as a hedge against inflation. Last month the Fed started scaling back the amount of money it is injecting into the economy through monthly bond purchases. Neil Wilson at Markets.com said: Well this is a mess, an inflation report so bad even the Fed might actually do something about it? Hohoho, I joke of course… Inflation way ahead of forecast and exceeding 6% on the headline number, highest in 30 years, core month-on-month accelerated to +0.6%. Yet Fed still sticks to its ‘transitory’ narrative. Gold has blown past resistance and the path to $1,875 is clear. Stocks offered and the dollar is bid. Bonds sold off with US 10year yields jumping above 1.480%. 30 year real yields (TIPS) [Treasury Inflation-Protected Security] touched a record low -0.595%, whilst 10yr TIPS fell to I think a record low of -1.224%.m Stocks are paring losses and the dollar is paring gains – so far only really gold holding onto the spike with real rates the biggest loser from all of this. Well, after the Fed’s credibility. As economies around the world recover from the pandemic, demand for oil and other commodities has increased. Brent crude prices have gained more than 60% this year as a result, while gasoline prices in the US are at seven-year highs. Many countries, including the US and the UK, are also struggling with shortages of skilled workers. The US Labor Department reported today that initial claims for state unemployment benefits fell 4,000 to 267,000 for the week to 6 November. That’s the lowest level since mid-March 2020 when the coronavirus pandemic first struck and the economy ground to a halt. Sam Bullard, a senior economist at Wells Fargo in Charlotte, North Carolina, told Reuters: Supply disruptions and the recovery of services poses a substantial concern that higher-than-expected inflation could persist for longer than the Fed believes. We expect goods inflation to hand the baton to services over the course of the next year, but all signs indicate that supply chain bottlenecks will keep fanning the flames off inflation in the near term. US inflation is now at the highest annual rate since November 1990, amid a global supply chain crisis, suggesting price pressures could remain uncomfortably high well into next year. It rose to 6.2% last month from 5.4% in September. The Federal Reserve has reiterated that high inflation should prove temporary but many economists at sceptical. Even excluding food and energy which tend to be volatile, the consumer prices index jumped 4.6% year-on-year, the biggest increase since August 1991, after being steady at 4% for two straight months. That’s the so-called core CPI. Senior currency market analyst Simon Harvey at Monex tweets: NEWSFLASH: US inflation has jumped to an annual rate of 6.2% in October, higher than the 5.8% forecast by economists. Excluding food and energy which tend to be volatile, inflation was 4.6%. In a few minutes, we’ll be getting the latest US inflation reading for October. We are expecting an annual rate of close to 6%, 5.8% or 5.9%, which would be a 30-year high. In China, the debt-laden property developer Evergrande Group is (once again) teetering on the brink of default. Some bondholders have not received their coupon payments of more than $148m due at the close of Asian business today, sources told Reuters. The company holds the dubious title of being the world’s most indebted developer and has been stumbling from deadline to deadline in recent weeks. It has more than $300bn in debts, $19bn of which are international market bonds. Evergrande has narrowly avoided default so far, but a 30-day grace period on coupon payments on its April 2022, 2023 and 2024 bonds ends today, though it is uncertain when exactly. A failure to pay would result in a formal default by the company, and trigger cross-default provisions for other Evergrande dollar bonds, worsening a debt crisis in China. The US Federal Reserve warned yesterday that China’s struggling property sector could pose global risks. Moody’s Investors Service, the credit rating agency, downgraded Kaisa Group today, citing liquidity risks, limited financial flexibility and poor recovery prospects for its creditors. Kaisa has the most offshore debt of any Chinese developer after Evergrande. It has coupon payments of more than $59m due on Thursday and Friday. Paolo Pizzoli, senior economist for Italy and Greece at ING, said: There’s good demand, but Italian producers seem to be meeting increasing supply-driven obstacles. This will likely limit the scope for a substantial industrial contribution to the country’s GDP growth in the coming quarter. Looking ahead, evidence from recent business confidence surveys points to a continuation of the current production pattern. The combination of strong domestic and foreign orders and declining inventories is, in principle, a good best omen for higher production, but businesses are also signalling that materials and capacity are increasingly hampering production. Even assuming that some businesses managed to hoard intermediate goods and commodities, longer delivery times suggest that that might not have been enough to meet growing demand. Furthermore, even though demand is not yet perceived as an obstacle, the vulnerability to supply disruptions of Italy’s main trading partners might eventually negatively hit Italian producers. Germany, Italy’s premier export destination, is a case in point, with Italian car subcomponent producers clearly exposed to the risk of production stops from chip scarcity in the car industry. The bottom line is that, notwithstanding the notable resilience in manufacturer confidence, we believe that temporary factors will limit the scope for a solid contribution of industry to GDP growth over 4Q21. Add to this some cooling down in services on the back of Covid-19 concerns, we will likely end up with a clear deceleration of GDP growth over the coming quarter. We are currently pencilling in a 0.5% QoQ GDP expansion in 4Q21, which would still leave the average Italian 2021 GDP growth at a comforting 6.2%. In Italy, industrial production edged 0.1% higher in September from August, the country’s statistics office Istat said this morning. In August, output slipped 0.1%. In the three months to September, output was 1% higher than in the prior three months. It is M&amp;S’s second profit upgrade in three months, and only the second this century. AJ Bell investment director Russ Mould said: Something spectacular must have happened since August for Marks &amp; Spencer to upgrade earnings guidance once again. Back then, it believed pre-tax profit for the year would be above the upper end of a previously guided £300m to £350m range. Now it’s talking about profit hitting £500m which is quite some jump. Food sales are doing incredibly well, particularly instore. It has really nailed the proposition with decent quality products and an ever-widening range of items. Quality is the key word as it caters for a specific type of customer who is happy to pay that bit extra for something nice. Its online joint venture with Ocado has also helped the business reached a broader audience, such as individuals who want higher quality products but don’t want the faff of visiting a store. However, clothing continues to be a mixed bag, he said, although the company comes across as more confident about its prospects. Overall sales aren’t growing but operating profit is, thanks to selling more items at full price. Marks &amp; Spencer has a reputation for being the place you buy you undies and socks, or perhaps push the boat out and buy a pastel-coloured sweater. Yet that isn’t enough to sustain a proper clothing business. Suits and formalwear have been pushed to one side and more floorspace given to athleisure, jeggings and jeans. The only problem is that so many of its customers are old and don’t want to wear splashproof running bottoms. The company needs to attract a younger crowd and it could take a long time to change its image as the brand is still associated with slippers and socks. “Just imagine if Marks &amp; Spencer and Next merged. The former has nailed the food proposition and the latter is an expert in clothing. Together they could be a real force in the retail sector. But such a tie-up seems unlikely as Next doesn’t need any help and it is full of bright ideas to keep growing profits, food certainly not being on the menu.” Chris Beauchamp, chief market analyst at IG Group, the trading and investments platform, said about the M&amp;S results: This is a great return to something like normality, the market rewarding the news with a 15% bounce in the shares, with a prudent note of caution where the dividend is concerned. The shares have come roaring back from the brutal decline of June/July, but with January 2020 levels now recovered the question will be where the next big of good news can come from. If it can dodge most of the supply chain concerns there is room for more upside, but the stock needs a fairly rosy assessment of Christmas sales to keep moving higher, and that might just put off disappointment until January and the post-festive trading statement. And here is our story on ITV: Here is our full story: Shares in Marks &amp; Spencer have jumped more than 15% to 223.5p! After the retailer returned to profit in the first half and upped its profit forecast for the full year. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, tweeted: Oil stocks, along with strong earnings from companies including the German chipmaker Infineon, are driving European shares higher. In London, BP is the third-biggest riser, up 2%, while ITV is the No 1 gainer, after the broadcaster said it was enjoying its best year for ad revenues in its 66-year history. Crude oil prices have been boosted by industry data showing US crude stocks fell unexpectedly last week. On the stock markets, shares are pushing higher, shrugging off higher German and Chinese inflation. Only the Dax in Frankfurt is slightly down at 16,033. The FTSE 100 index in London has gained 22 points, or 0.3%, to 7,296 while the CAC 40 in Paris is flat at 7,046 and the FTSE MiB in Milan is 0.46% ahead at 27,566. In other news this morning, Britain’s employers are offering bonuses of up to £2,000 to recruit Christmas workers amid fears over staff shortages disrupting the festive season, reports our economics correspondent Richard Partington. Research from the jobs website Adzuna showed there are currently 26,307 seasonal job vacancies ahead of the pivotal Christmas shopping period, almost double the 13,668 at the same point a year ago. My other colleague Jasper Jolly has visited the West Midlands, which is also carving out a new role in electric vehicle production. He writes: Corners of the Alucast factory in the Black Country would be familiar to metalworkers several centuries ago. Workers pour molten aluminium at 720C into steel moulds. The cooling metal is then quickly pressed into shape before being sanded down into parts for gas-guzzling British sports cars. Yet for all its traditional West Midlands manufacturing roots, Alucast is finding a role for itself in a fast-growing new industry: electric cars. It needs to make the switch fast. The UK will ban the sale of all petrol and diesel cars by 2035, and other big car markets are following suit. The accelerated end of the internal combustion engine surprised and delighted environmental activists and has proven politically popular. Yet it has thrown into sharp relief the peril facing workers in the fossil fuel economy, who risk being left behind in the energy transition. My colleague Joanna Partridge has visited the German carmaker Volkswagen’s Zwickau factory in east Germany to find out how it is recovering from dieselgate, with its €35bn bid to lead the charge in electric vehicle production. It is a wider tale of how Germany is trying to wean itself off fossil fuels. She writes: Volkswagen hopes investment in its Zwickau plant – where Trabants were once built – will put dieselgate to rest. Two bronze statues that guard the entrance to Zwickau train station in Saxony tell the tale of Germany’s struggle to wean itself off fossil fuels. A crouching miner cradles a lamp in a nod to the lignite, a particularly dirty form of coal, that was dug from this part of former East Germany, fuelling its factories and power stations. His companion, an engineer, represents the car industry that dominates Germany’s industrial heartland. But while mining for coal is on the way out, the country’s influential car industry, which employs more than 830,000 people, is heading in a new direction. Volkswagen’s enormous plant on the outskirts of the medieval town is the first in the German carmaker’s empire to fully embrace the future. ITV is set to enjoy the best year for advertising revenues in its 66-year history, as businesses pour money into marketing to drive a post-pandemic recovery and content such as the Euro 2020 tournament prove a hit with viewers, reports our media business correspondent Mark Sweney. ITV, which said that it is performing more strongly than in 2019 before the pandemic hit, said that total advertising revenue for the first nine months is up 30% year-on-year to £1.3bn. The UK’s biggest free-to-air commercial broadcaster said that for the year it expects total ad revenues, which includes the growing income from ads on streaming service ITV Hub, to be up a quarter over 2020 to hit an all-time high. The broadcaster said that in final three months of the year - which is forecast to see a record spend in the run up to Christmas and is when ITV usually makes about 30% of its annual ad income - will be up as much as 13% year-on-year. “2021 looks set to have the highest revenue in ITV’s history,” said Carolyn McCall, chief executive at ITV. “By any standards ITV has had an outstanding nine months.” Total revenues including ITV Studios, which makes and sells shows such as Coronation Street, Line of Duty and Come Dine With Me, rose 28% year-on-year to £2.38bn in the first nine months. This is 8% higher than in 2019. “Revenue from each business is up both on last year and 2019,” said McCall, who said that content spend will hit £1.16bn next year due to programming including the FIFA World Cup and investment in dramas. The broadcaster said the share of total TV viewing taken by its flagship ITV channel increased in the first nine months. However, total viewing including across its digital channel portfolio fell 5% year-on-year. Marks &amp; Spencer is back in the black, but warned that the impact of the pandemic, supply chain issues and Brexit would weigh on its performance into 2022. The retailer, usually seen as a bellwether of the high street, made a first-half profit before tax of £187.3m versus a loss of nearly £88m a year earlier. Food prices jumped 10% and it hailed a “substantial” improvement in its struggling clothing and homewares business. Clothing and homewares sales were down just 1.0% compared with 2019/20, despite lockdown extending into the first week of the period. Sales grew in the second quarter and overall full price sales were up 17.3% for the period. Operating profit before adjusting items was £156.2m, up from £109.6m in 2019/20. Steve Rowe, the chief executive, said: Given the history of M&amp;S we’ve been clear that we won’t overclaim our progress. Unpacking the numbers isn’t a linear exercise and we’ve called out the Covid bounce back tailwinds, as well as the headwinds from the pandemic, supply chain and Brexit, some of which will continue into next year. But, thanks to the hard work of our colleagues, it is clear that underlying performance is improving, with our main businesses making important gains in market share and customer perception. The hard yards of driving long term change are beginning to be borne out in our performance. M&amp;S said it had ‘re-engineered” its clothing &amp; homeware division to try and reverse years of decline in the business. This includes training staff in efficient buying and merchandising, creating a more focused core range while also broadening choice in growth area such as activewear, kids’ daywear and homewares. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. We’ve woken up to news that inflation has picked up in China and Germany, while oil prices are also climbing, adding to worries that mounting price pressures could prompt central banks to raise interest rates. Inflation in Germany picked up to 4.5% in October from 4.1% in September, but is slightly below August’s 4.6% rate, according to the country’s statistics office Destatis. A surge in energy prices was behind the rise, up 18.6% year on year and up for the fourth month in a row. Prices of heating oil doubled and motor fuels jumped 35% while prices of natural gas and electricity rose by 7.4% and 2.5% respectively. Food prices are also rising, up 4.4% in October, pushed higher by dearer dairy products and eggs, and bread and cereals. Meanwhile, China’s inflation jumped to an annual rate of 1.5% in October from 0.7% in September, marking a 13-month high, official figures showed. The increase was driven by higher prices for food and fuel. Factory gate prices soared 13.5%, the fastest rate in 26 years, as coal prices soared amid a power crunch in China’s industrial heartland. On the oil markets, Brent crude has risen by 0.6% to $85.31 a barrel while US light crude is at $84.46 a barrel, up 0.37%. Shares in Asia have retreated, with Hong Kong’s Hang Seng down 0.3% while the Shanghai Composite Index lost 0.4%, recouping some of their earlier losses, and Japan’s Nikkei fell 0.6%. European stock markets are set to open lower ahead of the latest US inflation data. Out at lunchtime, US inflation figures for October are expected to show consumer prices galloping ahead at 5.8% year on year, a 30-year high, according to a Reuters poll of economists’ forecasts. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets UK, said: With a number of Fed policymakers making louder noises about the need for rate hikes next year, a strong number here could well prompt a rebound in US [bond] yields which have declined quite sharply in the last week or so, with the 10-year down over 15bps from last week’s highs. The Agenda 9am GMT: Italy industrial production for September 1.30pm GMT: US inflation for October (forecast: 5.8%) 1.30pm GMT: US jobless claims 1.30pm GMT: Bank of England policymaker Silvana Tenreyro speaksGovernments and car manufacturers have coalesced at the Glasgow climate talks around new targets to drastically ramp up the use of electric vehicles. But activists at the summit have urged a more fundamental question – what if we just gave up all types of cars? With the new goal of phasing out new sales of gasoline and diesel cars within 20 years, dozens of countries and car companies have used Cop26 to extol the rise of electric vehicles as a way to slash planet-heating emissions. “This is a massive transformation,” said Omar Alghabra, transport minister for Canada, one of the 24 countries to sign on to the new pledge. Alghabra spoke on Wednesday on a panel of government officials and business leaders in the vast Glasgow convention centre, a multicolored Envision formula-E race car perched in the foreground on a podium. “We see this as a massive opportunity for job creation,” he added. Cynthia Williams, environmental policy manager at Ford, one of the carmakers to join the agreement, called for government support to help spread a new wave of electric vehicles around the world. “We need these vehicles now, we need actions to match our ambitions,” she said. “One of the key things we will need to accelerate the electrification revolution is incentives. We need infrastructure, infrastructure, infrastructure. This is needed to get more people in the vehicles, leaving no one behind.” While this grand vision would cut emissions – transport is responsible for about a fifth of the world’s carbon pollution and electric vehicles are much cleaner than fossil fuel-powered cars – climate campaigners have called on governments to have a deeper rethink about the role of cars. At a series of protests held on Wednesday, activists urged greater funding for public transport and walking and cycling paths, arguing that a promised “green revolution” away from cars during the Covid pandemic has failed to materialize in most cities. Nancy Henderson, a protester who lives in Glasgow, said that cycling flourished during lockdown but that many people have switched back to cars as they don’t feel safe cycling in traffic. “That’s an issue with electric cars, people will still feel unsafe with them around,” she said. “It doesn’t actually change the issue of congestion and the number of cars on our streets. Going electric doesn’t change the blight of cars in our cities. We are still isolated in our little booth, not communicating, not meeting other people.” Henderson said many Glaswegians were resentful of the smart card public transport passes given to Cop26 delegates, which enable unlimited use of trains and buses during the conference. “No one else around here has ever got one of those smart cards,” she said. “It marginalizes people when you don’t have good public transport.” Environmental critics of electric cars argue that they still clog up cities and are dangerous to cyclists and pedestrians. While they are vastly less polluting than traditional cars, lithium is mined in often controversial circumstances for the batteries used by electric vehicles, and dust from car brakes and tyres still give off a certain amount of air pollution. At a separate pro-cycling protest held on Wednesday, the designated day to focus on transport at the Cop26 talks, activists held signs reading “Electric cars are a Cop out” and “Car car car blah blah blah”. Iona Shepherd, of the GoBike and Pedal on Parliament groups, who organized the protest, pointed out that “active travel is not even on the table for discussions” at the climate summit. “At the conference electric cars are taking centre stage, while our sustainable form of transport – by far the cheapest and easiest way to cut emissions from transport – doesn’t even get a mention,” she said. “We need the Cop to force through better investment and political will for sustainable transport modes if they are serious about the Paris agreement to limit warming to 1.5C.” Electric vehicle numbers are still dwarfed by those of gasoline and diesel cars around the world but sales have been climbing in recent years and exploded following the pandemic outbreak. Global sales are expected to surpass 5m this year, around 1,000 times higher than a decade ago. Electric vehicle purchases in China, the US and Europe – the top three auto markets – surged by 160% in the first half of 2021 from a year earlier, aided by the enthusiastic backing of political leaders. Joe Biden is pushing for half of all sales in the US to be electric by 2030 and expects to sign a huge spending bill next week that will funnel billions of dollars into consumer rebates to purchase new zero-emissions cars. There should be a rethink of this strategy, activists outside the summit say. “Whilst we recognize the important contribution electric vehicles will have in reducing carbon emissions in the future, we need to reduce emissions now,” said Paul Tuohy, chief executive of Campaign for Better Transport. “Persuading more people to swap at least some journeys from cars to public transport will have immediate benefits for the climate.” • This article was amended on 17 November 2021 to correct the figure relating to the rise in global sales of electric vehicles.‘All of 2020 I spent in this position,” announces Rina Sawayama, lying flat on the stage of Manchester’s Albert Hall. But that year also saw the Japanese-British singer’s career take off vertically. Following a steady drip of acclaimed but niche avant-pop singles, debut album Sawayama was released as the world entered Covid lockdown, propelling her to cult stardom (superfan Elton John later duetted with her). Until now, it had to exist in headphones. This is the second date of her first tour in three years, and walks the line between exuberant victory lap and striking political statement. Bathed in pink and purple lights, Sawayama is flanked by two voguing dancers and a powerhouse shredding guitarist in Vic Jamieson. The operatic high camp of opener Dynasty is a succinct manifesto for Sawayama’s sound – a potentially chaotic mezze of pop tropes that defined the charts of her early 00s childhood. That means shuffling between the gothic bombast of Evanescence and Tatu, and the glossy R&amp;B productions of Destiny’s Child or Timbaland. Sawayama smooths over any contradictions with plenty of humour and pop hooks. A fizzing Comme Des Garçons (Like the Boys) transforms this former Methodist church into a queer rave. But for all the high-energy bangers, it’s the moral authority that stands out. Sawayama studied politics, psychology and sociology at Cambridge, and, during one costume change, a speech by Labour MP Zarah Sultana is played, tying together the climate emergency, Black Lives Matter and trans rights. Chosen Family, a gorgeous hymn to LGBTQ+ solidarity, is played acoustic in a big-hearted cameraphone moment. Between songs, she gives speeches on empowerment and naughtiness, to big applause. Sawayama is also fascinated with the opulence of the 1%. There’s even a brief airing of the piano theme from Succession, while XS, a Tesla-namechecking satire of modern consumption, could be a recasting of Pet Shop Boys’ Opportunities (Let’s Make Lots of Money) for the Logan Roy era. Visibly moved by the uproarious audience response, Sawayama points out that this is the largest crowd she has performed for to date. In an earlier single, she performed a playful caricature of the Ordinary Superstar. On the basis of tonight, an extraordinary one has just been born.Facebook and Instagram are to stop allowing advertisers to target users based on their history of posting, reading or liking content related to subjects such as sexual orientation, religion and political beliefs. The social media networks’ parent company, Meta Platforms, said from January it would remove detailed targeting options that let advertisers seek out users based on their interactions with causes, organisations or public figures related to health, race or ethnicity, political affiliation, religion, or sexual orientation. This means, for example, that advertisers can no longer pay to target people who have shown an interest in same-sex marriage or Catholicism. In a blogpost, Graham Mudd, a Meta Platforms vice- president of product marketing, said: “We want to better match people’s evolving expectations of how advertisers may reach them on our platform and address feedback from civil rights experts, policymakers and other stakeholders on the importance of preventing advertisers from abusing the targeting options we make available.” According to research by the Tech Transparency Project, Facebook had been serving ads for weapons accessories and body armour next to inflammatory discussions in militia and “patriot” groups on the platform, even after the 6 January Capitol attack in Washington. Meta generates 98% of its income from advertisers, who are able to target specific demographics and consumers because the company has built up profiles of its users through their online activity. Meta, which also sells adverts on its Messenger app and to third-party apps through its audience network, made $86bn (£64bn) in revenues last year. Nearly 2 billion people use the Facebook app every day. Meta acknowledged that the move could affect political groups and campaigning organisations, many of which use Facebook for fundraising. “Some of our advertising partners have expressed concerns about these targeting options going away because of their ability to help generate positive societal change, while others understand the decision to remove them,” said Mudd, who added that advocacy groups still had options on the platform for reaching people. However, advertisers on Meta platforms can continue to target billions of users based on a range of options such as age, gender, occupation and location. Meta is under scrutiny on both sides of the Atlantic over its record on keeping users safe following revelations by the whistleblower Frances Haugen, who has released tens of thousands of internal company documents. In a quarterly report released on Tuesday, Meta said the prevalence of hate speech on Facebook had fallen for the fourth quarter in a row. In the third quarter of 2021, it was 0.03% or 3 views of hate speech per 10,000 views of content, down from 0.05% in the second quarter.After 1,056 days, three Queen’s speeches, countless hours of drafting, campaigning, protest and debate, the first environment bill in England for 26 years has passed into law. Environmental activists at the heart of first pressing for the bill and then attempting to make it the best it could be, said its enactment was momentous. While key battlegrounds relating to discharges of raw sewage by water firms, air quality levels and safeguarding the independence of a new body to police and enforce the law remain issues of concern, most involved agree that having the Environment Act is better than not. Ruth Chambers, a senior parliamentary affairs associate for Greener UK, a coalition of NGOs formed to campaign for an environment bill, said: “I feel a mixture of emotions. There is a sense of relief that finally we are here after so many days and years of hard work. And there is anticipation because now the really hard job starts. Passing the act is momentous but will count for nothing if it’s not seized upon with vigour by government and translated into real action on the ground.” Chambers was there from the beginning, when the idea of an environment act was not on the government’s mind. After the UK left the EU, European directives that related to the environment were rolled over into UK law via the Withdrawal Act. “The government said there wasn’t going to be a governance gap and if there was then judicial review would cover it,” said Chambers. But in a testament to the campaigning powers of the environmental movement, MPs and ministers were persuaded that such a crucial area required specific legislation. The draft bill was published on 19 December 2018. Since then it has taken 1,056 days to come into law. Battles have been high-profile and bruising. The issue of the scale of raw sewage discharges by water companies became one of national concern, from grassroots protests on beaches to rebellions within the Conservative camp in parliament. Other tendentious fights took place over the independence and powers of the body that fills the enforcement gap left by the European court and European Commission – the Office for Environmental Protection (OEP). These fights are not yet finished, campaigners say. “The campaign to #EndSewagePollution is far from over. Our voices and our action meant the parliamentary vote on this was very close, with MPs from all parties voting in support of this legal duty on water companies. And whilst we lost the vote, this tight race will have sent a clear message to ministers that much more must be done,” said Surfers Against Sewage. Chambers said the lack of provision to strengthen the independence of the OEP was a glaring omission. “Some safeguards have been built in, yet ministers remain in charge of determining the watchdog’s budget and board, and they have retained a wide power to ‘guide’ its enforcement work, which we fear could be used to curtail its freedom to make up its own mind about when to enforce environmental law.” Jenny Jones, who with other peers voted for amendments to toughen the OEP and for action over sewage discharges, which were rejected by the government, said: “I am torn between pleasure that we finally have an environment act, even though it took until the last week of Cop, but I am also very disappointed that the government didn’t allow us to make it even better. “We have to come back to the issue of adequate enforcement of any measures, plus the setting targets. For example, allowing water companies to continue frequent discharges without a timetable for reduction is plain wrong.” Chambers, too, said the fight for the best law possible would continue. The act requires the government to set long-term improvement targets on air, water, nature and waste. The first targets will go to public consultation early next year. “This will be the first major test of the government’s ambition,” said Chambers. “Given the huge public interest in solving the crises of toxic air, sewage pollution, plastic waste and endangered wildlife, it’s clear that there is only one direction of travel that will satisfy the court of public opinion.”The former UK attorney general Sir Geoffrey Cox is facing a conflict of interest claim after it emerged that he had lobbied against imposing tougher financial regulation on the Cayman Islands just months after he gained more than £40,000 from legal firms based in the tax haven. The Conservative MP is under the spotlight over MPs’ second jobs as the fallout from a sleaze scandal engulfing the Conservative party continues. His £1m of extra earnings raised questions about how much time he was devoting to his job funded by the public purse. After Labour referred him to the standards commissioner for appearing to attend a court hearing remotely from his Commons office, Cox’s other legal work came under scrutiny. It has emerged that Cox argued against an amendment to the sanctions and anti-money laundering bill debated in parliament in May 2018. The proposal would have imposed stricter regulation on British overseas territories by forcing them to create a public register of company owners. However, Cox, the MP for Torridge and West Devon, opposed the measure. He said it broke a promise to the people of the Cayman Islands that the UK government would not impose legislation without their consent. Cox claimed the Cayman Islands were “given a constitution in which the responsibility for the governance of their financial and economic affairs was solemnly conveyed to them by this parliament”, and that the amendment would “require that constitution to be amended so that the section that conveys on them the power to make their own orders in these affairs will have to be removed”. The MP’s entry in the register of interests published in August that year said he was paid tens of thousands of pounds for legal work by companies based in the Cayman Islands. The register said he received £40,000 for 60 hours of work between September 2017 and February 2018 paid by Messrs Travers, Thorp, Alberga, Attorneys, based on Grand Cayman island. The firm describes itself as advising on “all types of offshore entities”. A further £3,135 was paid from Bradys Attorneys-at-Law, also registered on Grand Cayman, for 25 hours of work between January 2016 and July 2017. The company says it offers court representation, as well as trade and business advice. Cox alluded to his work for firms based in an overseas tax haven during the debate in 2018. At the end, he told the Speaker: “I should have made it clear … that I have on occasions practised in some of the Caribbean countries that formed the basis of our discussion in my capacity as a member of the Bar. I have done that for more than 20 years and I have a familiarity with those jurisdictions as a result.” Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, who referred Cox to the standards commissioner on Tuesday night, said it appeared that he was “trying to prevent a crackdown on tax avoidance”. She claimed this would be a “glaring conflict of interest and an insult to British taxpayers”. Rayner added: “You can be an MP serving your constituents or a barrister working for a tax haven – you can’t be both, and Boris Johnson needs to make his mind up as to which one Cox will be.” Cox, who has only spoken once in parliament since he left the government last February, has been contacted for comment. Earlier on Wednesday his office released a statement defending his outside business practices. It said he “makes no secret of his professional activities” but that he “always ensures that his casework on behalf of his constituents is given primary importance and fully carried out”.The former attorney general Sir Geoffrey Cox is the MP currently in the spotlight amid a wider controversy about second jobs and outside interests, after it emerged that in his work as a QC he has been representing the British Virgin Islands (BVI), both from London and the Caribbean. In a statement on Wednesday, the Torridge and West Devon MP insisted he had done nothing improper, and that his extensive outside work was “no secret”. Nonetheless, Labour and the Lib Dems have demanded an inquiry into Cox’s activities. Here are the main areas of controversy over his extra-parliamentary work: Doing outside work while in parliament While MPs are allowed to have other jobs, they are not permitted to use parliamentary resources to do them. This was one of the charges upheld against Owen Paterson, the now-resigned Tory MP whose paid lobbying instigated the current fuss. Paterson held meetings connected to his lobbying in his Commons office, and used Commons stationery for some letters. Footage has emerged of Cox taking part virtually in hearings in which he represented the BVI over allegations of misgovernance and corruption. He appears to be doing so from his parliamentary office. At one point on 14 September Cox apologised for an absence, saying “the bell went off”, thought to be an apparent reference to the division bell, which calls MPs to vote. Opposition parties want Kathryn Stone, the parliamentary commissioner for standards, to investigate what they believe is a breach of the rules. In his statement, Cox says he would accept Stone’s verdict, but “does not believe that he breached the rules”. Working abroad while parliament was sitting As well as representing the BVI via video link, Cox represented its government and its premier, Andrew Fahie, in person in the Caribbean, in April, May and June this year, including periods when the Commons was sitting. Cox took part in a number of votes while he was away, doing so via a proxy. Proxy voting was first introduced to the Commons in January 2019, initially just for new parents. In June last year, amid Covid, the arrangement was extended for MPs who could not be in Westminster for medical or public health reasons, and then in November, to any MPs who preferred to not vote in person “for medical or public health reasons relating to the pandemic”. This element expired in July this year. Under the rules as set out, Cox would appear not be have been allowed to cast a proxy vote so he could do non-MP work. However, in his statement Cox said he “consulted the chief whip specifically on this issue and was advised that it was appropriate”. Travelling abroad amid the pandemic During spring, restrictions on travelling abroad remained notably tougher than they are now. Overseas trips from England were only permitted with a “reasonable excuse”. One of these was travel for business “where it is not reasonably possible to complete that work within the UK”. Among examples listed were work linked to critical infrastructure, national security or diplomatic purposes. Cox is likely to have a reasonable argument that his trip was necessary, both in terms of the difficulty of holding weeks of legal hearings remotely, and the fact he was representing a national government. Working too many outside hours to be an effective MP Cox’s contribution to the register of MPs’ interests shows significant hours devoted to Withers, the international law firm representing the BVI, with a continuing commitment from this month of up to 41 hours a month, or around 10 hours a week. It does seem to be the case that Cox’s contributions to the work of the Commons have been minimal since he took on the BVI case. From 1 April this year until now, Cox has spoken just three times in the chamber, according to Hansard, all on the same day, 13 September. However, as long as MPs do not break rules, for example on paid lobbying, there is in effect no limit on how much outside work they carry out, and it is up to their electors to decide. Cox makes this point in his statement, one he opted to voice in the third person: “Sir Geoffrey’s view is that it is up to the electors of Torridge and West Devon whether or not they vote for someone who is a senior and distinguished professional in his field and who still practises that profession.”The BBC has quit a diversity programme run by the LGBTQ+ charity Stonewall, saying it believes coverage of transgender issues should be considered an impartiality topic that requires the inclusion of critical voices. The national broadcaster said it would no longer be a member of the Diversity Champions programme, under which the corporation paid Stonewall for ongoing advice and assessments on creating inclusive workplaces. The BBC director general, Tim Davie, told staff it was “unquestionable” that its ongoing participation in the scheme “has led some organisations and individuals to consider that the BBC cannot be impartial when reporting on public policy debates where Stonewall is taking an active, campaigning, role”. He made clear that the BBC’s journalism had not been compromised by the involvement. He said: “While I do not think that our journalism has been influenced by our involvement in the Diversity Champions programme, not renewing our involvement is the correct move at this time to minimise the risk of perceived bias and avoid any perception that engagement with the programme is influencing our own decision-making.” Stonewall said it was a shame the BBC had chosen to withdraw and added that “many of the arguments against trans people today are simply recycled homophobia from the 80s and 90s”. Stonewall provides paying members with training material and access to advice on LGBTQ+ policies, along with a promise to provide assessments and “tell you where you’re doing great things and where you can improve”. The trade union Bectu, which represents a large number of BBC staff, said it was “hugely disappointed” with the decision and that it would be “incredibly damaging to the morale of the LGBT workforce and will negatively impact the BBC’s ability to attract talent in the future”. The decision comes shortly after the BBC was forced to edit a piece describing how some lesbians felt pressured into sex with trans women after one of the main sources posted transphobic messages. Last year, BBC journalists were also told they could attend Pride marches only if they did not take a stance on “politicised or contested issues” – widely interpreted by LGBTQ+ staff as meaning no public position on trans rights. BBC management have come under substantial external pressure to withdraw from the Stonewall scheme, which has already been abandoned by several government departments and the media regulator Ofcom. This included a 10-part BBC podcast presented by Stephen Nolan, which suggested some BBC staff were unable to air gender-critical views because of the charity’s influence. Davie acknowledged many LGBT and trans staff would be disappointed by the decision to withdraw from the scheme. He said: “Some have asked me whether the BBC needs to be ‘impartial on trans people’s lives’. I want to be clear, our impartiality is infused with democratic values and we are not impartial on human rights. In simple terms, what that means is that we don’t condone or support discrimination in any form.” However, he also said the treatment of trans people in society was an impartiality topic in the eyes of the BBC, unlike others such as gay rights or the climate crisis. “Our editorial guidelines are also clear: when reporting on policy debates, our journalism must be impartial and reflect a range of views. I want our reporting to cover a range of topics and different perspectives, to help our audiences understand and engage with the world around them.” Coverage of trans rights has increasingly split the BBC newsroom, with a broad divide along age lines. Many younger staff feel it is a topic that is not up for debate, while many older staff believe gender-critical views must be aired to meet impartiality requirements. One problem for Davie is that the issue is increasingly spilling out of the BBC’s newsroom and into other parts of the organisation, which are bound by a lower standard of news impartiality guidelines. He said the BBC remained committed to LGBTQ+ inclusion and “providing a workplace in which lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and non-binary colleagues are respected, welcomed and able to fully participate”.Two Germans and a Chilean have been detained over the murder in Paraguay of a German man and his daughter in a crime police believe was related to the theft of rare Stradivarius violins. Bernard Raymond von Bredow, 62, a museum owner and luthier, was slain along with his 14-year-old daughter Lydia last month at their home in Aregua, east of the Paraguayan capital. Police said Von Bredow’s body showed signs of torture. Commissioner Hugo Grance, the chief investigator of the local police, said four violins believed to have been made by the revered Italian luthier Antonio Stradivari were found in the possession of Volker Grannas, a 58-year-old German who lived near the Von Bredow residence. Also arrested were Yves Asriel Spartacus Steinmetz, 60, and Chilean Stephen Jorg Messing Darchinger, 51. None had been formally charged yet, however, said prosecutor Lorena Ledesma. Grance said that Von Bredow apparently had left the violins with Grannas during a trip to Germany, and was told when he returned that they had been destroyed in a fire. “Our principal hypothesis is that the motive for the double crime was to find the international certification of authenticity of the violins so they could be sold,” he said. Ledesma said officials were seeking further evidence because they suspect more people were involved. “To commit the crime and such a brutal murder it must be because they knew the victims. We’ve found a lot of evidence,” said Ledesma. Violins crafted by Stradivari in the 17th and 18th centuries can sell for millions of dollars. Von Bredow gained notice as a teenager when he discovered the complete skeleton of a mammoth near his home town of Siegsdorf in Bavaria. He later founded a museum on mammoths and also pursued work in biology, geology and other fields, according to the biography on his museum’s website. Neighbors in Aregua said Von Bredow had settled in the town two years ago and dedicated himself to making violins. Grance said last week that Von Bredow’s house “was found in complete disarray and blood stains indicated that the Germans were probably killed elsewhere on the property. The man had traces of having been tortured,” Grance added. The officer said the evidence at the scene indicates “that two or more individuals sought something” inside the house.Liverpool have confirmed that Michael Edwards will leave his role as sporting director at the end of the season. The 42-year-old celebrates 10 years at Anfield this month but he confirmed in a lengthy open letter to supporters that this will be his last season at the club. It is understood that Edwards, who previously served as chief scout at both Tottenham and Portsmouth, is keen to explore new opportunities. “Ten years, that’s a pretty long time in anyone’s working life,” he wrote. “In football terms, it is an era in itself, particularly at a club like Liverpool where the expectations and standards are never anything other than as high as the supporters deserve. To be part of this club during this period has been a privilege due to the people I have been fortunate enough to work with and the success we have enjoyed. “But all good things must come to an end and, in my case, I recently completed my final summer window as Liverpool sporting director. Even writing those words seems a bit surreal, but at the end of this season I will pack up my laptop and leave my office for the last time.” The Liverpool manager, Jürgen Klopp, added: “I wish Michael and his wonderful family all the best, for whatever they choose to do next. I know he isn’t leaving immediately or in haste, which is cool, so we still have some time to work together. If we are as fortunate and blessed, as we have been so far, maybe we can create more special memories for our club in this remaining time. “He has been a constant presence during my period at LFC and his contribution to our success is clear for everyone to see.” Edwards will be replaced by Julian Ward – who joined Liverpool from Manchester City in 2012 as part of the club’s recruitment and scouting team and has recently served as assistant to Edwards – as sporting director at the end of the season.Soaring coronavirus rates in Germany are threatening plans for a rollout of the country’s famous Christmas markets, due to open in about a week’s time. There had been considerable fanfare over municipalities’ plans to stage the markets this year after they were called off a year ago. Hopes that the vaccine campaign – which started in Germany on 27 December last year – would have enabled markets to go ahead have been thwarted by a low uptake rate – only about 67% of Germans are fully vaccinated – and the spread of the more infectious Delta variant. On Wednesday, Germany registered a record number of cases for a third day in a row, with just under 40,000 new infections, predicted to reach 100,000 in the next 10 days, while 236 deaths were registered, and hospital authorities warned intensive care units were in danger of reaching capacity before Christmas. Berlin’s Charité hospital announced it was cancelling all non-urgent operations in order to free up beds for a growing number of Covid-19 patients. With tens of thousands of Germans expected to travel at Christmas time, the fear is that case numbers will increase further over the holiday period. Politicians have been under mounting pressure to announce the pandemic is nearing an end after an optimistic few months over the summer and autumn. The reopening of the markets is part of that narrative, even as data shows the health emergency is far from over. Tighter controls had been announced to allow Christmas markets to go ahead, with organisers expected to monitor visitors’ entry in some cases by putting fencing around venues, and with many markets due to insist on vaccine certificates or proof of recovery from coronavirus. Market stalls are to be erected with more distance between them, and the numbers allowed in are to be restricted. Organisers and health authorities have issued appeals for visitors to use common sense, keep their distance from other market-goers and to wear masks. But now authorities from Bavaria in the south to Saxony and Thuringia in the east have begun announcing the cancellation of many scheduled markets, saying a rising infection rate means it would be irresponsible for them to go ahead. Berlin’s Charlottenburg Palace market was cancelled after its operator said enforcing mask-wearing, as well as an alcohol ban in place owing to its location in a public park under the German capital’s infection protection law, made the event impossible to hold. The market’s Tommy Erbe told German media: “Once again, politics has failed to create clear and real conditions for organisers in time.” Nuremberg, one of the country’s most popular markets, is due to go ahead but its opening ceremony will only take place online. Other cities such as Dortmund have cancelled their Christmas lights ceremonies, arguing that health and safety regulations had made events too costly to hold. Holger Zastrow, the head of the Augustustmarkt in Dresden, due to open on 24 November, said he remained optimistic it would go ahead. “At 500 metres long, our market has the longest promenade of any in Germany, and we will open,” he told German media. “Everything is so spread out that it is not necessary to carry out controls, whether of tests or vaccine passports.” Germany’s Weihnachtsmärkte do not only contribute to the seasonal spirit – offering families and parties of office workers up and down the country the chance to get into the festive mood with everything from Glühwein and roast chestnuts to a range of arts and crafts and fairground amusements – they are also huge business. Typically they attract more than 150 million visitors a year, including many tourists from abroad, and generate about €3bn (£2.6bn) in revenue annually. They normally open from mid- to late November until just before Christmas. The virologist Christian Drosten, a leading German voice throughout the pandemic, warned in his regular podcast on coronavirus on Tuesday, in an episode titled SOS – Iceberg Ahead, that Germany faced an escalation that would be hard to control and lead to tens of thousands of additional deaths if authorities did not reintroduce tighter measures, including contact restrictions. “We need to be able to control infection activity again, and testing is not an adequate way of doing that. The tests are viewed as an emergency brake, to break the wave, but there is no way they will do that.” Previous waves, Drosten said, had shown that the only way to lower the incidence rate was a change in the behaviour of the entire population. “When people change their behaviour and take the threat more seriously, that has an effect,” he said. “We are in an emergency situation.” He said the most effective way of ending the pandemic was for the entire population to have received three vaccination shots, though he admitted it was an unrealistic prospect. There has been much focus in Germany in recent days on neighbouring Denmark, which had announced its pandemic was over last month but which has reintroduced restrictions this week over a rise in cases, and on Austria, which has managed to considerably boost the number of people willing to receive a vaccine by introducing strict so-called 2G rules, meaning that only those who are vaccinated or recovered can take part in many activities such as visiting cinemas or hairdressers. Germany is also debating a mandatory vaccine for people working in certain fields such as care homes and hospitals.GETTING SHIRTY The Fiver has lost count of the amount of times we’ve sharpened our pencil and taken aim at the Premier League for not having rules robust enough to stop nefarious forces flooding into the English top flight. Vulture capitalists? Hello. Online betting companies? Show us the money. Blood-soaked regimes? The washing machine is right over there. So imagine our surprise when the powers that be pointed to their rulebook to make it clear what they were not willing to tolerate: teams wearing away kits at home. For charidee. Yep, well done Richard Masters and co – what a show of strength! It stems from an approach to the Premier League by Shelter, the organisation campaigning to end homelessness in England, asking for its support for #NoHomeKit. “The idea is simple but powerful: this Boxing Day, clubs and fans ditch their home colours for their away or third kit, showing support for people who don’t have a safe home.” It’s a brilliant proposal and a cause that even our mean-spirited relatives would support. You’d think it was an open goal for an organisation up to its elbows in bad publicity after the Newcastle takeover. But nope, here’s a faceless suit, perhaps dressed like Scrooge, with a view from their paymasters. “The Premier League receives a large number of requests from charities every season, however we aren’t able to support all centrally,” they blabbed. “Clubs are entitled to support charitable causes, and we encourage clubs to do so, provided it is in compliance with Premier League rules.” Those rules state home teams must wear home kits as their first priority. The backlash was understandably swift. “The Premier League have obviously got no heart,” roared Trevor Sinclair, while Gary Neville – who has helped house homeless people in his Manchester hotel – also took aim, damning it with comparisons to the PM. “Imagine refusing a request to raise money and awareness for homelessness,” he sighed. “A Johnson-like U-turn on its way if the clubs push hard.” The only good to come out of the iron-hearted decision so far is that it has arguably given Shelter’s campaign more publicity in the run-up to Christmas than it would have received had the Premier League done the right thing and said yes. The Fiver’s not always the most charitable, but we’ll be getting right behind Shelter by plucking our dusty Dukla Prague away kit out of the attic and donating some of our soft-earned to a vital cause. We might even dig deep to buy Premier League suits a moral compass for Christmas. They certainly need one. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join Daniel Harris from 5.45pm GMT for Women’s Big Cup MBM coverage of HB Koge 0-4 Arsenal. QUOTE OF THE DAY “Paris Saint-Germain condemns in the strongest possible terms the violence committed. The club has taken all necessary measures to guarantee the health, well-being and safety of its entire women’s team. Paris Saint-Germain is working with the Versailles police to clarify the facts” – the French club respond after women’s midfielder Aminata Diallo was taken into custody following an alleged attack on teammate Kheira Hamraoui last week. FIVER LETTERS “With it looking likely that Frank Lampard will go to Norwich and $tevie Mbe to Villa, we may finally have found something that they can successfully do together: getting relegated” – Antony Train. “On seeing the link to the old Ormondroyd virtual match report thingy (yesterday’s Fiver letters), I was momentarily excited then let down by the fact that none of the links within work. Thinking whether to send an email, at first I decided that anything I could write would be predictable and generic. Then I remembered who I was writing to. Thanks for the consistency” – Mike Anthony (and 1,056 others who may like this, this, this, this, this, this and this). “Re: paying for The Fiver (yesterday’s letters). Please reassure Dan Ashley that he is not alone. All of us long-term readers have paid for it on some level” – Richard O’Hagan. “I was trying to avoid this recent Fiver nostalgia-fest. However, it’s international fortnight and I’m already bored, so can I request a return of the best thing The Fiver ever did, which – I grant you – is a low bar: the battle of Rubbish Song Lyrics. Having said that, by now we already know the answer to the worst of all time, don’t we?” – Noble Francis. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Richard O’Hagan. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS The former commentator and broadcaster Gerald Sinstadt has died aged 91. Clubs and governing bodies signed up to the FA’s leadership diversity code have collectively failed to hit any of the recruitment targets set related to women. Liverpool sporting director Michael Edwards will ride off into the sunset at the end of the season, with Julian Ward replacing him. Czech billionaire Daniel Kretinsky has shelled out for a 27% stake in West Ham to become the club’s second-largest shareholder. “I greatly appreciate and respect the exceptional history and tradition of West Ham you Irrrronnnns,” he cheered. Emile Smith Rowe reckons a groundbreaking new diet – and an in-house chef – is the reason for the form that has earned him an England call. “I’ve tried to cut out chocolate and takeaways as much as I can,” he sighed. “Chris comes to my house every day. I live with my mum and she normally cooks but she doesn’t have to any more.” Chelsea boss Emma Hayes is delighted that Maren Mjelde is back from knack after her return in the 7-0 Women’s Big Cup win at Servette. “She’s a Rolls-Royce of a footballer,” tooted Hayes. And Bayern Munich fans will step up their attempts to force the club to cut its ties with Qatar by presenting a motion at the club’s upcoming AGM. “Instead of bringing about changes, Bayern is actively helping the Emirate of Qatar through sponsorship to distract attention from the grievances,” said Michael Ott, the motion’s initiator. “If Bayern remains silent on the situation in Qatar, our club is expressing its indifference. With this, Bayern is damaging its reputation and not living up to its responsibilities as a role model.” RECOMMENDED LISTENING The latest Football Weekly special welcomes John Barnes into the pod. RECOMMENDED VOTING The FSA Awards are coming soon and various members of Big Website are up for gongs. Vote now and vote regularly. STILL WANT MORE? Poland defender Matty Cash gets his chat on with Paul Doyle. Scotland keeper Craig Gordon gets his chat on with Ewan Murray. Golden Goal is back, baby, with this lovely read on Ronaldo v Lazio. Has a player’s name ever been deemed too offensive to broadcast? The Knowledge has a delve. The power of perceptions and PR in football management. By Chris Evans. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! ‘LEAVE ME TO LOVE’Anat Shenker-Osorio: ‘A massive achievement’ The infrastructure bill is a massive achievement for Democrats in a country where naming a post office requires herculean efforts thanks to Republicans hell bent on impeding progress. This is a bill to protect the water we drink and bridges we cross, to deliver reliable internet to our farms and modern equipment to our ports. Whether the American people will see it as such is a different question. I would like to live in a place where what people think about Democrats depends on what Democrats say and do. But, in America, how this bill will affect voters’ views depends largely on how the media cover it. To date, stories have centered on legislative process and conflict, aka “Democrats infighting”. To be sure, there is division at play: but it’s between the richest few plus the politicians they pay for and the rest of us, who support the provisions in this bill and Build Back Better (BBB) by large margins. When the media accurately report this, and give proper due to the Democrats acting for Americans of every color, creed and background, this bill and – when passed – BBB will be recognized as Democratic party accomplishments. And an accomplishment for democracy, too; for it’s thanks to the voters who turned out in record numbers last year that we have new leaders who govern in our name. Anat Shenker-Osorio is the host of Words To Win By: a podcast about progressive wins Bhaskar Sunkara: ‘Are the best days of Bidenism behind us?’ Joe Biden’s infrastructure legislation, even in its scaled-back form, is an obvious policy success. Its $1.2tn in funding for roads and bridges, mass transit and rail service, as well as upgrades to ports, the electric grid and water infrastructure will pay dividends for generations to come. The real questions rest around the political aspect of this policy victory. This is the second major piece of legislation from the Biden administration, along with the important withdrawal of US troops from Afghanistan. Yet somehow Biden and the Democrats appear weak and ineffective to many Americans. The president is held hostage by a few conservative members of his own party and has been unable to clearly sell his broader and more ambitious Build Back Better bill – the vote for which has been decoupled from the infrastructure bill and delayed, to the frustration of progressives – with a clear message. From the perspective of this socialist, the pending Build Back Better bill may actually try to do too much, throwing money at problems that require more coordination, planning and state capacity to properly solve. Biden would be far better able to sell his agenda if it centered around a few big, fully funded and universal programs. Of course, the design of the emerging BBB bill is not Biden’s fault alone. It reflects the varied (and sometimes rotten) interests of the Democratic caucus and the unwieldiness of the American political system. For now, Biden has a much-needed political win. But I, once again, can’t help feeling that the best days of Bidenism might already be behind us. Bhaskar Sunkara is the editor of Jacobin, a Guardian US columnist and the author of The Socialist Manifesto – The Case for Radical Politics in an Era of Extreme Inequality Steve Phillips: ‘This is a big deal’ When you examine the Bipartisan Infrastructure Framework (BIF) through a historical lens, it looks pretty damn good. Throughout US history there has actually been pretty strong support for robust government investment in people and infrastructure so long as the beneficiaries of said largesse were white. The New Deal and the GI Bill enjoyed broad support, but, as Ira Katznelson wrote in When Affirmative Action Was White, “the GI Bill did create a more middle-class society, but almost exclusively for whites.” As people of color began to demand their fair share of the public pie (which they helped bake through back-breaking, wealth-creating work by, among other things, picking cotton and grapes and laying railroad tracks), the political will for public investments dropped dramatically. From Prince Edward county, Virginia, shutting down its schools entirely rather than desegregate in 1959 to the fierce resistance to Obamacare, getting support for any public investments has been a Herculean task. As a result the infrastructure has atrophied in ways that endanger the public in general and poor people and people of color in particular. The Flint, Michigan, water crisis showed how aging lead pipes can create a health crisis. Every lead pipe in the country will now be replaced. The pandemic laid bare the digital divide of who has access to high-speed internet and who doesn’t, and now rural areas can get broadband access. Politically, you don’t have to look far back into history to understand the importance of the infrastructure bill. No legislation at all would be coming out of Congress had Stacey Abrams and the Georgia civic engagement groups not flipped the two Senate seats in the January runoff elections. Given where we were, I’m feeling that the BIF is a BFD. Steve Phillips is the founder of Democracy in Color and author of Brown is the New White: How the Demographic Revolution Has Created a New American Majority Lloyd Green: ‘A shot in the arm’ The infrastructure package is a shot in the arm for the US, a badly needed win for Joe Biden, and a reminder that the Democrats face an uphill climb in next year’s midterms. The US Senate passed the bipartisan infrastructure framework last August by a wide margin, but it took three more months for the House to adopt the legislation. Suffice to say, the ensuing delay did not engender public trust. Looking back, Mitch McConnell and 18 of his Republican colleagues said “yes” to a $1tn spending on roads and bridges, but too many House Democrats appeared ready to make the perfect the enemy of the good. Less than a year in the job, polls show the president trailing Donald Trump in a hypothetical rematch. Meanwhile, South Carolina’s representative James Clyburn, the number three Democrat in the House, is warning that internal divisions may cost his party control of both houses of Congress. Over in Pennsylvania, Representative Conor Lamb, the state’s likely Democratic senatorial candidate, has taken to calling himself a “normal Democrat” to distinguish himself from his caucus’s more recalcitrant and “socialist” members. Last Friday night’s vote may have stanched Biden and the Democrats’ bleeding– the question is, for how long? Lloyd Green is an attorney in New York and was opposition research counsel to George HW Bush’s 1988 campaign and served in the Department of Justice from 1990 to 1992The former Northern Ireland secretary Julian Smith is facing scrutiny for earning £144,000 a year from companies with close links to the region. The Conservative MP for Skipton and Ripon earns up to £3,000 per hour as an “external adviser” offering guidance on “business development” for a hydrogen company owned by a Tory donor who also runs a Northern Irish bus factory. The register of members interests shows Smith also works with a cruise ship refurbisher based in Newry, County Down, and the UK subsidiary of an Irish offshore wind company that is exploring an expansion to Northern Ireland. All three of Smith’s extra jobs were approved by the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments (Acoba), the parliamentary watchdog that polices the commercial interests of MPs and civil servants. Acoba put several conditions on its approval, including that Smith would not lobby or have any contact with ministers and government departments in connection with his clients. There is no suggestion Smith has breached any parliamentary rules. But campaigners and other MPs have raised concerns, saying Acoba’s approval of Smith’s consultancies “beggars belief”, and existing rules needed to be “significantly tightened”. Parliament’s committee on standards, which advises the prime minister on ethics in public life, is considering recommending a bar on MPs having second jobs as political or parliamentary consultants, following the scandal surrounding the MP Owen Paterson. Paterson, another former Northern Ireland secretary, said he would leave the Commons after criticism of his “egregious” lobbying on behalf of two Northern Irish businesses. Smith, a former chief whip, held the Northern Ireland brief from July 2019 to February 2020, helping restore the power-sharing agreement after a three-year deadlock. Just a few months after being sacked by Boris Johnson, he began accepting paid advisory work for companies connected to the region. Since August 2020, Smith has declared payments £60,000 a year for 20 hours’ work – equivalent to £3,000 per hour – by Ryse Hydrogen, now renamed Hygen Energy. The company is owned by Jo Bamford, an heir to the JCB digger-making fortune who has donated £75,000 to the Conservatives. The Bamford family and its companies have given £8.7m to the Tories since 2002. Bamford is also the owner of the Bamford Bus Company, which took over the Northern Irish bus-maker Wrightbus in October 2019, months after Smith started work as Northern Ireland secretary. Smith has declared that he had a meeting with Bamford in January 2020, while still a minister, to discuss growth plans for Wrightbus. Wrightbus has contracts worth £12m and £66m respectively with Transport for London and Northern Ireland’s Department for Infrastructure. Since March, Smith has also been employed at a rate of £60,000 for 30-40 hours’ work by the Newry cruise ship refurbisher MJM Marine. The company was briefly linked with a purchase of the struggling Belfast shipyard Harland &amp; Wolff, although MJM Marine reportedly dropped its interest shortly before Smith started his role. Since January, Smith has been collecting £2,000 a month to advise Simply Blue Management (UK), a subsidiary of the Irish offshore wind company Simply Blue. A spokesperson for the company, which already has projects in the Celtic Sea and Scotland, confirmed it was exploring expansion to Northern Ireland. Its two founders incorporated Simply Blue Energy (NI) in June. Richard Burgon, a Labour MP who is proposing a private members bill to ban second jobs for parliamentarians, said: “When MPs are getting huge sums like this for a few hours’ work the public will rightly ask themselves in whose interest are these MPs really working? It beggars belief that this was permitted and it should be urgently reviewed. “There is a simple way of preventing anything like this from happening again which is to ban MPs from having second jobs.” Tom Brake, a former Liberal Democrat MP and the director of the Unlock Democracy campaign group, said: “Acoba approved these roles with indecent haste and conditions that will be very hard to monitor. Who is the fly on the wall to verify whether MPs refrain from lobbying the government or using information obtained in government? “The rules need to be changed to create a real firewall between ministers’ experience and their ability to use their knowledge and expertise to influence government. Nothing less than five years will do.” Stephen Farry, an MP for Northern Ireland’s Alliance party, said the regulations on MPs’ second jobs needed reform. He said the party “believes in the highest standards around openness, transparency and good governance. We believe the rules on outside work need to be significantly tightened and look forward to engaging with that process.” Smith did not respond to a request for comment. Bamford’s companies and MJM Marine were approached for comment. Simply Blue declined to comment.Stephen Colbert Stephen Colbert lamented the inflation of food prices on Tuesday’s Late Show, specifically: meatflation, as prices for sirloin, boneless chunk roast and bacon have increased by 25%. In Canada, a rib roast could now cost as much as $100. “That’s ridiculous,” said Colbert. “A hundred dollars? The only hunk of Canadian meat worth that much is Ryan Gosling.” But meat is only the “rib-tip of the iceberg”, as prices are increasing for everything from cooking oil to dairy to pizza ingredients, forcing many New York pizza shops to abandon the classic $1 slice. “It’s gotten so bad that Pizza Rat can only afford garlic knots,” Colbert joked. The inflated meat prices have been a drag on Joe Biden’s approval ratings, now down to 38%, and a CNN poll found that the majority of Americans believe Biden isn’t paying attention to the nation’s most important issues. “Yes, he’s focused on things Americans don’t care about, like infrastructure,” Colbert observed. “He needs to change his slogan from ‘Build Back Better’ to ‘We Have the Meats!’” Trevor Noah On the Daily Show, Trevor Noah celebrated the passage of Biden’s $1.2tn infrastructure bill, which received support from 13 Republicans, to the chagrin of many colleagues. Donald Trump said Republicans who voted for the bill should be ashamed of themselves, while Representative Majorie Taylor Greene of Georgia called them “traitors” helping the communist takeover of America. “Which I know sounds crazy, but think about it – how are Soviet tanks gonna invade America? Over the newly refurbished roads and bridges,” Noah joked. “That’s why you’ve gotta keep your roads and bridges broken, it’s called homeland security, people.” It’s not just fellow lawmakers – Congressman Fred Upton of Michigan said he was harassed by constituents for working with Democrats, with a voicemail calling him a “traitor” and a “piece of shit” whose family should die, among other insults. “And they say political discourse is dead,” Noah joked. “This is really disturbing, because what kind of person leaves voicemails any more? “This partisan anger, it’s happening over an infrastructure bill, people,” he added. “Infrastructure! I mean, I would get it if the new roads they were building all led to an abortion clinic, or if they were adding special carpool lanes for nonbinary people, but it’s just fixing things for everybody! So I don’t get the anger.” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel updated viewers on the congressional inquiry into the insurrection on 6 January. On Monday, Team Trump asked a federal judge to prevent the records from being released, which the judge refused. “This could be bad for Donald Trump,” Kimmel explained. “If these documents are made public, we may finally know whether Trump and his associates were as involved in the events of January 6th as we already know they were.” The congressional committee issued subpoenas on Tuesday for 10 associates of Donald Trump, on top of six subpoenas on Monday. “Congress wants them to provide testimony and to shed light on the war room that was assembled at the Willard hotel in DC, where Trump’s minions brainstormed ways to overturn the election,” Kimmel said. “Boy, if they do ever end up arresting Trump, they should let Hillary cuff him. Shouldn’t they, just for fun?” Kimmel also touched on how Trump acolytes in the media have begun to spin the siege in January. “At first they seemed to agree that it was bad, but the new thing these rightwing cable channels are doing is treating these criminals who literally tried to overthrow our government, who if they weren’t white people with tattoos of Pepe the frog on their necks, Newsmax, Fox, OANN, they’d be calling for the death penalty,” he said. “Instead, they’re treating them like some kind of conscientious objectors, or something.”A Thai court’s ruling that protesters’ calls for reform of the monarchy amounted to an attempt to overthrow it has been likened to “a judicial coup”. Thailand’s political establishment was shocked last year when the leaders of a wave of youthful protests that broke a long-held taboo in calling for curbs on the royal family issued a 10-point list of demands, including that the royal budget be reduced and that the king not interfere with politics. The constitutional court, ruling in a hearing on the cases of three protest leaders – Panusaya Sithijirawattanakul, 23, Arnon Nampa, 37, and Panupong Jadnok, 24 – said such demands were an “abuse of the rights and freedoms and harmed the state’s security” and ordered an end to them. Thailand has one of the world’s harshest lese majesty laws, which states that anyone who “defames, insults or threatens the king, queen, heir apparent or regent” can face between three and 15 years in prison. The protesters had also called for that law to be scrapped. “If we allow the first, second and third defendant and their networks to keep doing this action, it will not be long to lead to the overthrow of the constitutional monarchy,” said the judge, Chiranit Havanond, according to AFP. Sunai Phasuk, a senior researcher with Human Rights Watch, described the ruling as “essentially a judicial coup” that could pave the way for further legal cases against protesters, who could be accused of treason. “By asserting that sovereign power belongs to the monarchy not the people, this puts an end to Thailand’s constitutional monarchy rule and replaces it with absolutism,” he said. The court did not impose a penalty on the three protest leaders, as it was instead ruling on the constitutionality of their demands. All three deny seeking to overthrow the monarchy, according to their lawyer, Krisadang Nutcharut. “If you actually give the time and opportunity for these young people to elaborate and make their arguments, they would say that these demands for monarchy reform would actually make the monarchy more safe and secure under the democratic regime that we have,” said Krisadang. Evidence submitted by the defence was not examined by the court, according to Krisadang, who said this had prompted him and Panusaya to walk out of the hearing. Arnon and Panupong are in pre-trial detention over separate charges related to protests and were not permitted to attend the session. Since last year’s protests, at least 156 people have been charged under the lese majesty law, including 12 minors, the youngest aged 14, according to Thai Lawyers for Human Rights. Twenty-four protesters have been denied bail and remain in pre-trial detention for their political activities. An online petition recently set up by protest groups to call for an end to lese majesty has attracted more than 210,000 signatures. Protests have dwindled in number since 2020, partly owing to Covid outbreaks and the increased use of legal charges against activists. Sunai said it remained to be seen how the protesters would respond to the verdict. “By making peaceful expression impossible, I am worried Thailand is now at a very dangerous juncture as a result of the constitutional court ruling. Instead of stabilising the country, Thailand is heading towards a dangerous chaos,” he said. On Twitter, FreeYouth, a key protest group, shared an image with the message “Just say it clearly that this country is governed by absolute monarchy”. It added: “The judgment will burn its own system.”Australia is trying to block a UN recommendation that countries should try to keep global heating to 1.5C to protect world heritage sites from the impacts of the climate crisis. The Morrison government has also told Unesco major decisions about world heritage-listed places being damaged by climate change – which would include the Great Barrier Reef – should be put on hold. The government’s lobbying efforts are revealed in amendments sent to Unesco on a new climate change policy for world heritage sites scheduled for discussion at a meeting in Paris in two weeks. A draft version of the policy recommends countries take a precautionary approach “that pursues pathways limiting global heating to 1.5C, with no or limited overshoot”. Australia says that reference to 1.5C should be struck out, and replaced with a more generic statement about the importance of the Paris climate agreement. In the document, Unesco recommends that the meeting ignore Australia’s recommendation. Reef campaigners described the government’s intervention as “reprehensible” and difficult to comprehend, as it appeared to contradict government advice on the need to keep global heating to 1.5C to protect the reef. The 1.5C goal has been a focus of global climate talks in Glasgow over the past fortnight. A spokesperson for the federal environment minister, Sussan Ley, said the government was not trying to block references to 1.5C, but was trying to ensure climate policy was directed through the UN’s climate convention. The move is the government’s latest attempt to keep the tourism icon and ocean jewel off an official list of world heritage sites in danger. Earlier this year, the Australian government launched a fierce international lobbying effort to stop the world heritage committee from placing the reef on the list. The government hosted diplomats for a snorkelling trip on the reef while Ley flew to Europe to lobby committee members and Unesco. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In July, the 21-country committee ignored recommendations from UN advisers to list the reef and instead called for a UN monitoring mission to report back before the annual meeting of the committee in Russia next year. There are 1,154 sites on the world heritage list, which is part of a UN convention to protect places “considered to be of outstanding value to humanity”. The convention’s climate policy has not been updated since 2007, but about a third of more than 250 places listed for their natural significance – including the Great Barrier Reef – are considered under threat from rising temperatures, extreme weather events and increased sea levels. Elsewhere in the amendments document, Australia says any major decisions relating to world heritage sites being affected by the climate crisis should be “deferred” until disagreements can be resolved and guidelines are updated. Unesco says clear guidelines already exist. The Australian government has previously argued the world heritage convention should not be a vehicle for shaping climate policy, which should be left to the UN’s climate convention. Australia also wants a sentence removed from the policy that says traditional knowledge and Indigenous science “can also constitute climate technology with relevance to contemporary climate action”. A section of the policy recommending countries integrate their management of world heritage sites into their plans to tackle the climate crisis is also rejected by Australia. Imogen Zethoven, a reef campaigner working on world heritage issues, said Australia’s attempts to change the policy showed the Morrison government was “prepared to sacrifice the Great Barrier Reef to keep the coal and gas industry alive for as long as possible – its position is reprehensible to anyone who loves the reef”. She said: “The Morrison government needs to be honest with the Australian public and tell them that it is comfortable with losing the Great Barrier Reef.” The government’s Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority said in a 2019 position statement “there is growing recognition that limiting the increase in global average temperature to 1.5C and ideally less, is critical to minimise significant environmental and societal costs from the loss of reef habitats.” Coral reefs are considered one of the world’s most vulnerable ecosystems to rising ocean temperatures. Zethoven said the government was trying to assert there was a lack of clarity about whether to inscribe a site on the “in danger list” due to climate change. “But the rules are very clear,” she said “If a site such as the Great Barrier Reef is endangered, whether by climate change or any other threat, it should be inscribed. The government is trying to create a smokescreen to avoid having to take action”. Richard Leck, head of oceans at WWF Australia, described Australia’s attempts to remove the reference to 1.5C as “hugely significant” and “bewildering”. “Australian officials trying to delete a reference to 1.5C is not only inconsistent with well-established science, but also with the government itself. It is very hard to understand why the Australian government is looking to have this language removed.” Leck said if the convention’s climate policy was “not updated to reflect the most ambitious targets possible” then the “relevance of the convention going forward is undermined”. “WWF will make its position clear to the government and to the Unesco general assembly later this month,” he said. A spokesperson for Ley said in a statement that Australia “did not seek to remove direct reference to 1.5C in this paragraph, a reference to 1.5C is included earlier in the text”. He said the government’s position was that Unesco’s climate policy should be embedded in its operational guidelines “to ensure consistent and transparent decision-making across all climate affected world heritage properties”. The statement said: “Our approach with the two amendments we proposed to this paragraph was to ensure that the policy document was fully aligned to the Paris agreement.” The statement said the government “actively recognise and support the importance of traditional knowledge and Indigenous science in adaption and resilience” but suggested the reference be removed because the UN’s climate convention was the body with the mandate to consider what constitutes climate-related technology.It was a point to which those in the Socceroos camp were happy to give air time, and rightly so. “They’ve have been fortunate [in] that they’ve played all their World Cup qualifiers at home except for Oman,” coach Graham Arnold said on match day minus one. “We’ve played 11 out of 12 games away from home, they’ve played 11 out of 12 games at home.” They being Saudi Arabia, Thursday night’s opponents. Opponents who sit top of Group B, three points ahead of Australia. Opponents who have not lost a match in this phase on the road to Qatar 2022, achieving those results either within their own country or just over the border. Also, pertinently, opponents who have never won on Australian soil. Soil on which both teams will tread at Sydney’s Commbank Stadium with a whole lot riding on the result. The positive omen for the Socceroos is that it’s been a long time since they last lost a World Cup qualifier at home – 4,890 days, to be exact. It was on 22 June, 2008 that Australia went down 1-0 in a dead rubber against China under Pim Verbeek, who rested his stars in the knowledge the next phase of qualifying for South Africa 2010 was assured. That match, in front of 70,000 at ANZ Stadium, was the national team’s first home World Cup qualifying defeat since 16 May, 1981, when Rudi Gutendorf – the late German known for the number of teams he managed (a world-record 55, including 18 national sides) – oversaw a 2-0 disaster against New Zealand at the SCG. That one mattered, and Australia failed to qualify for the 1982 finals in Spain. Now, with a place at next year’s showpiece tournament on the line, 763 days since their last home game, the Socceroos will sit the toughest examination of their campaign to date. “We’ve been away for so long, and home advantage is a big thing in football,” the forward Mathew Leckie said on Wednesday. “I think history shows how strong we are at home. It’s tough for the other teams to also come over and play against us. We’ll definitely be coming out with a heap of energy and putting them on the back foot early, trying to control the game from the first minute.” Arnold agreed overall with Leckie’s sentiment. “I expect our mentality to be one of getting in their faces and making sure we’re on the front foot right from the start and not giving them any time to play,” he said. Easier said than done, given Hervé Renard’s Saudi Arabia are tight at the back with a penchant for punishing mistakes. The Green Falcons are vastly improved under the Frenchman, who has won the Africa Cup of Nations with both Zambia (2012) and Ivory Coast (2015), and has instilled a renewed sense of belief. The visitors are aiming for a ninth straight victory that would make them favourites to qualify with five matches to play. Still, some key players are unavailable and those remaining are up against both history and an Australian team who recently notched an 11th consecutive win – a world record for a single World Cup campaign – against Oman last month. That streak was ended by Japan four days later. Thursday night, then, doubles as an opportunity to respond to that dressing down in Saitama. Beat the Saudis and then China next week, and the Socceroos could yet lead the six-team group heading into the final two windows early next year, with the top two automatically qualifying. However, Arnold is also missing important players: the regular midfield starters Aaron Mooy is absent due to club commitments, while Tom Rogic and the forward Adam Taggart are both injured. He has “mentally” settled on a starting XI but noted that Wednesday night’s training session was the first involving the full squad. Suffice to say there will be changes, one of which may be the inclusion of Jamie Maclaren, who has not represented Australia since June. Ditto Maclaren’s Melbourne City teammates Leckie and Andrew Nabbout, the latter of whom has not played since the 2019 Asian Cup due to issues with form and fitness but is regaining the spark that made him Bert van Marwijk’s first-choice striker before the 2018 World Cup. Given the absences, the trio could yet play a part in stopping the Saudi counterattack and opening up their defence, which has conceded three goals from four games in this phase of qualifying – the same as the Socceroos. Like Maclaren, Leckie opted against travelling overseas for the four matches in September and October due to Australia’s quarantine requirements when returning home, but is ready for a 66th cap. “I always want to be there and for many years now I’ve barely missed camps, so it was a tough decision but sitting there and supporting the boys,” Leckie said. “I was proud of the way we played. The boys have put us in a really good position in the qualification. “Although I wasn’t there, I could see how everyone was out there, and the mentality … I’m just happy to be back, and I’m just buzzing for the game. I feel in great shape – I’ve had a long time to be able to get myself ready.” Like Leckie, Arnold was positive about playing in front of a home crowd for the first time since beating Nepal 5-0 in October 2019. “Obviously it will be great to have our 12th man here,” he said. “But the focus for me is on our performance and getting the game plan right.”The former chairman of the National Disability Insurance Agency has warned proposed government changes to the NDIS could give the agency boss unprecedented powers to cut funding packages. Last month the government introduced a “participant service guarantee” bill to parliament to introduce time limits on decisions for the agency to follow and to set “strict service standards”. These changes, which are uncontroversial, are based on recommendations of a key review by the former public servant David Tune in 2019. But months after it was forced to scrap its controversial plan to introduce independent assessments to the scheme, the government is now being accused of including a new power grab in the legislation. “The changes go well beyond introducing the participant service guarantee,” Prof Bruce Bonyhady, the inaugural chair of the NDIA, told Guardian Australia. Critics argue the bill will amend the NDIS legislation to give unprecedented powers to the chief executive of the scheme, Martin Hoffman, and also potentially the NDIS minister, Linda Reynolds. The main concern is a change to allow the NDIA chief executive to vary a person’s NDIS funding plan on his or her own initiative. While the government insists the power would be used for emergencies and to fix minor technical issues with a person’s package, it is not defined in the legislation. Instead, the powers would be defined in sections of the NDIS rules that can be more easily altered by the minister of the day without parliamentary approval or sign-off from the states and territories, which are joint funders of the scheme. The government has repeatedly said this year it believes the scheme is now too costly. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The New South Wales government, which has expressed concern along with Western Australia and the ACT, has described the powers as “unconstrained”. “The commonwealth minister could set whatever rules he or she likes and then the CEO would have to follow them when amending or varying a plan, and that could include cutting plans, changing the structure of plans,” said Bonyhady, now the head of the Melbourne Disability Institute. “The powers would be essentially unlimited if these changes go ahead.” Bonyhady has recommended the bill be rejected unless changes are made to ensure greater oversight, including by the states and territories. “In my view, these changes are as big a risk to the original vision of the scheme as independent assessments,” he said. The government’s own Independent Advisory Council to the NDIS has said the bill “potentially authorises the CEO to implement systemic changes that have a detrimental impact on participants”. The Greens senator Jordon Steele-John said people with disabilities were being forced to publicly campaign to “express their worry in an attempt to stop the government making changes to the NDIS which are not in the interest of our community”. The NDIA and Department of Social Services said they had listened to feedback, but argued the changes were warranted. The powers were needed to respond to emergency situations, such as a participant needing urgent equipment repair, or crisis accommodation in a family and domestic violence situation or a discharge out of hospital, they said. “The department and the agency consider that these powers are essential to enable the agency to respond in a timely and appropriate manner in situations where a participant may not, or may not be able to, make the request for a variation,” they said in a submission to an ongoing Senate inquiry. The NDIA and the department argued the chief executive already had powers to reassess a person’s plan, but the new powers offer “a simpler and faster process for smaller changes to be made”. “The powers provide the agency with the ability to provide a timely and proportionate response where continuity of a participant’s plan or risk mitigation is required as assessed by agency on the basis of information received,” it said.Equality advocates are mobilising against the Coalition’s revived religious discrimination bill and urging changes to ensure minority groups are not harmed by the legislation. The federal attorney general, Michaelia Cash, met with faith and LGBTQ+ groups last week in a forum attended by the Liberal MPs Dave Sharma and Warren Entsch, who have indicated they oppose a religious freedom act that would provide legal cover for discrimination against vulnerable groups. Other Liberal MPs and senators have indicated they are prepared to cross the floor over the contentious legislation, which the government plans to introduce to parliament in the final sitting fortnight this year. The Equality Australia chief executive, Anna Brown, said the current draft bill remained “deeply flawed”, with unprecedented and dangerous provisions that would undermine access to healthcare and inclusive workplaces. “It was because of these provisions that a broad chorus of voices spoke out against the bill, from industry, unions, people of faith, women, people with a disability and LGBTQ+ people,” Brown told Guardian Australia. “This coalition is coming back together over coming weeks to highlight the level of community opposition to laws that would take us backward. We urge the government to listen and to abandon proposed laws that would privilege religious institutions and entrench new forms of discrimination. “Instead, the new attorney general should deliver on the government’s commitment to protect LGBTQ+ students at religious schools, and wind back outdated exemptions that allow religious institutions to treat people unfairly because of who they are or whom they love.” Equality groups are particularly concerned about the inclusion of what has been dubbed the Folau clause, which would enable claims of indirect discrimination based on a person’s religious belief against an employer or professional body’s ruling of misconduct. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The Australian Christian Lobby has claimed credit for the inclusion of the clause, which refers to the controversial sacking of rugby player Israel Folau after he wrote on social media that hell awaits “drunks, homosexuals, adulterers, liars, fornicators, thieves, atheists and idolaters”. There is also unease about giving legal protection to someone asserting a statement of belief – even if in breach of state anti-discrimination laws – and conscientious objection provisions that could see people denied health services. Brown said if Cash introduced the bill to parliament in the forthcoming sitting fortnight, it should be referred to a public inquiry so MPs and senators could hear directly from those impacted. Rev Jo Inkpin, a transgender minister at the Pitt Street Uniting Church, attended the meeting with Cash and said the Folau clause was “particularly problematic” and could give licence to discrimination. “So if you’re working within an organisation that’s trying to maximise the respect and freedom of everybody, you can’t really have people attacking them, whatever your private views, you can’t have people attacking particular groups, particularly when they’re minority groups who are already under severe strain,” she said. Inkpin is concerned about the bill’s impact on gay and transgender people of faith, noting the legislation could lead to discrimination within a faith-based institution. “What I find … a bit difficult is that the state here is being asked to put forward enabling legislation which … gives a green light for some people to carry on what is to my mind is actually forms of spiritual abuse.” Inkpin said while it was reasonable for religious people to have protection from discrimination – “as any other group” in society – it was not appropriate for religion to be given a higher standing. She said the Australian Christian Lobby – which has boasted it has been able to have the Folau clause included in the third iteration of the bill – was a “minority” voice within the faith community and appeared to have undue influence on the government’s proposal. A spokesperson for Cash said the government was still working to introduce the religious discrimination bill into parliament by the end of this year. “The attorney general is meeting with a range of stakeholders to ensure all input can be considered,” he said. “The government has conducted two rounds of public consultation on draft legislation, and met face to face with over 90 stakeholders in a series of roundtables.”The University of Sydney earlier this week declared it would pay staff a bonus, declaring the $2,000 “Covid recognition payment” an extraordinary measure in gratitude for their “remarkable and sustained service”. While the university described the payment as thanks for enduring “this most testing of years”, it also hinted at an additional motive. Student numbers have unexpectedly risen, including from abroad, giving the university the financial capacity, but also the incentive to retain staff. Indeed, the prospects for many employers across the country have improved sharply in recent months as federal and state government largesse to counter the pandemic disruptions fills consumers’ savings accounts and the order books of businesses. Staff are suddenly in high demand. “Workers have got this brief period of time with the borders closed where they’ve got more individual bargaining power,” Sally McManus, the secretary of the Australian Council of Trade Unions, told Guardian Australia. “They are choosing to leave jobs, especially if they are not secure, and are looking for ones that are,” she said, adding they are in a good position to demand a fixed-term contract or a guaranteed number of hours. McManus said the labour shortages are appearing mostly at the lower end of the salary scale where employers “pay the award and not much more”. These include disability services, aged care, hospitality and retail. The latest official reading on the labour force will surface on Thursday with the Australian Bureau of Statistics scheduled to release national jobs figures for October. In line with the unusual nature of the economic rebound, the Commonwealth Bank’s chief economist, Gareth Aird, predicted the unemployment rate would increase to 4.7% from 4.6% in September, even though 50,000 jobs were added. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning One reason for the anticipated higher jobless tally is that the participation rate will probably have picked up, from 64.5% to 64.8% in the month, as more people look for work. Another is that the ABS survey spanned 26 September to 9 October, covering the depth of the lockdown involving the half of Australia living in New South Wales, Victoria and the ACT. “It’s not going to be until next month – so the November employment report – that you’ll see the big lift in employment because of the reopening,” Aird said. Other statistics also point to growing confidence among workers that their jobs are relatively secure and they can either haggle for better terms or find takers elsewhere. The Westpac Melbourne Institute Unemployment Expectations Index, released on Wednesday, dropped 11% from 107.1 to 95.3. The gauge measures concerns among consumers about losing their jobs over the next 12 months. “[T]his is the lowest level for the Index since the mid-1990s, when resurgent growth was finally starting to see sustained declines in unemployment from the very high levels of the early 1990s recession,” Westpac said in a research note. “Confidence is at historic highs for both males and females although the confidence amongst females is particularly buoyant – near all-time record levels going back to 1975.” The bank identified employees as most confident in real estate, accommodation and food, health care and retail, and even media and telecommunications. These industries may face shortages in coming months, Westpac said. Ross McEwan, the chief executive of National Australia Bank, was reported on Tuesday as saying securing employees was “our biggest issue that will inhibit growth the most”. Jenny Lambert, the director of economics, employment and skills at the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, said most signs were pointing to a “worker market” emerging, where staff were better placed to set terms with their employer. The shortages might also become acute as construction work revs up. “There’s a huge issue in the infrastructure construction workforce”, with project managers, engineers and other skilled labour in short supply. Border closures because of Covid had made conditions harder for employers but better for Australians, she said. “It’s a very important message to those that are unemployed to say there’s never been a more conducive time for you to get back into the workforce,” Lambert said. Australia Post is among employers bracing for “our biggest Christmas period ever”, and fortunately for those waiting for festive season deliveries, the news seems promising. To meet the record surge in online shopping and other services, “we sought to recruit more than 5,000 people,” a spokesperson said. “Currently [we] have more than 80% already filled.”Australian businesses appear to be moving forward with paid family and domestic violence leave – something Michaelia Cash once warned would lead to fewer jobs for women – despite the government’s reluctance to adopt it as a universal right. Flinders University completed an analysis of Australia’s workplace agreement database and found a third of enterprise agreements approved by the Fair Work Commission included paid family and domestic violence (FDV) leave for employees. Of the almost 1.2 million Australian employees with access to paid FDV leave under their enterprise agreements, about 660,000 were granted at least 10 days of paid leave. The private sector has taken the lead, accounting for 95% of those agreements which included paid FDV leave, with small businesses (under 15 employees) making up 40% of that group. The Coalition government has so far resisted calls to mandate paid family and domestic leave for all employees, although five days of unpaid leave has been made available, including for casual and part-time workers. Separate Flinders University research found just over 60% of women who were experiencing family or domestic violence, were employed. It also found FDV eroded “housing, education and employment stability” and was estimated to cost employers up to $2bn a year. The most recent budget reported violence against women cost the Australian economy up to $26bn a year. The estimated cost for a survivor leaving a violent relationship was $18,000. Women who had experienced violence in their intimate relationships were also more likely to have lower incomes, having been forced into part-time or casual work or full-time caring roles. Previous arguments against legislating for paid leave, from Cash, now the attorney general, included that it would lead to fewer women being employed as it would act as a “perverse disincentive” for employers. However a review of the use of the entitlement in 2016, the same year Cash made the comments, found the cost of paid FDV leave could be as little as 0.02% of existing payrolls for businesses. The Flinders University analysis, released by the Fair Work Commission, showed businesses taking the lead. Business Council of Australia chief executive Jennifer Westacott has previously voiced her support for paid family and domestic violence as a universal right. She said while additional paid leave entitlements could be seen as a strain on smaller businesses, workable solutions were possible to make it a reality. “We’re incredibly proud that many of Australia’s largest employers are showing real leadership on this,” she said. “We should work towards a universal entitlement for paid family and domestic violence leave but we recognise that this will be more difficult for small and family-owned businesses. The best way to meet this ambition is by working together with businesses of all sizes, unions and the government to develop a workable entitlement.” In October, the government announced one-off payments of up to $5,000 for people leaving violent relationships, which included up to $1,500 in cash, with another $3,500 available for direct payments for school fees or rental bonds, or goods and services. Eligibility for the payments includes a referral from a family and domestic violence service provider, along with a risk assessment and safety plan, an apprehended violence order, or a police report. While the payment was welcomed, concerns were raised that not all people fleeing violence had access to the eligibility requirements, or would need time to gather the necessary evidence – which would mean time off from work. Cash, who is speaking at the workplace sexual harassment national forum “influencing positive change” on Thursday, did not respond to requests for comment before publication. Labor previously attempted to legislate for paid FDV leave through the Senate while in opposition, while the Fair Work Commission, at the behest of the ACTU, is undertaking a review of paid FDV leave for all modern employment awards. The review is due to be heard early next year. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. If you or someone you know is impacted by sexual assault, family or domestic violence, call 1800RESPECT on 1800 737 732 or visit www.1800RESPECT.org.au. In an emergency, call 000. International helplines can be found via www.befrienders.org.I am in high school and always find myself leaving assignments (especially important ones) to the last minute by procrastinating a lot and, as a result, not getting a great mark. What can I do to ensure I get my work done earlier and motivate myself to get it done instead of procrastinating? Eleanor says: A lot of people who procrastinate think they’re just failing, when actually they have a treatable mental health condition. It’s worth asking a professional about your experience. If you’re experiencing garden variety procrastination, I can tell you what’s helped mine. I’m an Olympic level procrastinator. I’ll take the toaster apart and shine its parts and put it back together before I open my emails for the day. I’ll read the footnotes to the footnotes on a Wikipedia page about the bolts they use on Boeings. I’ve seen listicles you people wouldn’t believe. Here’s what I know. We procrastinate because we’re trying to avoid the way that working makes us feel. It’s not because we’re lazy. If your parents or your teachers act as though you’re lazy, you can act as though they’re wrong. We do it because working makes us feel bad, bone-deep. Working out exactly which flavour of “bad” your work makes you feel will help, but the basic structure is we’re running away from a feeling by running away from work. The things we run to have a pattern that’s well worth learning. If you can spot it – like the stripes on a poisonous snake – you’ll be able to avoid mistakes that some of your friends will spend years making. The pattern is: we run to things that promise one feeling while in fact undermining it. In procrastination, the feeling is fun. (In drinking it might be freedom; in gambling, being carefree). We want fun instead of work, and procrastinating offers it.But the trick is, we don’t ever really get a fun day off, Ferris Bueller style. We just do endless non-work things within plausible leash-range of the computer. Then, when we surface from the bliss of self-erasure we find we have way too little time left for either work or fun. Procrastinating accordion-crunches your time; it robs you of the hours you need to do what it actually feels fun to do. You asked what you could do about it. There are too many wonderful resources and systems to describe in full here, but here are two basic ideas. The first is habit. Start as small as you can. Don’t wrestle directly with big resolutions like “I’ll do all my homework every day”. Just promise yourself something small to start with: I’ll do one homework question first thing when I get home. Just one. Practice being happy with yourself for meeting that habit. A swimming coach I once knew liked to say: you’re faster than the people who didn’t turn up. The second basic idea is calm. When work goes badly – and it sometimes will – practice responding to that matter-of-factly. So you got a bad mark, you put off something important. It happens. We avoid things when we find them intolerable, so if you find your mistakes intolerable, you’ll avoid them, which means you’ll avoid fixing them. That can get messy. I know someone who moved country to avoid a procrastinated task. But the more you can tolerate, the less you’ll avoid. So practice tolerating the fact that you procrastinated. Say “I’ll own up to it and try again”. This might involve resisting an adult’s meanness or panic. That’s okay. You can tell them that it’s more helpful to point out what’s still fixable than to dwell on what you can’t change. And you can tell them I said to ask if they were ever late on their tax. Try not to beat yourself up for the urge to run away from things that feel bad. You’re designed to have it – it keeps you safe. But try to have habits that keep you from running – and if you’re going to run, at least make it towards real fun. *** Ask us a question Do you have a conflict, crossroads or dilemma you need help with? Eleanor Gordon-Smith will help you think through life’s questions and puzzles, big and small. Questions can be anonymous. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here This article was amended on 11 November 2021 to include an opening sentence advising the letter-writer to discuss their concerns with a doctor.Queensland’s Covid vaccination rate is lagging the rest of Australia, with health experts warning targeted messaging is needed to boost uptake and protect vulnerable people. The state was projected to pass 80% first dose vaccination on Tuesday, 9 November. But, with an average of 10,000 people jabbed a day in the past week, it has only just passed national cabinet targets. Queensland’s vaccination rate for first doses remains almost 10% lower than the national average, with 80.1% of Queenslanders having received a vaccine compared with 89.69% nationwide. Among the Indigenous population, the vaccination rate is even poorer. Just one region in Queensland, west Brisbane, has reached 70% first dose targets among the Indigenous population, while in Cairns the figure is just 41.8%. Epidemiologist Catherine Bennett said that while the vaccination uptake was slowest among young adults, in part due to delayed access to the vaccine, the lag was “much more marked” in Queensland. At least 90% of over-60s in Queensland have received at least one vaccination dose, but among 12 to 29-year-olds that number falls to less than 65%. Just 55% of 12-to-15-year-olds have received a vaccination dose, and 34.6% are fully vaccinated. “It’s the most dramatic discrepancy from other states,” Bennett said. “They’ve had supply ahead of demand now long enough we should be seeing it catch up.” The premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said restrictions would ease when at least 80% of over 16-year-olds were fully vaccinated, expected around 17 December. But since the announcement, there has been no notable spike in uptake. Walk-in vaccination hubs have rolled out across hundreds of Queensland sites – in surf life saving clubs, Bunnings carparks, theme parks and entertainment precincts – since the roadmap was released. Social media campaigns are also being prepared to target the youth demographic. Bennett said messaging from former Queensland chief health officer Jeannette Young regarding AstraZeneca risks for younger people earlier in the pandemic may have dissuaded some. “That might’ve … had a broader impact on the view of vaccines generally,” she said. Bennett said Queensland was now in a catch-22 situation. “They won’t be able to open without a higher vaccination rate, but they’re not going to set the date to motivate people,” she said. “Restricting activities for the unvaccinated will be the last push … hopefully that will bring things forward.” When Queensland hits the 80% vaccination target, unvaccinated people will be unable to visit public sites including hospitals, aged care services, hospitality venues and sporting stadiums, and masks will no longer be required indoors. Palaszczuk has also made the vaccine mandatory for all health staff across aged and disability sectors. “A lot of the pushback doesn’t seem to be so much about myths but being told what to do which is equally difficult … if hesitancy is real, you have to share the facts,” Bennett said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning University of Queensland associate professor Tom Aechtner said while there was no single reason for the sluggish vaccine uptake, being “largely spared” from major outbreaks was a factor. “Added to this is underlying distrust, anxiety about side-effects, and misinformation.” Aechtner’s research into vaccination has found that while vaccine hesitant people come from a wide range of backgrounds, beliefs, and education, a common uniting attribute is who people trust and distrust. “Individuals who are most hesitant are inclined to distrust government the most, and express greater distrust of pharmaceutical companies, scientists, and new vaccine technologies,” he said. “Fear about the side-effects and unknowns of Covid-19 vaccines, mixed with widespread misinformation … both feeds into and validates hesitant people’s pre-existing distrust and anxieties about the vaccines.” Convenience is also a factor. Aechtner said for regional Queenslanders, getting vaccinated could require significant travel and time commitments. ANU associate director Nicholas Biddle agreed. He said a combination of access, mistrust in institutions and socio-economic difference had played into the disparity of the vaccination rollout in regional areas and in Indigenous communities. “These differences have been observed across Australia, and when we analyse Queensland specifically we find they hold,” he said. “Equally … when we analyse the demographic and socio-economic determinants of vaccine uptake using our most recent survey data … Queensland, along with Western Australia, South Australia, Tasmania and the Northern Territory still have lower rates of vaccination.” Since the rollout began, more than 300 outreach clinics have been established in rural communities to expand vaccine accessibility, on top of community-controlled health services in First Nations communities. Biddle said vaccine mandates could make a difference, however they may be counterproductive and unnecessary. “Target those who are most at risk or reluctant, and put a much greater focus on providing convenient access,” he said. “Giving salient information … utilising trusted spokespeople to reassure people about the very low risk … but taking people’s ongoing concerns seriously.” A Queensland Health spokesperson said in a state as decentralised and diverse as Queensland, the vaccination rollout was “no small feat”. “We have been working hard to make the vaccine as easy and convenient to access as possible,” they said. “Given the scale of the vaccination rollout, diversity of Queensland’s population and the remoteness of some communities, it’s not unexpected that some regions and specific age groups will have lower rates than others, and this may be for a range of factors. “This may include hesitancy, cultural reasons, misinformation in the community and the remoteness of the community which means they have been largely unaffected by Covid restrictions.”If social media is anything to go by, the 2022 federal election campaign will be overwhelmingly negative with disputed claims about Medicare and tax policy featuring in early major party ads. Although Clive Palmer’s United Australia party is the biggest spender so far, ad trackers for Google (including YouTube) and Facebook show the Coalition and Labor have also been active. The UAP has spent $2.5m with Google in the last year, with Labor’s national secretariat a distant second on $55,800. Whereas the UAP ads blanket the country, Labor has produced more ads and targeted marginal seats, particularly in New South Wales and regional Queensland. Several are positive, featuring Anthony Albanese promising to “strengthen Medicare” and help families with childcare costs, but draw an implicit comparison with Scott Morrison with the tagline “that’s what I’ll do”. But one of the most common video ads targeted at marginal seats is negative, linking governmental failures during the pandemic. It uses imagery that harks back to the 2016 campaign when Labor claimed the Coalition wanted to privatise Medicare. “During a global pandemic instead of sorting out our vaccination bungles and instead of establishing federal quarantine centres, Scott Morrison has been busy cutting Medicare,” it says. The ads refer to technical changes in mid-2021 changing the Medicare rebate for 900 health services and procedures which the Australian Medical Association campaigned against, warning they could increase out-of-pocket costs for orthopaedic surgery, general surgery and heart surgery. Labor is playing a mixture of defence and offence, with Google data showing the ads are targeting Labor’s own marginal seats of Richmond, Dobell, Macquarie, Gilmore, Eden-Monaro, and Paterson in NSW and Lingiari in the Northern Territory; and Coalition marginals including outer-suburban seats La Trobe and Lindsay and the regional Queensland seats Flynn and Leichhardt. The United Workers Union spent $42,750 with Google including a YouTube ad accusing the Coalition of trying to force pensioners onto the cashless debit card, and has built a campaign website around that claim. Labor also has a campaign website on the cashless debit card, and MP Justine Elliot has promoted video posts on Twitter calling on Australians to “stop the national rollout of the cashless welfare card”. Labor MPs in marginal seats contacted by Guardian Australia privately conceded negative campaigning will feature prominently. After Morrison’s successful “Kill Bill [Shorten]” strategy in 2019, it was time to “return the favour” said one, pointing to Albanese’s repeated reference to the Coalition’s “eight long years” in government as an example of likely messaging. Another MP said that protecting welfare recipients by ensuring they are not on the cashless welfare card will likely feature, including to win over pensioners. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The social services minister, Anne Ruston, has rejected any suggestion the Coalition will force pensioners onto the card. But as Labor’s vague and untrue Medicare privatisation claims in 2016 or the mischaracterisation of Labor’s franking credits policy as a “death tax” in 2019 proved, scare campaigns can change votes. Labor’s Facebook advertising campaign has a similar mix of themes, but with more positive ads in the mix. In the last three months the party has spent at least $107,472 on Facebook ads, with many ads calling for donations to the party. The Liberals have been more active on Facebook than Google or YouTube, spending at least $42,000 on ads seeking to associate themselves with the accelerated pace of the vaccine rollout and urging supporters to join the party. But their ads also have a negative streak, targeting Albanese in October and November, including with claims that Labor could “retrospectively change the rules” to claw back jobkeeper wage subsidies from small businesses. Another accuses Labor of “flip-flopping on jobkeeper”, citing four instances it supported wage subsidies or called for them to be extended and one claiming Labor “said jobkeeper was a waste”. Labor has criticised the fact $38bn of jobkeeper went to companies that didn’t suffer the requisite downturn and supported greater transparency but has not proposed retrospectively clawing it back. In another ad, the Liberal party depicts Albanese as a weather vane asking where he stands on “Labor’s retiree tax”, “Labor’s housing tax”, tax relief for workers, mining jobs, jobkeeper and vaccination payments. Although the party political ads are an early indication of key messages in the campaign period, they are still dwarfed by taxpayer-funded government ads including $13m on the Positive Energy campaign about emissions reduction. At Senate estimates, the Liberal senator Zed Seselja defended the campaign, arguing it “counters some of the lies” about Australia’s record, including promoting awareness of its “high take-up of solar … a great international story”.Australia’s drugs regulator, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), has granted “provisional determination” to pharmaceutical company AstraZeneca for a long-acting antibody cocktail which has shown promise in preventing Covid-19 in adults. Provisional determination is an early step in the drugs approval process and means AstraZeneca can now submit further data to the TGA from human trials about how the treatment works and its safety. Once the TGA has scrutinised the data, and if it is satisfied with it, it may grant Evusheld “provisional approval” for use in Australia in limited circumstances. Further data must be collected and given to the TGA even if this occurs. What is the treatment? This treatment consists of two laboratory-made antibodies, tixagevimab and cilgavimab. These antibodies bind to the spike protein of the virus, stopping the virus from entering the body’s cells and causing an infection. Because each of the antibodies attach to different parts of the protein, using them in combination may be more effective than using either alone. It is also hoped this will offer good protection against variants, since the virus would have to mutate in multiple ways to escape both antibodies’ actions. Evusheld is being considered for use as a Covid-19 preventive in Australians aged 18 years and older. In August, AstraZeneca released the results of a trial of the treatment involving 5,197 participants from the US, UK, Spain, France and Belgium who did not have Covid-19. Seventy-five per cent of participants had comorbidities, including medical conditions that often mean vaccination is weak or ineffective. Two-thirds of participants received Evusheld, and the rest were given a placebo. The trial found Evusheld reduced the risk of developing symptomatic Covid-19 by 77% compared to the placebo. There were no cases of severe Covid-19 or related deaths in those given Evusheld. In the placebo group, there were three cases of severe Covid-19, which included two deaths. The results now need to be replicated more widely in further trials, which is why regulators such as the TGA require AstraZeneca to submit ongoing data. Is it a vaccine? No. A vaccine trains the body’s immune system to respond to the virus if a person becomes infected in the future. Evusheld provides antibodies directly to the body via two intra-muscular injections administered consecutively. It immediately targets and neutralises the virus, preventing the virus from entering cells and causing an infection in the first place. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning If approved, Evusheld will be the first long-acting antibody available for Covid-19 prevention in vulnerable populations who are unable to mount an adequate immune response to the virus from vaccination alone, for example people with cancer, and some elderly people. Who will benefit from it? Associate Prof Nada Hamad, a haematologist in Sydney, said Evusheld and similar treatments under development are designed to fill a gap left by vaccines, and by antibody treatments like Sotrovimab. Sotrovimab is given to people already diagnosed with Covid-19 who are at high risk of developing severe disease. Sotrovimab needs to be administered early after someone is diagnosed to be effective. “But Sotrovimab is very short-acting,” Hamad said. “It just lasts as we wait for the virus to dissipate. Once you get over the virus, the treatment doesn’t hang around in your body. “Evusheld is a longer-acting antibody, and the hope is it will prevent the infection.” Why not roll it out to the general population as well? Clinical trials to date show Evusheld may provide six to 12 months of protection from the virus. This is significantly shorter than vaccines. Even though the protection offered by vaccines does slowly wane over time, they are still effective at preventing severe disease, death and hospitalisation months down the track. “Evusheld and similar treatments being examined should be seen as a major advancement in protecting the very vulnerable, but not a vaccine alternative,” Hamad said. Evusheld also takes longer to administer, is more expensive, needs to be given by a trained doctor or nurse, and patients may need longer monitoring afterwards than the 15 minutes required for a vaccine. It is not something that can be quickly given in a pharmacy or hub, so it is not ideal for widespread, fast rollout, Hamad said. Plus, further data from ongoing trials is still needed, while the efficacy and safety of the vaccines are now well known. Evusheld has also shown promise in preventing severe disease when given early as a treatment to those infected with Covid-19, similar to Sotrovimab.The Morrison government wants to put more taxpayer money into carbon capture and storage (CCS) projects, with a new $500m fund that could include the technology alongside other new projects. The emissions reduction minister, Angus Taylor, told the ABC on Wednesday “there’s 60 [CCS] projects around the world, 30 in operation. It’s working in large quantities now.” There’s certainly growth in carbon capture and storage around the world, but do they work? According to the industry’s Global Carbon Capture and Storage Institute, there are 29 CCS facilities up and running around the world (two of those have been suspended). But there’s a massive catch if you’re hoping these are good for the climate. Twenty-two of those 29 projects are primarily injecting CO2 into geological formations in order to push out more oil and gas, in a process known as enhanced oil recovery (EOR). Only about 11m tonnes of CO2 a year is being captured at projects that are not EOR, according to the institute’s data. The institute says as of September this year CCS projects are growing and have the capacity to capture 111m tonnes of CO2 a year. But that’s only about 0.3% of the 36.4bn tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions caused by fossil fuel use in 2021. The institute lists four more projects “under construction” (three of which are EOR) and 58 in “advanced deployment” stage. When Taylor says CCS is “working in large quantities now”, what the industry’s own data suggests is that its impact on emissions is extraordinarily marginal, even without knowing the impact of burning the extra oil and gas that many of the projects are designed to extract. According to the Australia Institute, a thinktank critical of CCS, Australian taxpayers have put $4bn into the technology over the years. Perhaps not burning the fossil fuels in the first place may be a more efficient way to bring emissions down? Just an idea. Electrical electioneering Scott Morrison’s claims in 2019 that more electric cars on the road would “end the weekend” have returned like an electrified ghost to haunt him. During the launch of the government’s plan for electric vehicles this week, the prime minister was asked if he could “honestly say” he was “not attacking electric vehicles” back then. Morrison snapped back, saying there had been a “massive change” in technology over the past few years. An incredulous reporter pushed again, asking if that had really occurred in the last two years? “Yes, yes, a massive change,” replied Morrison, trying to suggest one reason for his backflip was that the circumstances had changed. But they haven’t. When Morrison said in 2019 that an electric vehicle “won’t tow your trailer” and was “not going to tow your boat” he clearly hadn’t watched the Qantas corporate video from 2018 of a Tesla towing a passenger jet. They’re just a bit heavier than boats and trailers. If Morrison was referring to sudden advancements in charging infrastructure in recent years, then this is also wrong. According to the Electric Vehicle Council, in 2018 there were already 783 charging locations in Australia, and Queensland already had 24 direct current fast chargers. Ultra-fast chargers that can add hundreds of kilometres of range to an electric car in 15 minutes were being installed in 2018. Is Morrison referring to “massive” changes in hydrogen vehicle technology? The first hydrogen refuelling station was commissioned in Australia in 2019 and the country registered its first hydrogen fuel cell car – the Hyundai Nexo – in 2019. Toyota’s fuel-cell electric car, the Mirai, was officially launched in 2014. As a side note, Morrison said the government did not want to “drive these costs [of new technologies] down by writing off big cheques to multinational companies” while standing at Toyota’s hydrogen centre that received $3m of taxpayer cash in 2019. Not much Cop The Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow are scheduled to conclude on Friday, with negotiators working through a raft of issues to come up with a final text. But on Sky News Australia last Friday, presenter Chris Kenny appeared to think the talks were already over. “Glasgow of course achieved little when it came to climate policy, in fact it might have helped to expose the hypocrisy and futility of the UN climate action process,” said Kenny, with a week of talks left to go. Kenny invited climate science denialist and mining industry figure Ian Plimer, a geologist, on to his show to promote his new book Green Murder, which carries the catchy subtitle “A life sentence of net zero with no parole”. Plimer was also happy to make an assessment of Cop26 a week before it ended, saying “the only great recommendation to come out of Glasgow was to reduce methane emissions by 30 per cent”. Plimer was referring to a push from the European Union and the United States for countries to reduce emissions of methane – a potent greenhouse gas – by 30% by 2030. Australia has refused to sign. But then Plimer – who denies there’s any evidence that human emissions of carbon dioxide have caused global heating – made another claim. “Most of the world’s methane comes from rice paddies and these are in the Indian subcontinent, Asia and Brazil,” he said. Plimer’s argument was that reducing methane would force a reduction in rice production, which would “starve people.” Except Plimer’s claim “most of the world’s methane comes from rice paddies” is contradicted by studies into human-caused methane emissions. The most recent examination of human-caused emissions of methane shows rice cultivation accounts for just under 8% (or 30m tonnes). This is tiny compared with the oil and gas industry which is responsible for 22% (84Mt), coalmining at 11% (44Mt) or livestock (mostly burping cows) at 30% (115Mt).The latest payroll job index released on Wednesday allows us to make a good guess that Thursday’s labour force figures will show a nice increase in employment. But the figures also show that there is still a way to go before the impact of the lockdowns is completely over. The payroll figures from the week ending 16 October saw a 0.9% increase over the past four weeks. There will of course be a bit of seasonal adjustment in the labour force figures, but given those figures cover the first two weeks of each month, it is a good bet that at 11:30am the Bureau of Statistics will show that there has been a nice jump in employment in October. If the graph does not display please click here But what type of work has gone up? For one thing, the biggest growth in jobs in the past month has been for young workers – because they were the ones who most lost work during the lockdowns: If the graph does not display please click here Given younger workers are less likely to work full-time it will be interesting to see if the labour force figures show the recovery of employment in October was mostly part-time. But despite the jump in jobs in October, across Australia total jobs remain below what was in place before New South Wales went into lockdown in June. But of course, the picture is very different across the nation. Victoria, NSW and the ACT lost jobs well beyond those of the other states over the past few months. Jobs in October in the ACT were down nearly 9% on where they were before it went into lockdown in the middle of August – a much bigger fall than occurred even in NSW or Victoria: If the graph does not display please click here And while the jobs are returning in NSW and Victoria, they remain well down on where they were before the lockdowns: If the graph does not display please click here Here we see the problem of the Bureau of Statistics moving from fortnightly to monthly payroll job numbers. Last year during the winding down of the lockdowns, the fortnightly numbers gave a much more up-to-date picture than did the monthly labour force figures. Now we have figures that themselves are a bit out of date given the massive changes in restriction since 16 October. As it is, the growth of jobs over the past year shows just how greatly different things have been for those in the lockdown areas of the south-east compared to the rest of the country: If the graph does not display please click here The map reinforces just how fluid the economic situation is at the moment. Victoria, NSW and the ACT are likely to have surging economies in the run-up to Christmas as people get out of their homes and go shopping. The rest of the country is unlikely to see such a release of pent-up demand. One area that should provide a boost across the nation is jobs in hospitality and recreation. Given the size of NSW and Victoria, their lockdowns affected tourism elsewhere. As a result, just as with last year’s lockdowns, the biggest hit industries this year were accommodation and food services and art and recreation: If the graph does not display please click here Last year it took around six months for the jobs to come back in line with the rest of the economy. This year the impact of the vaccines and the closeness of Christmas might see the return of some even quicker. That would certainly be welcome news for those in the airline industry. Jobs in air transport have not surprisingly been by far the hardest hit during the pandemic – down nearly 40% on the number of jobs there before April last year. Thursday’s labour force figures should contain some good news. Employment should be up and the recovery from the lockdowns should be progressing well. But while the payroll job figures give a good insight into the industries and locations of the job growth, we shall have to wait for Thursday’s figures to see how full-time and part-time employment is going and if people have not just come back to work, but have come back looking for work.In the video for his 2020 single Miss Andry, Sydney pop artist Flowerkid sits slumped in the corner of a boxing ring. Drenched in red light, he’s scratched, bleeding and spent, fighting demons both invisible and ever-present. “Who’s to say that you still think of me?” he laments: “I’m just weak and miserable and only five foot three. How do I compare?” It was for songs like this – deeply personal stories of identity, mental health and familial trauma, wrapped up in slickly produced bedroom pop – that Flowerkid (real name Flynn Sant) was pegged as one of Triple J’s Ones to Watch, and caught the attention of Billie Eilish’s manager, Danny Rukasin, who signed him for the US. At just 20 years old, Sant can already look back on the early phase of his career with the nostalgia usually reserved for people much older. “When I’m listening to my music, I feel like I’m time-travelling.” Released on Wednesday, his debut EP – Everyone Has a Breaking Point – features songs recorded over the past three years, a period that began when he came out as transgender. It captures his voice incrementally deepening and moving into a lower register – a side-effect of taking testosterone. “It’s like documenting the journey as I go,” Sant tells me over Zoom. “To be honest, I don’t realise how much it’s changed unless I go back and listen to the first tracks that I made. It’s crazy. I love it. I love hearing the change.” Sant began making music at an early age, figuring out how to play an old Yamaha keyboard he was given by an aunt. “I was born into a Catholic family, so, you know, I had my communion and reconciliation, all of that,” he says. “All of that” encompasses the guilt and shame Sant believed was his due inheritance, burdens he carried in secret and now channels into his music. On I Met the Devil at 4 Years Old, he raps over distorted synths and sirens: “Someone came up to me with faith and hope / Saying I sinned trying to hang myself from the rope / So I told her … God was a no show.” “I was so little and all I could think was that I was a sinner. I was going to hell,” he says. “I tried praying and I tried to submit myself to God and every time these bad things kept happening … I just couldn’t make sense of it. I thought, ‘Am I a bad person? Is that why my prayers aren’t being answered?’ And that continued for a long time.” By high school, Sant identified as “a bit of an atheist” (“I didn’t really believe in anything because I thought … I’m not getting any blessings here”). But by then he was exposed daily to a new kind of oppressive structure: teenage boys, whose private, Catholic school uniforms granted them a free pass to torment and intimidate. “In year 10, I came out as liking girls. It was before my transition and [my girlfriend and I] got a lot of shit. The culture of what masculinity is supposed to be, it was disgusting. And it was in my nightmares, it was in everything I thought of. “I had these thoughts like, ‘I think I’m transgender’, but they were in the back of my head.” He “kept them back there” until he left school, after completing year 10 in 2017. “If I stayed in school, I wouldn’t have come out at all. It was such a hostile environment. Once I had that space, I was like, ‘oh, that’s what’s going on’.” As Sant began to understand his changing gender identity, his rage and distrust towards men mutated into what he describes as feelings of inadequacy: did he hate the confident, broad-shouldered boys around him, or envy them? These are the questions he grapples with on Miss Andry: “I never hated you, I don’t even hate them, I just hate myself,” he sings. “Taking shit out on you was never right.” The song – Flowerkid’s break-out – resonated with other men, who reached out to say it had articulated their own complex feelings about masculinity. Feedback from fans is validating, but as he’s grown in popularity, the line between “Flynn” and “Flowerkid” has become finer – and more vital. “Why I started Flowerkid was to help people, and to give them a universal language that they can mourn to, heal to – whatever,” he says. “Something that I’ve battled with is having this overwhelming sense of responsibility for people to … to be well. Which can be very burdening and heavy sometimes. It’s hard separating from Flowerkid; it feels like it’s me.” The song Vodka Orange Juice is the tender and nuanced heart of Everyone Has a Breaking Point. On the surface it’s a recollection of a high school party. As the social dynamics play out with the help of sickly boozy concoctions, Sant floats above, narrating as the tall boys (of course they’re called “James”) exert their dominance, the girls yield to them, and the kid with the scrawny arms seeks the safety of the corners of the room or the privacy of the bathroom. That’s where he stares at his reflection, resenting what he sees. “Maybe it’s the way that I act / Or it might be the way I look,” Flowerkid sings. “I can’t help the way I am / I didn’t sign up for this life, but I’m doing the best that I can.” • Everyone Has a Breaking Point is out nowWhen Australia’s men tackle Pakistan in the Twenty20 World Cup semi-final, they will come up against a purring cricket machine. If we’re swayed by the latter team’s longer-term history, then it would be entirely feasible for Pakistan to surge unbeaten through the group stages and still bomb out in a semi-final. The success in this tournament though hasn’t been down to players randomly producing brilliance. It has been a collective in which the tasks to be done are clear and in which almost every player is firing. T20 being T20, a team can still have a bad game in a knockout. But for this Pakistan side it would be an aberration, not a likelihood. Their success starts at the top with Mohammed Rizwan and Babar Azam, wicketkeeper and captain making the opening stand. Rizwan always plays with a beaming smile, and bats with the same joyousness, taking on the bowling whenever afforded the chance, one of the cleanest strikers in a format full of them. Twice in this tournament he has made 79 not out, denied more by completing a run chase that he began. Babar alongside has four half-centuries from five starts, making himself the core around which the innings coheres, with a range that depending on need can go from collecting runs at six per over to thrashing them at closer to nine. Fakhar Zaman at first drop has been the weak link, and his underwhelming national record in T20s is partly masked by his excellence across 50 overs. But prowess when batting long makes him a backstop should others slip early, and his teammates won’t forget that his batting delivered their last world prize with the 2017 Champions Trophy. As the middle-order buffer below him, Mohammed Hafeez and Shoaib Malik had their inclusion questioned by all and sundry on the basis of advanced sporting age – nearly 81 between them – but they have batted selflessly by taking on the bowling whenever asked to finish an innings. Malik’s 54 from 18 balls in the final group match against Scotland was the most striking example. Rounding out the batting is Asif Ali, a power-hitting finisher who is especially adept at smashing pace bowling, where Malik has the edge against spin. Both for Pakistan and across Asif’s broader T20 career, over 38% of his runs comes in sixes – that’s two sixes on average in every 30 runs. He’s the sort of player who turns good scores into great ones or, as he did twice in the group stage, finishes off chases just when they’re starting to look a bit sticky. The bowling is just as varied and powerful. Shaheen Shah Afridi might be the world’s most exciting bowler right now, with left-arm swing at extreme pace from a player who has been on the scene for three and a half years but is still only 21. His new-ball dismantling of Rohit Sharma and KL Rahul on the opening weekend set in train India’s early departure from the World Cup. He forms an unlikely opening partnership with left-arm spinner Imad Wasim, who is less frightening but becomes almost unhittable by bowling a perfect length and targeting the stumps. Haris Rauf and Hasan Ali back them up by testing out the upper range of the speedometer, before Shadab Khan comes on with confusing leg-breaks and googlies. Throw in the fact that the two spinners are both very good with the bat, and that Hasan can bomb a six as far as anyone, and that Hafeez can bowl off-spin when required, and the Pakistanis have all the bowling they need while being sorted down to No 9 for runs. This is what the Australians are up against, in a less convincing configuration after a less convincing campaign. That may seem churlish given they qualified for the semi with four wins out of five, but they nearly lost what should have been a stroll against South Africa, got thrashed by England, then beat the eliminated Bangladesh and West Indies who had one foot on the plane. Australia have the quality to beat any team if their best players light up that day, but it will take something special. The pace trio may be the most likely to provide that, with Josh Hazlewood, Patrick Cummins and Mitchell Starc getting better together as the tournament goes on. Leg-spinner Adam Zampa has the equal most wickets in the main tournament draw. Aaron Finch and David Warner have had moments opening the batting, Steve Smith is Steve Smith, and Glenn Maxwell has ended his last two innings on 0 not out without facing a ball. Let him face a dozen and he might win a match with them. Pakistan have had fortune in this World Cup, with Babar winning four tosses out of five. He chose to chase against India and New Zealand so his bowlers could put them under pressure, he was pleased to be invited to chase when Afghanistan won the toss, and he chose to set a target against Namibia and Scotland to let his batters swing. But given how his charges are running now, it will take something more than luck to upset them. Pakistan are favourites, and deserve to be.If you’ve heard of me, it’s most likely because of the animations I started doing in lockdown. Hopefully you found them a bit funny. If not, hopefully I can somewhat redeem myself with this list. I love comedy with all my heart. It’s in my top five favourite things of all time. Comedy, hot chips, dogs, the feeling of relief, and Zelda: Ocarina of Time. The internet was very close to making my top five. Definitely top 10. It’s pretty damn good hey. Escapism is one of the main activities and the internet offers the most varied and convenient form of escape. It’s like the highlight reel for real life, and below is my highlight reel of that highlight reel. 1. @washbeast I highly recommend scrolling through this guy’s cartoons. They’re all clever, imaginative and funny. 2. Carrot in a box This is just a brilliant bit of TV and also a great example of how brilliant Sean Lock’s mind was. 3. @really_good_artist on Instagram This guy’s artwork makes me laugh consistently. 4. Freestyle This joke is great. It deserved more attention so I’m putting it on this list. 5. Crane shadow I think about this video all the time. I love a good prank and this one could be one of the most unique pranks I’ve ever seen. I aspire to one day do a prank this epic. 6. Salty and Peps This is one of my own animations. I came up with this video in lockdown. Some things to point out: Salty has salt stubble while Peps has pepper stubble, they are fishing in the drain with a toothpick and they are drinking cocktail sauce cocktails. 7. Kid buys bong This takes me back to when I was a kid and my mum found my bong. I made up a fake friend and said they wanted me to hold on to it for them. She told me never to have any contact with him again. No worries. 8. He just wanted juice For the most part, I don’t like laughing at kids hurting themselves but this is an exception. 9. Therapy Gecko I still haven’t quite grasped what’s going on with this show … all I know is that I enjoy it a lot. 10. Shitty Simpsons tattoos If you’re a massive Simpsons fan like me, you will enjoy this account. Sam Cotton is an actor, writer and illustrator. You can follow him on Instagram or TikTok or watch him in Diary of an Uber Driver on Stan, Mr Inbetween season 3 on Foxtel or Rosehaven on ABC iViewThe Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, has angrily defended his government’s immigration policy in a heated exchange with a journalist who accused him of lying over the alleged turning away of asylum seekers in the Aegean. During a joint press conference with his Dutch counterpart, Mark Rutte, late on Tuesday, Mitsotakis was accused of “narcissistic abuse” with his denials that Greek authorities are refusing asylum seekers entry at its land and sea borders. “Prime minister Mitsotakis, when, at last, will you stop lying? Lying about pushbacks, lying about what is happening with the refugees in Greece?” asked the Dutch reporter Ingeborg Beugel. In a nation with little tradition of its leaders being publicly put on the spot, the episode was unprecedented. Clearly irate, Mitsotakis responded: “I understand that in the Netherlands you have a culture of asking direct questions to politicians, which I very much respect. What I will not accept is that in this office you will insult me or the Greek people with accusations and expressions that are not supported by material facts.” After last year’s border crisis, when thousands of people, encouraged by the Turkish government, attempted to breach Greek frontiers, the EU state has faced growing allegations of engaging in illegal expulsions of asylum seekers on dinghies and other rickety boats arriving from the Turkish coast. Rights groups and aid organisations, including the UN refugee agency, UNHCR, have increasingly expressed concern, saying the practice of pushing back people without due process is in contravention of international law. Greece, like all EU member states, is a signatory to the 1951 Refugee convention, recognising the right of refugees to seek asylum if they face threat of persecution elsewhere. But Mitsotakis argued that the country deserved praise for saving “hundreds, if not thousands” of people at sea. “Rather than putting the blame on Greece, you should put the blame on those who have been instrumentalising migration systematically, pushing people in [a] desperate situation from a safe country, because I need to remind you that people in Turkey are not in danger,” he said. During the migration crisis of unprecedented intensity, Athens had granted 50,000 asylum seekers the right to protection, he said. He said that rather than carrying out pushbacks, Greek patrols were intercepting boats as European regulations allowed. When Beugel attempted to interrupt him to say their living conditions were “appalling”, Mitsotakis bristled that she clearly hadn’t been to the new and “impeccable” EU-funded facility on Samos – a facility that aid groups have likened to a prison. In a county so politically fragmented, Beugel was lauded on Wednesday by many on the left for raising an uncomfortable truth. The MeRA25 party, led by the former finance minister Yanis Varoufakis, countered that it was “the good name of Greece” that had been insulted by the “crimes” being committed by the Greek coastguard, government and other EU countries with the support of Frontex, the bloc’s border agency, in the Aegean.For environmental reasons, I want to be a better consumer. And also because I’m sick of buying crap. Buy less, buy better. But that’s much easier said than done. To be the wise, discerning consumer I want to be, I need reliable information about the quality of what I’m planning to buy. While there are recommendations galore available online, my strongest suspicion is that barely any can be considered reliable. I need some new walking shoes, and a well-known search engine instantly furnishes me with a long list of websites on which there are relatively short lists of the best walking boots. Words such as “trust” and “review” and “test” feature heavily on these sites. Even on the more reputable ones, you will have to look closely to find the small print, along the lines of: “We make money from putting these walking shoes in our list of best walking shoes, especially if you click through to whichever retailer we link to.” This wouldn’t matter if there was any proper testing done in the first place, but I’m now realising how gullible I was to ever have believed this was likely. After all, the time and money involved in conducting any meaningful test must be massive. At the very least I suppose you’d have to pick, say, 25 different pairs of boots and correctly fit them to 25 pairs of feet belonging to 25 similarly sized individuals who would then have to cover a similar distance over similar ground in similar conditions over a similar amount of time. It’s just not going to happen. So what do you do? I called Martin Lewis, AKA the Money Saving Expert, to see if I was missing something. It turns out I wasn’t. “Objective reviews about the quality of anything are very difficult to come by; that’s why I tend to focus on price first and foremost.” His advice is to ignore most of the stuff that comes up at the top of a search on Google. “The best you can say, possibly, is that there won’t be an absolute kipper on there, but you’ll be better off going to a specialist source like a magazine. OK, they’ll take advertising, I’m sure, but the chances are you’ll get more honest reviews. Other than that, just cross your fingers.” I thought the internet was supposed to empower consumers, but all the power seems to be with whoever’s selling us the stuff. Yes, the web might find us the best price, but the best buy is another matter. And it’s not as if we consumers can do much to help each other out. The same well-known “specialist” retailer has now sold me two consecutive pairs of its branded walking shoes, which were, I was assured, expensive but waterproof and durable. They turned out to be only one of those three things. How can I alert the world to this travesty? There is no forum anyone can trust because any such forum would, sure as anything, soon be corrupted itself. And neither do I dare utter the brand name here for fear of the legal consequences. Nor do I want any free pairs in compensation because I’m sick of bunging knackered three-month-old shoes into landfill. Nowhere can I find advice entirely unsullied by commercial interests. This I can just about live with if something approximating rigorous testing has been done. Which? magazine falls into this category, and we probably need to be thankful the organisation exists but, my word, its moth is close to the flame with offerings such as Best AO.com Black Friday Deals for 2021. At least we can be confident that tests have been done on whatever products it has picked out. And, lo and behold, it’s done something on walking shoes, so I may be able to get on a sound footing after all. • Adrian Chiles is a writer, broadcaster and Guardian columnistIn the midst of the Conservative car crash over the Owen Paterson lobbying affair, I asked a very senior Tory if he thought Boris Johnson’s ignominious U-turn would now reshape the party political landscape. He replied with the words of the instinctive pragmatist: “We will see. In politics, nothing matters – until it does.” Plenty would say this is a moment when it matters. Labour seems re-energised by the anti-sleaze campaign. Charges against Tory MPs Geoffrey Cox, Iain Duncan Smith and Daniel Kawczynski have given the Paterson outrage fresh legs. Reporters across Fleet Street are digging for more scandals. Columnists – not just on this newspaper – are plundering the thesaurus for condemnatory language with which to damn the scoundrel in Downing Street. Don’t get me wrong: the indignation is justified. It will also have some effect. The polls are narrowing in Labour’s favour. But the larger political question has to be a cooler one. Can we be sure, in the words of my senior Tory, that it matters? Does this row in fact shift our politics? At this point, consider three things. The first is whether this is a time when the Conservative party, with its hardwired sense of self-preservation, goes on red alert to seek Johnson’s downfall. The second is whether this sleaze crisis might have a cataclysmic effect on the Johnson government similar to the one that helped bring John Major down in 1997. Finally, is this the beginning of the end of the affair for Johnson and his voters, and the opening of a new opportunity for Labour and the opposition parties? In 1990, the Tory cabinet and backbenches were each vital in ousting Margaret Thatcher, the party’s three-time election winner. They did this after opinion polls showed the Tories could lose an election under Thatcher but win one under Michael Heseltine, amid widespread backbench unease about Thatcher and under leadership election rules that favoured the challenge. In the end, it was the cabinet that ushered Thatcher to the door. Today’s circumstances are different. The Tory party does not currently regard Johnson as an electoral liability, but as an asset. The cabinet has been handpicked for its loyalty to Johnson. And the rules now give party members, among whom Johnson is still highly popular, the final say. So the days of the fabled “men in grey suits” wielding the stiletto have gone. The sleaze crisis of the 1990s is not an off-the-peg model either. For one thing, it seemed endless, stretching from the David Mellor sex scandal of 1992 up to the 1997 election, in which Neil Hamilton was ousted by the anti-sleaze candidate Martin Bell. In contrast, today’s crisis, though undeniable, has lasted barely a week. Another big contrast is that Labour under John Smith and Tony Blair was well ahead in the polls throughout. Any byelection in the 1990s threatened disaster for the Tories. That’s not yet true today, although it may change. Unlike Paterson, Cox, Duncan Smith and Kawczynski all have seats that the Tories could struggle to hold, if things get that far. Above all, however, today’s public cynicism about politics extends to all parties, not just to one. Whether Labour can pick up every wavering Tory vote is doubtful. Close to the heart of all this is a question that simply never applied in the 1990s. Can Labour, or any of the opposition parties, win the votes of lost leavers, whatever the level of sleaze or corruption in Tory ranks? After all, for many leave voters it was Labour and the opposition parties that brought discredit on politics by attempting to overturn the Brexit vote. For these voters, Johnson may be a scoundrel inhabiting a moral vacuum; but in the end he is their scoundrel. He delivered Brexit. The Whig historian Lord Macaulay wrote something relevant here. Discussing popular support in 1685 for the Duke of Monmouth, the illegitimate son of Charles II who led a doomed Protestant revolt to seize the throne from his Catholic uncle King James II, Macaulay said it was unfair to charge the “common people” with “inconstancy” for their volatile enthusiasm for a pretender whom they later spurned. “The charge that may with justice be brought against the common people,” intoned Macaulay, “is, not that they are inconstant, but that they almost invariably choose their favourite so ill that their constancy is a vice and not a virtue.” No one except Jacob Rees-Mogg would use such language today. But Macaulay’s point still has resonance. For five years and more, our politics has been dominated by the upsurge of popular constancy that Johnson harnessed for Brexit. This has caused many observers to see these years as a historical break, marking the end of industrial-era democratic party politics and its replacement, driven by social media, of a more celebrity-focused populism that chews up and spits out old parties that stand in its way. The question of whether politics is tiring of Johnson is therefore obviously important. But it poses a systemic question as well as a personal one. It asks us to suppose that Britain may be ready to embrace new – and ultimately more consensual – forms of democratic politics, not simply to reinstate the old ones, and to be ready with them when today’s discredited system collapses. Right now, this feels like a stretch. The polls do not support it. But it’s like the man said: in politics, nothing matters – until it does. Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnistWe all know that person who, despite their entire household catching Covid-19, has never tested positive for the disease. Now scientists have found an explanation, showing that a proportion of people experience “abortive infection” in which the virus enters the body but is cleared by the immune system’s T-cells at the earliest stage meaning that PCR and antibody tests record a negative result. About 15% of healthcare workers who were tracked during the first wave of the pandemic in London, England, appeared to fit this scenario. The discovery could pave the way for a new generation of vaccines targeting the T-cell response, which could produce much longer lasting immunity, scientists said. Leo Swadling, an immunologist at University College London and lead author of the paper, said: “Everyone has anecdotal evidence of people being exposed but not succumbing to infection. What we didn’t know is whether these individuals really did manage to completely avoid the virus or whether they naturally cleared the virus before it was detectable by routine tests.” The latest study intensively monitored healthcare workers for signs of infection and immune responses during the first wave of the pandemic. Despite a high risk of exposure 58 participants did not test positive for Covid-19 at any point. However, blood samples taken from these people showed they had an increase in T-cells that reacted against Covid-19, compared with samples taken before the pandemic took hold and compared with people who had not been exposed to the virus at all. They also had increases in another blood marker of viral infection. The work suggests that a subset of people already had memory T-cells from previous infections from other seasonal coronaviruses causing common colds, which protected them from Covid-19. These immune cells “sniff out” proteins in the replication machinery – a region of Covid-19 shared with seasonal coronaviruses – and in some people this response was quick and potent enough for the infection to be cleared at the earliest stage. “These pre-existing T-cells are poised ready to recognise SARS-CoV-2,” said Swadling. The study adds to the known spectrum of possibilities after exposure to Covid-19, ranging from escaping infection entirely to severe disease. Alexander Edwards, associate professor in biomedical technology at the University of Reading, said: “This study identifies [a new] intermediate outcome – enough virus exposure to activate part of your immune system but not enough to experience symptoms, detect significant levels of virus or mount an antibody response.” The finding is particularly significant because the T-cell arm of the immune response tends to confer longer lasting immunity, typically of years rather than months, compared with antibodies. Nearly all existing Covid-19 vaccines focus on priming antibodies against the vital spike protein that helps SARS-CoV-2 enter cells. These neutralising antibodies give excellent protection against severe illness. However, the immunity wanes over time and a potential weakness of spike-based vaccines is that this region of the virus is known to mutate. By contrast, the T-cell response does not tend to fade as quickly and the internal replication machinery that it targets is highly conserved across coronaviruses, meaning a vaccine that also targeted this region would probably protect against new strains – and possibly even against entirely new pathogens. “Insights from this study could be critical in design of a different type of vaccine,” said Edwards. “A vaccine that primes T-cell immunity against different viral protein targets that are shared between many different coronaviruses would complement our spike vaccines that induce neutralising antibodies. Because these are components within the virus, antibodies are less effective – instead, T-cells come into play.”Name: Flaccid fall. Age: It is a relatively new thing, since the pandemic. That’s fall as in …? The season. You might call it abstinent autumn if you were desperately trying to maintain alliteration in a British translation. And flaccid as in …? Yeah, flaccid. So we are talking about sex? Well, less sex. The phrase was a line in a New York Post article: we’ve gone from “slutty summer” to “flaccid fall”. Meaning? So, in a survey … Here we go, another dodgy survey of about 11 people. Actually, it’s a survey of 5,000 single Americans, by Match, the dating service. And what has this survey found? That single men are not so bothered about sex these days – 81% said it was less important to them than before Covid. I thought everyone went straight from locking down to hooking up? That was slutty summer – keep up. No pun intended. What else emerged in the survey? Physical attraction is no longer the be-all and end-all, and emotional maturity is much more important. This all sounds like quite good news, grownup even. And it’s down to the pandemic, you say? So Helen Fisher says. Who’s she? A biological anthropologist and one of Match’s chief scientific advisers. “You can’t shut a planet and expect people’s physiology to remain the same,” she told the Post. “We all suffered, dopamine plummeted, testosterone plummeted, sex is less important.” So what are we doing, or thinking about doing, now that we’re not doing, or thinking about doing, sex? Justin Garcia said: “It’s most striking in men that they are taking a moment to value relationships and the relationship context of intimate encounters more.” And he pointed out that casual sex was down, with only 11% of singles now wanting to date casually. Justin Garcia? The executive director of the Kinsey Institute and Match’s other chief scientific adviser. This is the US. Presumably Britain is bonking on regardless through Sextember, Morevember, Di … Stop it! No, it’s much more complex than that, even in the UK. The 2020-21 Natsal-Covid study, which replaced the National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles, painted a complicated picture. Basically, Brits are doing it less too – the pandemic has changed sex if not for ever, at least for now. Do say: “Yeah, no hurry. We’ve only known each other a few months, after all.” Don’t say: “What if I keep the mask on – would that help?”Bedrooms are already standing empty at the Greenways care home outside the Warwickshire village of Long Itchington because there aren’t enough staff. Claire Callender, 42, the manager, has already closed 12 of her 27 beds because “there aren’t people who want to do the job”. And on Wednesday she said goodbye to another care worker, this time because of the new rule making double Covid jabs a condition of deployment for all care home workers in England as of Thursday. Katie Madden, who worked night shifts at Greenways for the last 18 months, came close to tears when she told the Guardian about leaving. She worked through a Covid outbreak at the home and was ill herself with the virus for weeks. She had planned to get the vaccine, but was anxious about it making her ill again. “The decision was taken out of my hands [when the law making it mandatory was introduced] … and I thought, ‘No, I’m not ready,’” she said. She washes residents, prepares them for bed and checks on them through the night. In the morning she gets them up and arranges breakfast. “This is a job I am going to be really upset about leaving,” she said. “I built a relationship with them all. We were all there through thick and thin when everyone was poorly … I could have run away when there was coronavirus, but the old people were getting it and it was breaking my heart. But I went there, breaking my back to help, and it turns from that to ‘You can go now’. I feel really let down.” For care managers, already dealing with staff shortages caused by exhaustion, pay that averages barely £9 an hour and the flow of foreign carers being choked off by Brexit, the rule is only made more difficult by the fact that NHS workers won’t have to get vaccinated until April 2022. Many care staff reluctant to have the vaccine have as a result already moved to the health service. “The [situation] is absolutely ridiculous,” said Callender. “I have to turn a healthcare worker away if they are not vaccinated, but not visitors.” There were goodbyes in all corners of social care on Wednesday. Neil Russell, the chairman of PJ Care, which provides neurological care for adults, said he was losing 14 staff across three sites and potentially another dozen by 24 December unless they could persuade doctors they were medically exempt. Carers are allowed to self-certify a medical exemption until Christmas, but must leave after then if it is not confirmed. Those leaving this week are going to new jobs including in the NHS and handling parcels at Amazon and John Lewis warehouses, he said.I’m very glad that 2030 is the “cliff edge” for the climate (Report, 9 November). This means that we don’t need to do anything until 31 December 2029. Does it really need to be spelled out that action means yesterday? Did this “reality check” come as a shock to me? Not for a minute. Tim Higgs Hever, Kent • Re climate change songs (Letters, 9 November), Canned Heat’s So Sad (The World’s in a Tangle) nailed it in 1970: “Too much smoke, too much gas, too little green”. Their songwriter Alan Wilson was also an ardent botanist and campaigner for the protection of California’s redwood groves. Max Bell Thame, Oxfordshire • Memo to Marina Hyde (With a sleaze storm brewing in parliament, Boris Johnson seeks shelter where he can, 9 November): five months ago, I decided to stop washing my white hair. It’s fine – clean, non-smelly and as fluffy as ever. It didn’t even go through the “looking and smelling like a damp sheep” stage. Dr Brigid Purcell Norwich • These southerners with their figs and raspberries (Letters, 7 November) can’t hold a candle to my bunch of sweet peas, picked this morning in my north of the Tyne garden. Pat Stevenson Holywell, Northumberland • I was interested in the fact that eider ducks are sometimes known as “Frankie Howerd ducks” (Letters, 9 November). Whenever I’ve heard them, it has always made me think of Les Dawson and Roy Barraclough’s Cissie and Ada. Fred Pickering Chapel-en-le-Frith, Derbyshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Scientists have shown how a fatty acid found in palm oil can encourage the spread of cancer, in work that could pave the way for new treatments. The study, on mice, found that palmitic acid promoted metastasis in mouth and skin cancers. In future, this process could be targeted with drugs or carefully designed eating plans, but the team behind the work cautioned against patients putting themselves on diets in the absence of clinical trials. “There is something very special about palmitic acid that makes it an extremely potent promoter of metastasis,” said Prof Salvador Aznar-Benitah, of the Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB), Barcelona. “I think it is too early to determine which type of diet could be consumed by patients with metastatic cancer that would slow down the metastatic process.” The study adds to emerging evidence that diet can be used to enhance existing cancer treatments because certain nutrients are disproportionately relied on by tumour cells, or are required at critical stages such as metastasis. The study built on previous work by the same team showing that, within a tumour, just a small subset of cells have the capacity to spread by travelling out of the tumour, reaching other organs and colonising them. These specialised cancer cells appeared to rely particularly heavily on fatty acids and the latest work narrowed this down to palmitic acid, which is found in palm oil – but also in a wide variety of foods such as butter and olive oil. The study, published in Nature, found that when palmitic acid was supplemented into the diet of mice, mouth and skin cancers were more likely to spread. Other fatty acids called oleic acid and linoleic acid – omega-9 and omega-6 fats found in foods such as olive oil and flaxseeds – did not show the same effect. Neither of the fatty acids tested increased the risk of developing cancer in the first place. The study suggested that exposure to palmitic acid caused changes to the function of genes in cancer cells that allowed them to sense fatty acids and consume them more efficiently. The presence of palmitic acid also appeared to send cancer cells into a “regenerative state” allowing them to form signalling networks beyond the tumour, which is known to be a crucial step towards spreading. Metastasis of cancer remains the main cause of death in cancer patients and the vast majority of people with metastatic cancer can only be treated, but not cured. By understanding what cancer cells need to make this leap, the scientists also identified ways to block the process and are planning a clinical trial of proteins that interfere with the tumour response to palmitic acid. “That is a much more realistic approach in terms of a real therapy, that doesn’t depend on whether a patient likes Nutella or pizza,” said Aznar-Benitah. “Playing with diets is so complicated.” Prof Greg Hannon, director of the Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, said: “This is a rigorous and comprehensive study that suggests that exposure to a major constituent of palm oil durably changes the behaviour of cancer cells, making them more prone to progress from local to potentially lethal metastatic disease. Given the prevalence of palm oil as an ingredient in processed foods, this study provides strong motivation for further study on how dietary choices influence the risk of tumour progression.” Helen Rippon, chief executive at Worldwide Cancer Research, said: “This discovery is a huge breakthrough in our understanding of how diet and cancer are linked and, perhaps more importantly, how we can use this knowledge to start new cures for cancer. Metastasis is estimated to be responsible for 90% of all cancer deaths – that’s around 9 million deaths a year globally. Learning more about what makes cancer spread and – importantly – how to stop it is the way forward to reduce these numbers.”A former minister in Muammar Gaddafi’s government “orchestrated” the shooting of PC Yvonne Fletcher outside the Libyan embassy in London in 1984, the high court has heard. Saleh Ibrahim Mabrouk is accused of being jointly liable for the death of 25-year-old Fletcher, who was killed by automatic gunfire aimed at anti-Gaddafi protesters and police outside the embassy in St James’s Square on 17 April 1984. Mabrouk was arrested over Fletcher’s murder in 2015. In 2017, Scotland Yard detectives said they believed they had identified those responsible for the crime but were dropping the investigation because key evidence could not be used in court for reasons of national security. John Murray, a close friend who was on duty alongside Fletcher on the day of the shooting and cradled her as she lay dying, has brought a civil claim against Mabrouk in an attempt to obtain justice for his colleague. Opening the trial in central London on Wednesday, Murray’s lawyer Phillippa Kaufmann QC said that although Mabrouk, who has refused to participate in the proceedings, was not the gunman and was arrested before the shots were fired, he was a “key participant” in the planned use of violence. She said Mabrouk: Told a meeting after he and his peers took over the embassy that they had to teach a lesson to anti-Gaddafi people and spoke of carrying out “bombings and murders”. Asked a colleague on the morning of the protest to collect another man to show those at the embassy “how to put together and dismantle a gun”. Told a police officer putting out barriers before the protest: “We have guns here today, there is going to be fighting.” Instructed protesters at a pro-Gaddafi counterdemonstration where to stand “so they wouldn’t get shot”. After the shooting, sought to pass on advice to the man who had fired the shots not to comment if questioned by police. Kaufmann said: “The orchestration of the shooting was entirely consistent with the official functions he had been given under the Gaddafi regime. It fell to the defendant to put Gaddafi’s instructions into action and consistently with this he had already started to do so shortly after moving into the embassy. “He – together with a small number of others – was in control of the embassy, the weapons being harboured there and who was permitted to gain entry. It is inconceivable that the individuals who fired from the first floor window were not acting under his direction, instruction, inducement, incitement and/or persuasion.” Murray, who suffered post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD), is claiming nominal damages of £1 for assault and battery. His main aim is to achieve justice for Fletcher, having promised her as she lay dying that he would find those responsible for shooting her. Before going into court, he said: “It’s something we shouldn’t have had to do because I do think criminal charges should have been brought. “What I fought for for all this time is for the full evidence to be heard in front of a judge, and let the judge decide.” Murray also hopes that if he wins his civil claim, which must be proved on the balance of probabilities rather than the criminal standard of beyond reasonable doubt, it may persuade the Crown Prosecution Service to charge Mabrouk, even without access to the evidence being withheld for national security reasons. Mabrouk, who is in Libya, denied any involvement in the shooting in email correspondence with Murray’s lawyers but is not represented. The trial is expected to last three days.On 2 November, I wrote to my Conservative MP about Richard Ratcliffe. I explained how he was camping outside the Foreign Office, on hunger strike (Growing concern for Richard Ratcliffe 17 days into hunger strike, 9 November). I asked my MP to visit Richard and find out what it is like for him and his family to manage their lives knowing that Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, his wife, will be held in Tehran for another year. Perhaps he could reassure Richard that the Foreign Office was doing everything in its power to secure her release. I received a reply shortly afterwards, but my question was unanswered. There was no mention of Richard. There was no mention of his daughter, Gabriella. There was no mention of his desperateness, his anguish or his frustration. In fact, it was a generalist reply telling me about the history of Nazanin, which I already knew. I was disappointed. The photograph of Richard and his daughter in Monday’s paper offered a sharp image of their pain. When will the government explain exactly what it is doing to support Nazanin and her family? What is the strategy for bringing her home? Rebecca Durant Winterton-on-Sea, Norfolk • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.With regards to Boris Johnson’s trip to Hexham hospital, the website of the Northumbria NHS foundation trust has advice for those wishing to visit (Boris Johnson seen maskless in hospital as cases among MPs rise, 8 November). To paraphrase, visiting should be kept to a minimum, and masks must be worn when entering the hospital. What was so necessary that Johnson, and presumably a large retinue of advisers and security personnel, had to travel from London to the hospital? Was anything concrete achieved or learned from the visit? What was so vital that required a large number of people to walk around the hospital? “Wear a mask when you enter the hospital”: it’s hard to be clearer than that isn’t it? I’d imagine the vast majority of the electorate would take it as read that this statement not only applies to the act of entering the hospital, but also in fact to the state of being in the hospital, and therefore wearing a mask for the whole of your visit. So what was the prime minister doing there? And why was he not wearing a mask for the entire duration of his visit? Even if none of the above registers, he’s in a hospital. All the doctors and nurses are wearing masks. It’s completely incomprehensible behaviour. I wonder how the relatives of the dying who are unable to visit feel when looking at those pictures. Matthew Sears Michaelchurch Escley, Herefordshire • Isn’t it about time that the NHS stopped allowing our prime minister into its hospitals? My wife, who is a year on from cancer surgery, is receiving follow-up checks on a regular basis. She has a PCR test before every visit, despite two Covid jabs and a booster, and must wear a medical-standard mask along with everyone else. I am not allowed to come into the hospital with my wife. We are both happy to follow the rules, which are for everyone’s safety. Surely hospitals realise that they have become filmsets where Boris Johnson is the star and the staff are extras in the show. If hospitals allow him in, the staff should protest and refuse to take part. Name and address supplied • How long before Thomas Eaton’s Saturday quiz asks what links Kabul, Hexham and a refrigerator? Michael Woodgate Bristol • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The prosecutor investigating the fatal shooting on the Rust film set in New Mexico last month has rejected conspiracy theories launched by defense attorneys of crew members suggesting that the death of the cinematographer could have been the result of a mysterious sabotage plot. “We do not have any proof,” the Santa Fe county district attorney, Mary Carmack-Altwies, told ABC News in an interview broadcast on Wednesday morning. “Do you believe sabotage is a possibility?” a reporter asked, to which Carmack-Altwies firmly replied: “No.” The tragedy occurred on a desert western film set in New Mexico when the actor Alec Baldwin, also a producer on the project, unwittingly fired a loaded gun while rehearsing a scene and the shot killed the cinematographer, Halyna Hutchins, and injured the director, Joel Souza, who was standing behind her. Baldwin was handed a weapon by the assistant director, Dave Halls, who indicated it was “cold” or safe to use, court documents have stated. Police have been investigating the shooting in conjunction with Carmack-Altwies’ office and the tragedy has also sparked fierce debate in Hollywood about working conditions for crew on TV and film sets. Carmack-Altwies said that if it were to be found that someone did indeed sabotage the film set, then her office would be looking at “certainly a higher level of murder charge than we would potentially be looking at with the facts we have now”. Last week, Jason Bowles, attorney of the set’s 24-year-old weapons armorer Hannah Gutierrez Reed, said someone may have sabotaged the film set, noting: “I believe that somebody who would do that would want to sabotage the set, want to prove a point, want to say they’re disgruntled, they’re unhappy.” He added: “We know there was a live round in a box of dummy rounds that shouldn’t have been there … We have a time frame … in which the firearms at times were unattended, so there was opportunity to tamper with this scene.” Carmack-Altwies raised concerns with “many levels of failures” on the movie set, adding that it was her understanding that more than one live round was found on set, without disclosing the exact number. “We still don’t know how they got on the set and how they got there I think will be one of the most important factors going into a [criminal] charging decision,” she said. Carmack-Altwies also confirmed that she knew the identity of the person who loaded the gun but refused to provide details. Additionally, she contested claims made by Lisa Torraco, attorney for the assistant director, who said that Halls did not take the gun from the prop cart and hand it to Baldwin. “Yes, that does seem to be the case,” Carmack-Altwies said in response to whether it is her belief that Halls handed the pistol to the actor. Since the shooting, New Mexico film industry workers have been demanding better film training and tougher gun regulations on production sets. A dozen producers, set managers, crew members and actors interviewed by Reuters said the industry growth has vastly outstripped the state’s supply of trained crew, putting set safety at risk. Up to a third of staff in some departments on high-budget productions can be inexperienced or on their first movie, according to a senior crew member and two set managers. Lower-budget productions such as Rust scramble to find trained staff as large companies such as Netflix and Universal, both with New Mexico production hubs, hire crews of up to 300, two producers said. New Mexico demands no special training or permits for armorers to manage real firearms.The disgraceful Owen Paterson saga has provoked many articles, including Nesrine Malik’s, about the vulnerability of pillars of governance once imagined to be a deep part of British identity (I have lived under corrupt regimes – the cynicism stalking Britain is all too familiar, 8 November). Instead of thinking of these things as providentially ordained, there is hope to be found by recalling how they were made by ordinary hands. Imagine that today all new judges were appointed by Dominic Raab. Yet, for us, the independent appointment of judges is quite new. It was wrested from the grip of the lord chancellor during the Blair government, and as a headhunter I played a part in that. (I led the search work to recruit the first Judicial Appointments Commission and, more significantly, its vital, little-remembered predecessor: the body which in a brief life blew apart the lord chancellor’s cosy club.) When I started work in the civil service, I was taught that fundamental principles like appointment on merit, with no chumocracy, were created during the Crimean war. Our predecessors learned what the rule by cronies of the powerful had cost in terms of unnecessary deaths. They had had enough. They invented a new concept of public administration. They changed their minds about who, and what, deserved respect. This “sceptred isle” needs a new Crimean moment. Let’s choose to have one. Douglas Board Visiting professor, University of Chichester • Nesrine Malik’s depiction of the way cynicism can flourish in a country like this is timely. The urgency now is around how to arrest the decline and restore voters’ belief that their participation at the ballot box is worthwhile. That only becomes possible if there is even the slightest belief that things are capable of changing. And in the current mire, if opposition parties cannot even provide a spark of hope which might inspire us to believe that change is possible, then the direction of travel is bleak indeed. Robust and sustained calling-out of corrupt practices, corrupt individuals and, above all, demands for restitution where possible, are vital prerequisites if the rot is to be stopped. Dr Peter Mangan Beckenham, London • It is with sadness and shame that I concur with Nesrine Malik’s searing analysis. I once believed that my country, with all its failings and injustices, had endeavoured over the past 60 years or so to improve the lot of all through its commitment to the NHS, the welfare state and improving social justice. Once I believed that my government spoke with “good faith” and that it did at least intend to speak the truth. Once I believed that when I died, I would leave behind a better and fairer country than the one I entered in the 1940s. Now I believe that this government, with its frequent reneging on explicit promises and agreements, its rejection of genuine honest debate, its distortion of facts, and our prime minister’s propensity to bully and flout every rule of good governance, is gradually unravelling the achievements of all the previous postwar administrations. If we continue on this path, it will inevitably lead to Britain being justifiably compared with Malik’s “failed states overseas”. What a sad and desperate state of affairs. Peter Riddle Wirksworth, Derbyshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.If Cop26 were to be staged, it would be as a political drama in two long acts. Act one would see the leaders of wealthy countries such as Britain, the US and Australia smiling broadly as they strut the Glasgow stage with their friends, wring their hands and manage the world’s expectations. Act two would see them knifing each other offstage and kicking poor countries hard before running away. The climate crisis conference, now halfway through its second week, is well into act two and the final scenes are being rehearsed in late-night talks. In a dramatic early-morning move, Alok Sharma and the UK presidency acting as the protagonist, listened to countries and produced a seven page draft “non-paper” that sets the broad outline of the final agreement that it thinks it may be diplomatically possible to reach. It is only a first draft but to many of the players in this drama it already bodes ill, because, despite the fine words and the supposed ambition, it seems very much to reflect the agenda of the rich. It is welcomed by some because it repeats the 1.5C goal as the critical temperature target, and for the first time calls on countries to speed up the phasing out of coal and fossil fuel subsidies. But it’s what is not in the draft that is just as important. It is full of words such as “urges” and “recognises” but there is no mention of the $100bn a year that the rich countries pledged nine years ago to help the poor adapt to climate change; no acceptance of their financial or moral responsibility for disasters; nothing about transparency or carbon markets; no plan or proposal to phase out other fossil fuels; and no acceptance that wealthy countries should act first. Now the stage is being re-set for the world’s poor and most vulnerable countries to push back hard and try to get genuine commitments to act. The many groups of small island states, least developed nations, Africans and Latin Americans are genuinely shocked, and worried. Not only is the world on course for a catastrophic 2.4C rise in temperature and nowhere near the 1.5C target, they say, but it looks from this draft as if they are being abandoned and denied the right to either develop with coal or be financially helped to adapt to a crisis they did not cause. Enter the chorus of NGOs, youth groups, indigenous peoples and charities that now step forward as the loud voice of the people. They, too, are shocked by the draft’s seeming lack of ambition and tell rich countries to be far more forceful. “These empty words are way off target to meet the scale of the enormous challenge facing humanity,’ says a spokesperson for ActionAid. “Far from being a real plan by governments to solve a worsening climate crisis, it is more a polite request that countries maybe, possibly, perhaps do more next year or sometime in the future,” says a Greenpeace representative. From this point on in the Cop26 drama, the lines have not been written and it’s impossible to guess which direction the talks will go. Just possibly, the UK will play a blinder, its diplomats furiously twisting arms, calling in favours, bringing out the cash and conjuring the missing words that the poorer nations want; but it’s equally likely that Boris Johnson has overestimated his ability to bring countries together, misread the mood of the meeting and left it too late to retrieve. That might explain why the PM has rushed back to Glasgow, possibly having been made aware that diplomatic shame looms without intervention at the highest level. There is little time left to close the gaps and precious little goodwill to take in to the critical last two days of negotiations. It is now a genuine thriller that could go either way. Over the next 36 hours, many more drafts will be cobbled together by the UK only to be rejected. But if Cop26 is anything like so many others, the poorer countries will eventually fall in line behind the more powerful ones and a shorter text will be put before the world and reluctantly accepted. The rich nations, again, will probably have their way. But it may be many years before the critics declare Cop26 to have been a farce, a tragedy or an unlikely spectacular hit. John Vidal is a former Guardian environment editorA “projection fight” broke out at the Cop26 venue in Glasgow, which resulted in official projectionists covering the building in the words “go away”. “I haven’t stopped laughing since,” tweeted one campaigner. At about 11.30pm on Tuesday a group known as the Gastivists were carrying out a guerrilla protest, projecting slogans such as “Leave methane in the ground” and “end fracking now” on to the side of the SEC building in the Scottish city, where the UN climate summit is being held. Ten minutes into their presentation, the event’s official projectionists tried to disrupt the protest by projecting multicoloured backgrounds, including a giant rainbow and animations. They then projected the words “go away” in large red letters to try to get the campaigners to leave. “It was quite a surreal thing to see,” said Neal Huddon-Cossar, a Gastivist campaigner from Rome. “It was quite comical really because in the end they just give us a big story to run with and made our projections appear much more attractive and dramatic because they had some pretty pretty cool backgrounds. But it was quite apparent that they were trying to block out our images.” The group, who want to highlight the damage caused by methane leaks in natural gas extraction, responded by trying to communicate with their antagonisers – at one point projecting “Put the rainbow back”. “It was all quite hilarious but also quite concerning. It’s quite indicative of the atmosphere at this Cop where civil society spaces have been restricted and those with power and money are given a much louder voice than activists,” Huddon-Cossar said. “This reality is at the very core of everything that is wrong with international climate talks.” The group had been planning the protest for weeks and it was part of a series of guerrilla projections across Europe, including one during the G20 summit two weeks ago. “We don’t understand the threat that we posed by trying to bring more attention to national governments around the world that are continuing to invest in fossil gas as a climate solution when methane emissions are such a big problem,” said Huddon-Cossar. A Cop26 spokesperson said: “A third-party supplier is responsible for delivering projections at the Cop26 site and we are speaking to them about this. This response was not authorised by Cop26.”The University of Glasgow has backed down from labelling a peer-reviewed journal article about pro-Israel lobbying as “antisemitic”, amid criticism from leading international academics. The university was criticised for undermining academic freedom after it appended a preface in May to the four-year-old paper, apologising for its publication and claiming it promoted an “unfounded antisemitic theory”. The university republished the article this week with a new preface, removing the apology and instead saying the paper promoted “what some would regard as an unfounded theory” about Israel. The climbdown came after Noam Chomsky, the US linguist and foreign policy critic, and George Smith, a Nobel prize-winning chemist, were among more than 550 academics who signed a petition handed to Glasgow two weeks ago calling on the university to assert its commitment to free speech. “[Glasgow’s] untenable position implies that other groups, states and corporations can all be the subject of critical academic analysis, but commentary on pro-Israel advocacy must be limited,” they said. The article, published in Glasgow’s eSharp journal, for early career academics, had argued that “an Israeli state-sponsored strategy [was] focused on controlling public opinion in the UK”. It said Israel sought to “harness the resources of grassroots Zionist supporters” to bolster British government support for Israel, and to “discredit and neutralise pro-Palestinian discourses”. Glasgow added a preface to the article in May, after complaints and a story about the controversy in the Jewish Chronicle. Prof Jonathan Rosenhead, of the London School of Economics, who helped to coordinate the petition, said he welcomed the university’s removal of the antisemitism accusation. But he added: “The university has completely failed to justify either its original insulting preface, or the need for any preface at all. It seems that it is trying desperately both to move and not to move; it’s trying to make a change which will defuse the academic anger about what it’s done without triggering a new burst of hostilities from defenders of Israel, and it seems to me quite possible it will have satisfied neither.” David Collier, a pro-Israel campaigner, who was referenced in the paper and who published a rebuttal on his website, described the removal of the apology as “an act of cowardice”. The research in the paper “didn’t hold up”, Collier said. “It was a gutter piece and the underlying thread was that people like myself are effectively fifth columnists working inside the UK for a foreign nation – which is a basic antisemitic trope.” A spokesperson for Glasgow insisted the preface was changed in August, before the petition was received, and the new version includes a footnote claiming it was amended in September “to address a potential ambiguity in the wording”. However, when the Guardian accessed the article through the eSharp website in October it led to the old version. That link has since been changed to the amended version. The university said it was committed to supporting academic freedom, adding: “The university does not agree that publication of the editorial is damaging to academic freedom. The article remains on the journal’s website and readers are free to endorse it or challenge it as they see fit.” • This article was amended on 23 November 2021 to reinstate text, removed during the editing process, which indicated that when the Guardian accessed the article through the eSharp website in October 2021 it led to the old version without the new preface.Gerald Sinstadt, one of the most instantly recognisable television sports voices as a commentator for BBC and ITV for more than 40 years, has died at the age of 91. The versatile broadcaster, who covered golf as well as the Olympics, will be chiefly remembered for his football commentaries, first for Granada TV in the north-west in the 1970s and also with the BBC where in 1989 he was famously its pitchside reporter on the day of the Hillsborough disaster. Sinstadt was one of the first commentators to criticise the racist abuse black players suffered, including during a West Bromwich Albion 5-3 victory over Manchester United at Old Trafford in 1978 when Cyrille Regis and Laurie Cunningham scored the crucial goals. His path to broadcasting might not have happened but for a cruel twist of fate involving his parents. Sinstadt, born in 1930, was the only child of shopkeepers in Folkestone and was evacuated during the second world war. Later, reflecting on the tragic death of the pair in a German air raid, he said: “I can still remember my teacher taking me out of class to tell me the news. I have wondered what might have been if my parents had survived. Who knows, I may have followed my dad and become a shopkeeper.” The young Sinstadt made his first live commentary in 1949 for forces radio after his conscription into national service and was rewarded with a 7-6 cup game between an English and Scottish regiment. “The game made my job easy and I thought: ‘Hang on, I can do this,’” recalled Sinstadt. “Unfortunately, I soon realised you couldn’t just turn up on the day and hope for the best. If you don’t do your proper research the listener will soon catch you out.” After time on BBC radio and Anglia Television, Sinstadt’s informed but distinctively dry style became a feature of Granada TV’s Kick Off preview and of highlights shows on ITV from 1969 to 1981 when he became the station’s full-time football commentator. Sinstadt described the iconic moment Denis Law scored a cheeky backheel goal for Manchester City as his former club Manchester United were relegated to the then second division. A cultured man with a passion for opera, he worked on programmes covering that art form as well as branching out to commentate on golf for Channel 4 when he left Granada TV before returning to the BBC in the mid-1980s to become a regular on Match of the Day, Football Focus and Final Score until his retirement. Sinstadt settled in the Potteries after his retirement and wrote a weekly column for the Stoke Sentinel until 2019.The family of a young Kenyan woman allegedly murdered by a British soldier almost a decade ago plans to sue the Ministry of Defence to demand answers over her death. The body of Agnes Wanjiru, 21, was found in 2012 after she reportedly went out partying with British soldiers at the Lions Court hotel in the central town of Nanyuki, where the UK army has a permanent garrison. The Sunday Times reported last month that a British soldier had confessed to killing Wanjiru and showed comrades where he had dumped her body in a septic tank behind the hotel. The report prompted Kenyan police to reopen the case amid fresh calls for an investigation to secure justice for Wanjiru. Wanjiru’s family have instructed the law firm Leigh Day to challenge the Ministry of Defence over what it says is a failure to investigate her alleged murder. Partner Tessa Gregory told Agence-France Presse: “Our client desperately wants justice for Agnes but also wants answers as to what the British army knew and why it is that over the last nine years the Ministry of Defence appear to have done nothing to address the known allegations Agnes was brutally murdered at the hands of a British soldier.” A spokesperson for the MoD said: “The jurisdiction for this investigation rests with the Kenyan police, who we continue to work closely with on a daily basis to provide all possible support. “This remains an active investigation with multiple lines of inquiry. In order to protect the investigation, and in the interests of justice, we cannot comment further.” Wanjiru was last seen one evening in March 2012 with a British soldier from the military base and her body was found about two months later. Rose Wanyua, Wanjiru’s eldest sister, told the Guardian: “It’s painful, very painful. Shiru did not deserve to die the way she did. We will never forget her.” Wanyua disputes the assumption that her sister met the soldiers while looking for clients as a sex worker. “A friend told my sister that there was some ‘quick money’ to be made that evening if only Wanjiru joined her in entertaining the Johnnies in town. She was a hair stylist who used to make my daughters’ hair, never the prostitute as many would like the world to believe,” she said. The UK high commissioner to Kenya, Jane Marriott, last month expressed “outrage and concern” over Wanjiru’s death and promised high-level support for a Kenyan investigation into her murder. Noordin Haji, Kenya’s director of public prosecutions, has said the government would request the soldier’s extradition to face murder charges in Kenya. Since Kenya gained independence in 1963, the British Army Training Unit Kenya (BATUK) on the outskirts of Nanyuki has been beset by controversies and allegations of offences, although some see it as bringing benefits, both to the local economy and to the society through the soldiers’ development work.The Covid-19 pandemic has thrown into relief the way that scientific facts can be distorted by commercial imperatives, unconscious bias or self-delusion as they make their way into the collective consciousness. Walter Gratzer was a pioneer in the subgenre of science writing that calls out such biases, yet as a researcher in molecular biology he celebrated the self-correcting tendencies within science as well as gently mocking its failings. Gratzer, who has died aged 89, was a modest man who never became a household name, yet he influenced the way science has come to be communicated beyond the confines of highly specialised journals, and his writings encouraged readers in the research community to raise their heads from the bench and reflect on what they were doing. He first ventured into journalism when the energetic John Maddox, a former science correspondent for the Manchester Guardian, took the century-old journal Nature by storm as its editor from 1966. Unlike many scientists, Gratzer had a way with words, writing with elegance and wit on avidly absorbed gems of information and anecdote from beyond his own field. Maddox made him a de facto news correspondent, inviting him to contribute lucid commentaries on recent research for his revamped News and Views section. Maddox, trained as a physicist, also relied on him for advice about what he should publish from the fast-moving field of molecular biology. Gratzer described Maddox’s impact on Nature as “more invigorating and far-reaching than anything that had happened to it since the time of its founding editor”. Yet Gratzer never joined the journal’s staff. He had recently set up his own laboratory at King’s College London, where Maurice Wilkins had begun X-ray studies of DNA and Rosalind Franklin had obtained the crucial X-ray photograph that enabled James Watson and Francis Crick to discover the double helix. The 1953 discovery had led to an explosion of research on DNA itself, on the different forms of RNA that helped to translate the DNA code into proteins, and on the abundant diversity of proteins. Gratzer rode the wave of a collective effort to make sense of that diversity, and to understand how, as Crick put it, “DNA makes RNA makes proteins”. Using spectroscopy and other analytical techniques such as gel electrophoresis, he examined the sizes, shapes and interactions of these vital molecules. From the mid-1970s he focused on understanding how the interactions of proteins in the membranes of disc-shaped red blood cells enable them to squeeze through tiny capillaries and recover their shape. Without this property, blood could not deliver oxygen to our tissues. These studies contributed to a better understanding of the molecular basis of blood disorders such as thalassaemia and sickle cell disease. Throughout his working life Gratzer continued to make weekly trips from his lab in Drury Lane to Nature’s offices in Little Essex Street half a mile away, towing a suitcase full of manuscripts. A connoisseur of scientific writing, he edited The Longman Literary Companion to Science in 1989. A Bedside Nature: Genius and Eccentricity in Science 1869–1953 (1996) was his quirky selection of papers from the journal’s early history, leavened with “an amazing mix of erudition and spiky comment”, according to Nature’s former books editor Tim Lincoln. In 2000, having witnessed late 20th-century scientific controversies such as morphic resonance, cold fusion and the “memory of water” at close hand, he published The Undergrowth of Science: Delusion, Self-Deception and Human Frailty. Unlike harsher critics, he empathised with his victims. “The germ of a pathological episode,” he wrote, “is usually an innocent mistake … Once committed it is difficult to go back and to allow the principles of caution and skepticism that training and experience normally inculcate to overcome the excitement and euphoria of a brilliant success.” Gratzer was born in the then-German city of Breslau (now Wrocław in Poland), the only surviving son of Hans Grätzer, a manager with various engineering companies, and his Hungarian-born wife, Margit (nee Perlstein). The family, who were Jewish, lived in the small town of Mikołów near Katowice in Poland. As nazism advanced, Walter and his parents escaped first to Czechoslovakia and then, in 1939, to the UK. Most of the rest of his large extended family perished in the Holocaust. The family lived first in Belsize Park, north London, but in 1940 first Hans and then Walter and his mother were interned as enemy aliens on the Isle of Man. Finally settled in Cheltenham after their release, Walter, who despite arriving in the UK with no English was already showing a flair for the language, won a scholarship to Cheltenham grammar school. A further scholarship took him to Oxford University to study chemistry in 1951, and after gaining his degree he taught apprentices as his national service in the RAF. At the National Institute of Medical Research in Mill Hill, north London, he worked with Gilbert Beaven on spectroscopic analysis of the protein haemoglobin, which carries oxygen in red blood cells, gaining his PhD. He was working in the department of biology at Harvard University in the US when Watson, a member of the same department, won his Nobel prize for the double helix (shared with Crick and Wilkins) in 1962. Gratzer and Watson subsequently became friends: Gratzer wrote the introduction to Watson’s 2000 collection of essays A Passion for DNA. He returned to the UK in 1963 and joined King’s as a lecturer in biophysics and subsequently a researcher in the Medical Research Council Cell Biophysics Unit, where he remained all his working life. According to Rosalind Cotter, the correspondence editor at Nature and his former PhD student, “he rescued many struggling postdocs, securing grants for them by helping them to write compelling applications”. He loved books, wine and opera, and, his colleague from King’s, Simon Hughes, recalls, “as a raconteur, whether in print or in person, he was second to none”. Gratzer met Hannah Gould while they were both postdoctoral researchers at Harvard, and they married in 1963. She survives him, and continues to carry out research into the molecular basis of allergy and asthma at King’s. • Walter Bruno Gratzer, biophysical chemist and science writer, born 20 September 1932; died 20 October 2021The Guardian has been speaking to climate negotiators from developing countries in the buildup to and during the Cop26 climate conference. We asked for their immediate reactions to the draft negotiation outcome published on Wednesday morning. One secret negotiator said: The draft covering decisions text has not come up to the global great expectations. The whole world wants a more ambitious outcome at Glasgow Cop26. But the draft covering decisions text waters down those ambitions and is not consistent with Paris agreement 1.5C goal, nor with raising ambitions [on cutting emissions]. The hope is that we have still two more days to raise mitigation [emissions-cutting] ambitions, deliver $100bn (£74bn) [that was promised from] 2020 and $100bn-plus for beyond 2025, fix article 6 rules for market mechanisms, set adaptation goals and support national adaptation plans and operationalise Santiago Network for loss and damage. The world needs a Marshall plan to face the climate emergency humanity is now facing. We can’t let Glasgow Cop26 fail to rescue the most vulnerable now on the hook of adverse impacts of runaway climate change. Another said: The IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] report is very clear, and the cover decision [summary of aims] needs to reiterate the messages from the IPCC report, acknowledge the gap between emissions pledges and the emissions cuts needed, and call on parties to fill the gap. Parties need to submit NDCs [nationally determined contributions] by 2022. We also need clear language on doubling adaptation finance, and on solidarity and support from developed countries. The link between finance for developing countries and their ability to have higher ambition on cutting emissions by 2030 [which would result from that finance] is also not made clear. Another said: To be honest, the text is devoid of any real ambition on finance and adaptation, especially in the context of the motto of keeping the 1.5C alive. Furthermore, it seems to be a sign of sobering realisation that all the hype around Cop26 and gloss is fading and fading fast. There seems to be some mad scramble now to kick the can on many issues down the road into next year. The so-called UK leadership does not seem to be present. Another told the Guardian: There need to be stronger words on reducing emissions in the near term, especially from developed countries, and much more than the current vague acknowledgments that more finance is needed. A serious deal that bridges the emissions gap to achieve a path to limit warming to 1.5C must also bridge the financial gaps that are needed for developing countries to both adapt to climate change and leapfrog the fossil fuel age. Ambitious mitigation must go hand in hand with ambitious financial support to achieve this. Anything less will condemn billions to needless suffering. Another developing country negotiator said: “To have any chance of reaching the 1.5C target, we must have a framework that consistently encourages countries to raise ambitions, and a five-year common timeframe is the best way to do this. The current NDC commitments already have us on a 2.4C temperature rise. A five-year common timeframe allows the review and assessment of how we are doing and forces a course of action. Despite the publicity created by pledges made last week, there are still huge leaps that must be taken if Cop26 is to be a success on climate finance. As well as the highly publicised failure to meet the $100bn target, which was intended as a floor, there are a number of other key issues. At present, there is an imbalance in the prioritisation of mitigation finance over investment in adaptation. For the developing world, the need to scale up adaptation financing is urgent. Yet sticking points for developed nations continue to grind negotiations to a halt. Refusals to commit to concrete financial targets, inabilities to discuss the definition of climate finance and stubbornness on the share of proceeds issue under article 6.2 are all contributing to an increasing disillusionment with this negotiation process among developing nations.Boris Johnson has insisted that the UK is “not remotely a corrupt country” and said MPs should be investigated and punished for breaking the rules, as the Conservative party continues to be embroiled in allegations of sleaze. Speaking in Glasgow, where he was making a brief visit to the Cop26 climate summit as it entered its final days, the prime minister sought to reassure the public after a slew of revelations about the private earnings of his party colleagues. “I genuinely believe that the UK is not remotely a corrupt country, nor do I believe that our institutions are corrupt,” he said. He declined to comment directly on individual MPs, including the former attorney general Sir Geoffrey Cox, who is under fire over his £1m-plus annual earnings as a barrister. But Johnson said: “I think what you’ve got is cases where, sadly, MPs have broken the rules in the past, may be guilty of breaking the rules today. What I want to see is them facing appropriate sanctions … The most important thing is, those who break the rules must be investigated and should be punished.” He was speaking a week after whipping Conservative MPs to back an amendment that sought to avert punishment for Owen Paterson – an MP found to have broken the rules – by tearing up the parliamentary standards system. Johnson reversed that decision less than 24 hours later after a backlash from Conservative MPs, and has since tabled a motion unpicking the amendment, which MPs will vote on next week. Paterson has since resigned. Amid a flurry of claims about MPs’ lucrative second jobs and whether they create conflicts of interest, Johnson said in many cases the public believed this outside work “has actually strengthened our democracy”. He said for a hundred years MPs had also worked as “doctors or lawyers or soldiers or firefighters”. But Johnson stressed that if such second jobs were to continue, “it is crucial that MPs follow the rules” by devoting themselves primarily to their constituents and avoiding “paid advocacy”. “Anybody who breaks the rules, who engages in paid advocacy in the House of Commons, should be punished,” he said. Parliament’s standards committee found Paterson had committed an “egregious” breach of the rules by repeatedly lobbying the government on behalf of two companies paying him more than £100,000 a year. Cox released a statement defending his actions on Wednesday. “He does not believe that he breached the rules, but will of course accept the judgment of the parliamentary commissioner or of the committee on the matter,” said the statement, worded entirely in the third person. His is only the latest of a string of cases brought to light in the past week after the prime minister’s botched attempt to protect Paterson. The Guardian revealed on Tuesday that Iain Duncan Smith chaired a taskforce advising the government that made recommendations on how hand sanitiser should be regulated – while being paid £25,000 a year by a company that manufactures hand sanitiser.Pressure on America’s central bank to raise interest rates has intensified after rising energy costs, supply shortages and increased consumption sent US inflation surging to a level not seen for more than 30 years. Although the Federal Reserve has repeatedly insisted price pressures will prove “transitory”, financial markets were taken aback by a 6.2% increase in the cost of living in the world’s biggest economy over the past year. A labor department report released on Wednesday showed prices rose by 0.9% in October alone – more than double the 0.4% jump in September – to push the annual rate of inflation to its highest level since December 1990, a time when global oil prices had risen sharply due to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait. The news came after the Biden administration and the Federal Reserve tried to downplay rising costs, arguing they are a temporary phenomena driven by Covid-19’s unprecedented impact on the global supply chain. The increase was “broad-based, with increases in the indexes for energy, shelter, food, used cars and trucks, and new vehicles among the larger contributors”, the labor department said. “The energy index rose 4.8% over the month, as the gasoline index increased 6.1% and the other major energy component indexes also rose. The food index increased 0.9% as the index for food at home rose 1%.” Last week Fed chair Jerome Powell warned that inflation had been “longer lasting than anticipated”. Powell said the Fed still expected recent price rises to be “transitory” but added that it was “very difficult to predict the persistence of supply constraints or their effects on inflation”. Energy prices are up 30% on a year ago, while food is up 5.3%. US consumers are paying more for clothes, car parts, shelter, energy, food and lawnmowers. US core inflation – which strips out volatile items such as energy and food also jumped by more than Wall Street had anticipated, rising from 4% in September to 4.6% in October, its highest since 1991. Major economies across the world are also suffering price rises caused by inflationary pressures. On Wednesday Beijing said inflation in China rose at a 1.5% annual rate last month, a doubling from the 0.7% annual rate in September, while German inflation came in at 4.5% in October versus 4.1% in September. The Bank of England, which last week predicted that UK inflation could rise above 5% next spring, has so far adopted the same approach as the Fed, leaving borrowing costs at the emergency level they reached in the early stages of the Covid-19 pandemic. Part of the latest surge in US prices was down to factors that may prove short-lived, economics forecaster Capital Economics wrote in a note to investors. US fuel prices surged in October but have since begun to fall and shortages of microprocessors and other parts are still contributing to a lack of inventory for car sellers that is driving up prices. But Capital Economics also warned it was difficult to tell when these inflationary pressures would stabilize. “The bottom line is that, while it remains difficult to predict how far or for how long the various ‘transitory’ factors will boost inflation, there is increasing evidence that inflationary pressures are broadening out, underlining that inflation will remain elevated for much longer than Fed officials expect,” they wrote.A federal judge in Washington has ruled that hundreds of pages of White House records from the Trump administration can be turned over to the House committee investigating the deadly 6 January attack on the Capitol, defying objections from Donald Trump. The decision, handed down late on Tuesday by the US district judge Tanya Chutkan, clears the way for the National Archives, the federal agency holding Trump’s White House materials, to start transmitting the records requested by Congress as early as Friday, though attorneys for Trump immediately vowed to appeal the ruling. Trump sued to block the release of materials, claiming presidential executive privilege. But Chutkan stated: “His position that he may override the express will of the executive branch appears to be premised on the notion that his executive power ‘exists in perpetuity’... but presidents are not kings, and plaintiff is not president.” In her ruling, she further said: “The court holds that the public interest lies in permitting – not enjoining – the combined will of the legislative and executive branches to study the events that led to January 6,” Chutkan wrote in a 39-page opinion that delivered a major win to the select committee. The White House records in question are among the most sensitive: visitor logs, telephone records and other documents from the files of Trump’s former White House chief of staff Mark Meadows as well as the former deputy White House counsel Patrick Philbin. Among the materials the committee wants to access are video clips, including out-takes of the video Trump taped on the evening of 6 January, when he asked rioters to go home but he also praised them, saying: “We love you, you’re very special.” A source that was present during the taping of that video told ABC News that there were many earlier takes of the president’s message but they were rejected for broadcast because the president heaped praise on the insurrectionists without telling them to leave the Capitol and grounds, the Good Morning America show reported on Wednesday. In total, the National Archives has indicated Trump was invoking executive privilege protections to block the release of at least 750 pages of records that pertained to the select committee’s request in August for records about Trump’s efforts to subvert the 2020 election, including events surrounding the attack on the Capitol by a crowd of his extremist supporters on 6 January. The Biden administration has already waived executive privilege for all of the documents in the first tranche of records requested by the select committee, but Trump sued the panel and the National Archives last month in an attempt to halt their release. House investigators have been pursuing the records for weeks as they undertake a far-reaching inquiry into the extent of the former president’s involvement in the Capitol attack and whether he had advance knowledge of the insurrection that left five dead and 140 injured. Bennie Thompson, the chair of the investigating committee and a Democratic congressman from Mississippi, said the federal judge’s ruling was a “big deal”. “We have the law on our side, and you know, we are a nation of laws,” Thompson told CNN. The ruling from the US district court in Washington DC came after the select committee issued 10 new subpoenas to Trump administration officials, including Trump’s former senior adviser Stephen Miller and press secretary Kayleigh McEnany. The subpoenas, which demand documents and testimony, are focused squarely on activities involving the White House and come a day after the select committee subpoenaed other top Trump associates who aimed to undercut the results of the 2020 election. The select committee gave the 10 Trump officials until 23 November to comply with the document requests in the subpoena, with deposition dates scheduled through December. It was not immediately clear on Tuesday whether any of the officials would cooperate.World Rugby is being urged to help bridge the widening north-south financial divide by confirming Australia as the host nation of the 2027 men’s Rugby World Cup. The Australian bid team also believe their principal rivals, the United States, would be a better option to stage the 2031 tournament. Before Saturday’s Cook Cup fixture at Twickenham, Rugby Australia’s chairman Hamish McLennan has further raised the ante, suggesting that leading rugby league players could be tempted to switch codes if a “golden decade” of sporting events in Australia, including a British &amp; Irish Lions tour in 2025, also included the first World Cup to be held in the country since 2003. McLennan has already confirmed that when Australia makes its formal bid presentation in a fortnight’s time it will make clear the global game could suffer if World Cups are only awarded to the richest nations. “We have made that argument,” said McLennan. “If World Cups just oscillate between one or two countries then I think it defeats the purpose. It feels right that after France in 2023 it comes south. I just think it’s good for the global game.” World Rugby is known to want to take a major tournament to the United States but McLennan says it would make more sense to wait until the Eagles national team is more consistently competitive. “Rugby is still a relatively immature sport in the US and they’ve still got to build a team up. You saw the recent 104-14 score between the All Blacks and the US Eagles. I think they need time to invest in their team and build their stocks up.” Australian rugby also faces its own battle to retain audiences in an increasingly competitive domestic market but McLennan claims high-profile league players would be more likely to transfer to the 15-a-side code if a World Cup was held on their doorstep. “We’re seeing rugby league players looking at our calendar,” he revealed. “We’ve got a Lions tour in 2025 and, potentially, a World Cup in 2027 leading into an Olympics in 2032. Some of these guys are putting their hands up and saying: ‘We want to be part of that.’ They realise the potential that exists.” With the final hosting decision to be taken next May, Australian officials say no firm decision has been taken on where a 2027 final might be held, with Perth, Melbourne and Sydney all viewed as candidates. McLennan, however, says Rugby Australia would be open to the 2025 Lions itinerary incorporating a Test against a Pacific Island nation and that they would also be open to hosting a women’s Lionesses tour. The former World Cup-winning hooker Phil Kearns, meanwhile, has admitted the Wallabies must raise their game if they want to end Eddie Jones’s unbeaten run against his home nation since taking over as England’s head coach. “They have been better than us for probably all of those games,” said Kearns. “That’s a hard pill to swallow [but] it’s a completely natural thing for Eddie to want to do: to beat the nation he once coached. He just wants to win … he’s a competitive guy, he drives his team hard and he’s very successful. How do you knock that?” Bristol have confirmed the signing of Sale’s American international fly-half AJ MacGinty for the 2022-23 season. The move will reunite the 31-year-old with his former coach Pat Lam, with whom he helped steer Connacht to the Pro12 title in 2016.Angela Merkel has asked Vladimir Putin to intervene in the crisis on the Belarus-Poland border in an appeal to Minsk’s key foreign sponsor as the EU prepared a new set of sanctions against Belarus. In a phone call on a crisis that has escalated dramatically since Monday, when 1,000 people mainly from Iraqi Kurdistan arrived on the border, the German chancellor told Putin that the “use of migrants by the Belarusian regime was inhuman and unacceptable and asked [Putin] to influence the regime in Minsk”, according to the chancellor’s spokesperson, Steffen Seibert, who described the situation as “state-sanctioned human trafficking”. The conversation came hours after Poland’s prime minister accused the Russian president of “masterminding” the surging numbers and underlined the role that regional alliances were playing in the standoff and ensuing humanitarian crisis. Thousands of people are in the forests along the border, where temperatures fall below zero after nightfall. Russia has denied any involvement and blamed Europe. The Kremlin readout of the phone call with Merkel said Putin “proposed to establish a discussion of the [current] problems in direct contacts between representatives of the EU member states and Minsk”. It did not mention Merkel’s request that Putin intervene or promise any action from Russia to end the crisis. But Moscow sent a potent message of support for Minsk on Wednesday as it dispatched a pair of nuclear-capable Tu-22M3 bombers on a patrol mission over Belarus. The Russian defence ministry called the rare deployment of the strategic bombers a preparedness check of Russia and Belarus’s joint air defence network. Poland and neighbouring Lithuania have declared a state of emergency on their borders with Belarus, where the authoritarian leader, Alexander Lukashenko, has been accused of ferrying asylum seekers from the Middle East to the EU’s borders as revenge for the bloc’s criticism of his crackdown on opposition. After a meeting of EU diplomats in Brussels on Wednesday, about 30 individuals and entities are facing sanctions, most likely including Belarus’s national air carrier, Belavia, and travel agencies. A full list of those to be targeted is expected to be finalised by the end of the week, then confirmed on Monday and brought into force next month. The EU has already imposed sanctions on 166 individuals tied to the Belarusian regime, including Lukashenko and his son, since the president embarked on a campaign of repression against opponents in order to stay in power after disputed elections last August, including forcing the landing of a Ryanair flight in order to arrest a dissident. An option to include Turkish Airlines and Russia’s Aeroflot in the sanctions regime for bringing people into Belarus from the Middle East was discussed but sources played down the likelihood of a decision being taken that would widen the scope of the crisis. The arrival of more than 1,000 people, many from Iraqi Kurdistan, at the Polish border on Monday brought the crisis to a head, with the EU accusing Belarus of a “hybrid attack”. Polish border guards said on Wednesday that two groups of several dozen people had breached the borders overnight. They were arrested and expelled, they said. Lithuanian border guards said they had prevented 281 attempts to cross the border illegally on Tuesday. Charles Michel, the European Council president, said during a visit to Warsaw on Wednesday that Belarus’s actions were unacceptable. “Possible sanctions are on the table … and we want to make sure that we coordinate with all the member states in order to make the best possible choices and to identify what are the best possible tools in order to be effective. It must stop, this hybrid attack against the EU,” he said. Poland’s accusations against Russia, the most direct yet in a crisis in which the Kremlin has not played a direct role, came amid an extraordinary session of parliament on Tuesday as the prime minister called Putin an “enabler” of Lukashenko. “This attack which Lukashenko is conducting has its mastermind in Moscow. The mastermind is President Putin,” Mateusz Morawiecki said in the Sejm, Poland’s lower house of parliament, which is dominated by the rightwing Law and Justice party. Morawiecki said Putin was determined to “rebuild the Russian empire” and called the crisis at the border “a new kind of war, in which people are used as living shields”. Moscow has been an increasingly crucial ally for Belarus in the past year as the EU has pushed Minsk further into isolation. On Tuesday, Russia’s foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, said western countries including EU member states, and Nato, were the “root” of the crisis. “They were pushing for a western-style better life and democracy the way it is interpreted by the west,” he said, referring to US-led interventions and alleged western backing for the Arab spring. Belarusian travel agencies are accused of issuing visas and bringing in hundreds of people from Iraq, Syria and other countries to Minsk, from where they then travel west to try to cross the border and from Poland pass on to Germany. Many of the airlines are either Belarusian or based in the Middle East. Asked whether Germany would take in migrants unilaterally, Merkel’s spokesperson said the question was “irrelevant”. A spokesperson for the German interior ministry said if Belarus did not provide humanitarian aid, then the European Union needed to do so, not just one member state. Additional reporting by Philip OltermannEngland’s attempt to unite the white-ball belts ended in Abu Dhabi with them on the canvas, bewildered and then beaten by a succession of vicious blows from Jimmy Neesham and Daryl Mitchell as a spellbinding game reached a brutal conclusion. Between them they simply pulverised England’s death bowling as, at the end of an evening when batters consistently struggled to time the ball and find the boundary, everything suddenly clicked. In the end New Zealand cantered to victory by five wickets with an over to spare. Defeat will sting, of course, and it will be little consolation to Eoin Morgan’s side that they contributed to a slow-burning thriller of a semi-final, a match that teetered compellingly on a knife-edge throughout. It was not until the 16th over of the second innings that either side seemed to grab the game, and at that point it was England who briefly took control as Liam Livingstone ended his allocation by leaking just three and taking the wicket of Glenn Phillips. At that point their opponents needed an apparently far-fetched 57 from 24, and Neesham was fresh to the crease. New Zealand immediately ripped the game right back out of their grasp again, and this time there was to be no comeback. Chris Jordan, England’s one genuine death-overs specialist, was completely marmalised by Neesham in the following over. It turned into England’s most expensive of the tournament, 23 runs coming off it including a couple of wides, and by its end it looked the Kiwis’ game. Neesham fell to the last ball of the 18th over but it hardly mattered, given what Mitchell was about to do to Chris Woakes. He had never scored an international T20 half-century, but ended the most important game of his life unbeaten on 72 off 47 balls. After the 50-over World Cup and the World Test Championship, New Zealand have now made three finals in three years in three formats, an extraordinary achievement. They have also brought to an end a run of high-profile defeats to England, and though they had promised that memories of their gut-wrenching defeat on boundary countback in the 2019 World Cup final would not be on their minds there was some poetic justice in Neesham, who faced all but one ball of New Zealand’s super over that day, returning to all but decide this match. It was a night when New Zealand’s core strategy of prioritising bowling depth, restricting their opponents’ run-scoring and leaving themselves a chaseable target worked to perfection, albeit after a little more drama than they might have liked. Meanwhile England’s decision to replace the injured Jason Roy with Sam Billings and bolster their batting, however well the formula has worked over recent years, looked decidedly unwise as the 30-year-old did not face a ball and their death bowling was mercilessly punished. England’s minds might drift back to the moment, halfway through Jordan’s decisively expensive over, when Jonny Bairstow executed a phenomenal catch on the boundary and, knowing he was heading over the rope, tossed the ball to Livingstone. England celebrated a brilliant relay catch but Bairstow seemed strangely half-hearted, and sure enough replays showed his knee making contact with the boundary padding just before he released the ball. In a game of tight margins perhaps this was the decisive moment, for all that New Zealand’s victory was hard-fought and ultimately comprehensive. Having won the toss and inevitably chosen to field, their long bowling attack slowly coiled around England’s batters from the start, restricting their freedom and their scoring. Bairstow, promoted to open in Roy’s absence, looked unsettled at the top of the order, hitting two boundaries including one off the inside edge in his 17-ball 13, and Dawid Malan’s was a very Dawid Malan innings: loitering at around a run a ball for a while before accelerating, particularly strong on the cover drive. But when he truly tried to motor he crashed, heaving Tim Southee for six and then edging the next as he attempted a repeat. In between England had to come to terms with the shock of Jos Buttler doing only moderately well, before being trapped lbw by Ish Sodhi. Instead Moeen Ali provided the backbone of their innings, scoring his third T20 half-century and cementing his status among the key players in a team that ignored him for the best part of two years before welcoming him back in 2020. But the feeling at the halfway stage was that England had been pedestrian for long periods, had not made use of their fabled batting depth and had reached a score that was no more than par. Martin Guptill, probably the batter England feared the most, fell to the third ball of New Zealand’s innings and when Kane Williamson followed not long after the Kiwis were 13 for two. They needed a partnership, and Devon Conway joined Mitchell to provide one. They, too, found timing difficult – after five overs together both were still going at just under a run a ball – but they offered few chances and looked ominously set when Conway was stumped off Livingstone in the 14th over. At that stage England seemed to be ahead on points, but New Zealand and Neesham were about to land the knockout blow.The former French president François Hollande has told a Paris court that authorities “did everything we could” to prevent terrorist attacks on the country – including launching military strikes on jihadist training camps in Syria and Iraq – but the government did not have information that could have stopped the 2015 Paris terror attacks. “If I had the slightest doubt on what we had done, I would tell you, say sorry and ask for forgiveness,” Hollande said. “But that is not my approach. I understand the suffering of the victims. I am trying in my answers [to the court] to give confirmation that everything was done.” Hollande appeared in court on Thursday to testify at France’s biggest ever criminal trial over the attacks by Islamic State on 13 November 2015, which killed 130 people and injured more than 400 in synchronised suicide bombings and mass shootings across the French capital. The killing began at about 9pm that Friday night, when a suicide bomber blew himself up after failing to get into the Stade de France for a France v Germany friendly football match, which Hollande was attending. Then came drive-by shootings and suicide bombings at cafes and restaurants. Finally, three gunmen entered the Bataclan during an Eagles of Death Metal gig, killing 90 people. There has been anger from some victims’ families that a jihadist commando was able to evade detection while preparing the biggest atrocities seen on French soil since the second world war. Hollande insisted that the intelligence services had “done all they could” to “identify and neutralise” threats. French officials had known for months that the country could be a target, Hollande told the court. He said it was even known that IS extremists were entering disguised as refugees. “But we did not know where, when or how they would strike us,” he added. All nine gunmen died, either shot by police or by blowing themselves up. A total of 20 men are on trial accused of providing planning and logistical support. Six will be tried in their absence; five are presumed dead in Iraq or Syria and one is in prison in Turkey. The chief defendant in the trial is Salah Abdeslam, who is alleged to have been part of the team of attackers but discarded a malfunctioning explosive vest and fled home to Belgium. During the attack on the Bataclan gig, gunmen had shouted that it was Hollande’s fault and that they were seeking revenge for France’s airstrikes on Syria. Hollande dismissed the attackers’ speeches about him as “a text learnt by heart, a kind of signature, as if the people who ordered the attacks had said that was the message that should be given”. He said he didn’t believe the attackers had struck France because of French military intervention. “This group struck us not for our actions abroad, but for our ways of life at home,” he said. “Democracy will always be stronger than barbarism.” Hollande said he stood firmly by French military intervention in Iraq and Syria in 2014 and 2015, saying: “The biggest victims of Islamist terrorism are Muslims.” He described being within earshot of the first explosion, when a suicide bomber blew himself up outside the gates of the national stadium. Hollande said: “When the first explosion sounded, and a player stopped, surprised, I realised that it could be an attack. When the second explosion went off, I no longer had any doubts.” He said he had left his seat to consult with security officials and decided the match should continue and “everything should be done to avoid panic”. He told a German government minister and the head of the French parliament, who were present, to stay in their seats. He went to the interior ministry to coordinate the response. Later that night he decided to go to the Bataclan himself, watching bloodied survivors walk out after an ordeal that had lasted two hours. “I saw people leaving the Bataclan, even then, holding on to each other. They saw me and could not say a single word,” he testified. “That will remain with me for ever.”A First Nations community on Canada’s west coast practiced the sustainable harvest of wild salmon for 1,000 years, before the system was largely destroyed after the arrival of European settlers, a new study has concluded. The Tsleil-Waututh, an Indigenous community whose traditional territory has been subsumed by the city of Vancouver, were long known to have used large weirs to capture salmon preparing to spawn. New research published on Wednesday shows that the Tsleil-Waututh used sex selection when harvesting spawning salmon, releasing the females to ensure the population would remain healthy for future use. Archaeologists studied chum salmon bones dating from between 400 BC and AD 1200 from four archeological sites around the Burrard Inlet. In their research, the authors of the study discovered that salmon bones taken from former village sites were overwhelmingly male, instead of an even mix with females. “People were harvesting the same sort of fish consistently, probably from the same places, for 1,000 years,” said Jesse Morin, archeologist for the Tsleil-Waututh Nation and an adjunct professor at the University of British Columbia, to the Canadian Press. “Here we are, 150 years later, 150 years’ worth of industrial harvesting, and we’ve really destroyed these resources.” Large weirs were likely placed in the inlet and then hauled ashore, where community members could select male salmon and set the females free. “If you take a good number of the males out of the system, the remaining males can still mate with the females to no detriment to the population,” he said. “One male can mate with 10 females and have just as many baby salmon the next year.” The Tsleil-Waututh weirs were torn down during European colonization, said Morin. In recent decades, wild salmon populations have collapsed. Half of Canada’s mighty Chinook, many of which spawn in the region, are considered endangered. All other species of Pacific salmon are in precarious decline. By some estimates, in just 100 years, 75% of sockeye have been wiped out. The crash of salmon – exacerbated by overfishing, poor watershed management and a changing climate – has significant effects on the region’s ecosystems. The endangered southern resident killer whale relies on healthy Chinook salmon populations, as do grizzly bears in coastal regions. The Tsleil-Waututh practices highlight the importance of properly managing a fishery as governments scramble to find a way to save the troubled salmon populations. In recent years, members of the Nation have not fished on their traditional territory, despite a treaty right to do so, in order to help rebuild ailing stocks.NZ did more to win the match than England did to lose it. On Sunday, it will be fascinating to see if they can win their first white-ball trophy. The second semi-final is tomorrow, with Australia taking on Pakistan – the only unbeaten team in the tournament. England matched them over the first four games, but then lost the next two, so our old friend Mo Mentum played his part. Thanks for your company and your correspondence (sorry not to get through it all). Do join Rob Smyth tomorrow, and I’ll be back on Sunday. I’ll leave you with Simon Burnton’s report of New Zealand’s superb win … “Thanks for the good coverage,” says Nicholas Butler. My pleasure! “Morgan is always praised for the wins so he can own the defeat. It may not have been decisive, but it’s England’s own fault for refusing to have Alex Hales as cover for Roy – stupid.” And here’s the winning captain. “Knew it was going to be a great game of cricket and it certainly was,” says Kane Williamson. “I’m really chuffed with the heart that was shown throughout that whole performance. I thought England had a pretty competitive total on the board but [we were] staying there, building those little partnerships, and obviously it was an outstanding knock from Daryl Mitchell.” Asked if it was an experiment to send Mitchell up the order, he says, tellingly, “Not in terms of his character. There’s a real quality there and he’s come in and batted beautifully in a high-pressure situation.” Amen to that, and Mitchell, sure enough, is the player of the match. Eoin Morgan is talking to Mike Atherton, calm as ever. “Coming into the game, we knew both sides were very close in skill. Full credit to Kane’s team, they outplayed us. I can’t fault anything we’ve done tonight, I thought we represented ourselves well, I’m extremely proud of the guys – they’ve given absolutely everything.” Asked what were the key moments, he says “hard to say... their game plan came off. We were right in the game up until the 17th over [of the NZ innings]... We’re a six-hitting side and we struggled to hit sixes. We hung in there, changed the gameplay, and posted probably a par score. Then the start we had, taking early wickets, couldn’t have been any better.” Asked if he’ll be there for the next T20 World Cup, in Australia this time next year, he says “I hope so, I think I’m still offering enough within the side”. And as he leaves the stage, he gives Kane Williamson a “well done” and a hug. Because they were a touch slow in the first ten overs, making only 67. Because their big hitters – Buttler, Bairstow and Livingstone – faced only 51 balls between them. Because Chris Woakes, who started so well, finished poorly, and Chris Jordan was off his game at the death too. Because they were missing three of their stars, in Roy, Stokes and Archer – arguably four, with Tymal Mills. But mainly it was because New Zealand managed that run chase magnificently. They are such a good team: there’s no shame at all in losing to them. ... could be Jimmy Neesham, who changed the game with his big-hitting 27. It could be Devon Conway, who was quietly excellent in the great NZ tradition. But it surely will be Daryl Mitchell, who sat in the passenger seat watching them, then grabbed the wheel and drove his team into the final. Plus, he sportingly turned down a run (off Rashid) because he had got in the bowler’s way. 19th over: New Zealand 167-5 (Mitchell 72, Santner 1) Mitchell tries to win it with a third successive six, but has to settle for a single as a skyer lands safely. Santner pulls – another single. The cameras find Steve Bruce, who may be wishing he was still in Newcastle. And then Woakes bowls a full toss and Mitchell flicks it for four. It’s all over! Daryl Mitchell, what a performance. Mid-19th over: New Zealand 161-5 (Mitchell 67, Santner 0) Mitchell is now the first violin, and he knows it. As Woakes returns, he whacks a two down the ground, then swings for six! And another!! Mitchell is bossing this, and England have to get rid of him. Six to win, off nine balls. 18th over: New Zealand 147-5 (Mitchell 54, Santner 0) There’s only one message here – get Neesham – and they do! Rashid tempts him with a wide-ish googly and a toe-end cut gives Morgan an easy catch in the covers. Neesham, though, has delivered the heroics NZ needed – 27 off only 11 balls. They need 20 off two overs. Mitchell comes to the party, lofting Rashid for six, and reaches a hard-won fifty – 53 off 42 balls. Not bad for a second fiddle. Mid-18th over: New Zealand 140-4 (Mitchell 46, Neesham 27) A dot from Rashid, as Mitchell refuses to run following a collision. Sportsmanship is alive and well and living in New Zealand. Then Neesham swings for six! NZ need 27 off 15 balls. 17th over: New Zealand 133-4 (Mitchell 46, Neesham 20) Chris Jordan is back, so this must be the death. Neesham knows he’s got to go big, and swings the first ball for six. Then extras chip in: two leg byes, well run as Buttler fields, followed by a wide. Neesham goes for it again, with a straight thwack for four. Fourteen off three! And another wide. Then a catch on the boundary – or is it? Bairstow does the flick-back to Livingstone, but Bairstpw’s knee has flicked the Toblerone! The barest. Bairstow did so well, but not well enough. Another swing – Bairstow and Livingstone could both catch it, but they leave it to each other! Jordan throws up his hands in frustration. He recovers with a yorker, but that’s 23 off the over. NZ now need 34 off 18 balls and the force is with them. “OK,” says John Starbuck, “Wood is to be known as Mr Speed Bump.” Nice one. 16th over: New Zealand 110-4 (Mitchell 45, Neesham 1) Dots are almost as good as wickets now and Livingstone is offering both: wicket, dot, dot, dot, single (which he fields himself). Then there’s a wide, just to remind us that he’s a part-timer, and another single, but as Nasser says, “what an over, what a spell”. Livingstone finishes with 2-22, and NZ need 57 off four overs. Another one! Phillips, the world’s leading six-hitter this year, knows what he has to do and he can’t do, holing out to long-off, where Billings holds his nerve and the ball. England on top, but for how long? 15th over: New Zealand 106-3 (Mitchell 45, Phillips 1) Wood returns, still bowling fast and short – though his final ball is his first attempt at a yorker. Mitchell top-edges, over Buttler’s head, for four. That’s only his third four, and fourth boundary. Sweat is pouring off his helmet. Ten off the over: NZ need 60 off the last five. The tie is on. 14th over: New Zealand 97-3 (Mitchell 37, Phillips 0) Well bowled Livingstone, who keeps the runs down to five as well as grabbing the wicket. The partnership between Conway and Mitchell was 82 off 11 overs. NZ need nearly two a ball now – 70 off 36. Just when a nation was wondering why he was bowling and not Moeen, Livingstone delivers the wicket England badly needed. The ball is a slider, and it slides on past Conway’s dance steps, giving Jos Buttler a stumping that his two-year-old daughter could probably manage. 13th over: New Zealand 92-2 (Mitchell 35, Conway 44) Rashid replaces Wood and Mitchell, who hasn’t had much of the strike lately, is dropped by Jordan at long-off – though it looks more like a case of an inspired save, as Jordan flicks the ball back over the Toblerone. No, hang on, the ball clipped the Toblerone, so it’s a six. The barest of margins. NZ need 75 off 42 balls. 12th over: New Zealand 79-2 (Mitchell 28, Conway 39) Livingstone continues, to Conway, and repays Morgan’s faith with three dots, but Conway fights back with a cover drive, struck from down on one knee. Jason Daye spots that I was one over behind – so sorry. The third over, you see, took place twice. NZ need 87 from the last eight overs. 11th over: New Zealand 72-2 (Mitchell 28, Conway 32) First ball after the break, Mitchell shows some intent by blasting a forehand back past Wood. And then something happens that hasn’t happened once in the whole tournament: England bowl a no-ball. Wood stares reproachfully at the crease, Mr Baffled. Mitchell can’t cash in on the free hit, but Conway makes up for it with a flash for six – the first of the innings and only the fifth of the day. Wood manages a dot to finish, by following Mitchell with a bouncer, but that’s the big over NZ were gasping for: 15 off it. They need 94 off 54 balls. 10th over: New Zealand 58-2 (Mitchell 22, Conway 26) Morgan springs a surprise, turning to Liam Livingstone ahead of Moeen, possibly prompted by Nathan Leamon, the England analyst, who was holding up one of his coded signs a few minutes ago. Conway gives Livingstone’s off-breaks the charge, goes aerial and picks up a two and a four. At the halfway stage, NZ still need another 109, so the rate is just under 11. England should be able to defend that, shouldn’t they? 9th over: New Zealand 50-2 (Mitchell 21, Conway 19) Wood continues, not falling over, and not giving much away either. NZ bring up their fifty with an overthrow, which will please Bill Hargreaves. At this stage England were 60-2, so the gulf is not a wide one. “Even among this fine bunch of fielders,” says Ewan Glenton, “surely someone’s going to drop a catch and be Mr Sitter.” 8th over: New Zealand 45-2 (Mitchell 18, Conway 17) Rashid, who conceded ten off his first over, finds the plug and goes for only four singles off this one. The required rate goes above 10 for the first time. England are on top, but they’d like another wicket now. 7th over: New Zealand 41-2 (Mitchell 16, Conway 14) Morgan saves a bit of Woakes for later and brings on Mark Wood. He digs it in, touches 93mph and persuades Mitchell to hook a bouncer that’s too high, but the top edge, not for the first time today, lands safely. Only five off the over, but this partnership (28 off 28 so far) is promising. More on the Mr Men, from Timothy Sanders. “Given how often he falls over in his follow-through from the sheer effort,” he reckons, “Mark Wood could be Mr Bump.” 6th over: New Zealand 36-2 (Mitchell 12, Conway 14) Eoin Morgan is feeling confident enough to bring on Adil Rashid in the powerplay. Conway greets him less than warmly, with a cut for four. Rashid retorts with an lbw shout as a googly thuds into the pad, but England don’t review and then Conway drives, handsomely, for four more, so NZ win that over. 5th over: New Zealand 26-2 (Mitchell 11, Conway 5) Woakes threatens to turn into Mr Normal, going fornix off the first two balls as Daryl Mitchell chips him back over his head, then whips for four. Eight off the over, which is what the asking rate was from the start. It has already climbed to 9.40 – the merciless maths of crash-bang cricket. 4th over: New Zealand 18-2 (Mitchell 4, Conway 4) More dots from Chris Jordan, bowling to Devon Conway, who finally breaks the shackles with a Malan-style lofted cover drive for four. Meanwhile, over on Cricinfo, England’s chances of a win have shot up from 54 per cent between innings to 78 now. Here’s John Starbuck, picking up on my mention of Mr Immaculate. “According to TMS, Woakes is Mr Reliable. What are the Mister names of the others? Morgan as Mr Indomitable, Buttler as Mr Smiter, Moeen as Mr Unexpectedly Successful, Wood as Mr Speed?” Unexpectedly?! 3rd over: New Zealand 13-2 (Mitchell 4, Conway 0) And that, ladies and gentlemen, is a wicket-maiden. It seems a long time ago that Woakes bowled that long hop. Oooohhhh! Woakes ties Williamson down with three dots and even this great batter gets rattled, resorting the scoop and failing to clear short fine leg. Woakes has two-for, and England are on top. 2nd over: New Zealand 13-1 (Mitchell 4, Williamson 5) Morgan opens not with Moeen, but with Chris Jordan. And he almost nabs the big wicket, as Williamson gets an under-edge. If even Williamson struggles to time the ball, 166 could soon look like a hefty total. “Given the well-demonstrated advantage of winning the toss in T20 cricket these days,” says Tim Kett, “is it not time for some imagination (not to mention fairness!) in allocating choice of batting/fielding either more equally (over a tournament) or more deservingly, e.g. to the group winners rather than the runners-up in the case of the current competition? If NZ and Australia both win the toss, field first and win narrowly, I won’t be the only one to feel the competition finale has been unnecessarily distorted by fortune.” A finale distorted by fortune... unthinkable. 1st over: New Zealand 8-1 (Mitchell 1, Williamson 3) So Chris Woakes started with a long hop, then remembered which Mr Men character he is: Mr Immaculate. Martin Guptill slaps the first ball of the innings for four, but plays and misses at the second, then gets a leading edge off the third. The ball pops up into the darkness and gives Moeen the simplest of catches at mid-on. 20th over: England 166-4 (Moeen 51, Morgan 4) Eoin Morgan comes out, picks up two from a mishit pull and a misfield, which Daren Sammy, on commentary, thinks may be deliberate, to deny Moeen the strike. Spicy! Morgan tries to finish with a six, slices it, and is dropped at deep cover, which allows him to pick up two. So that’s 11 off the last over, and I suspect both sides will be happy – England because they managed 99 off the last ten overs, and NZ because England never got out of sight. See you in a few minutes. Mo chips the next ball over the covers for four and reaches his first World Cup fifty. The forgotten man in 2019 is a central figure now. Jimmy Neesham has the dubious honour of bowling the last over at these two, but he does the trick! Persuading Livingstone to belt a drive to long-off, where Santner holds on with no fuss. No fuss could be this NZ team’s motto. 19th over: England 155-3 (Moeen 45, Livingstone 17) Back comes Boult, the only seamer to be expensive today. And he’s up against Livingstone, who drives a full toss for two, then slices a length ball for four. Boult recovers well, finishing with one-dot-one. The partnership is 39 off 22 balls, and there’s one over to go. Here’s Bill Hargreaves. “Can’t help feeling that if I were a Kiwi,” he says, “I’d be looking for some overthrows justice this afternoon. But my belly says an England win.” 18th over: England 146-3 (Moeen 43, Livingstone 10) Milne returns and thinks he’ll start with a slow bouncer. Mo sees it coming, bides his time and flicks it for six, like a guy in a restaurant swatting a fly with his knife. Milne shows some bottle, restricting England to singles, but then the last ball is in the slot, just asking Livingstone to launch one of his aerial missiles. Six! That’s his 86th six in T20 matches this year, according to a caption. The only man with more is on the other side today – Glenn Phillips. 17th over: England 130-3 (Moeen 35, Livingstone 3) Mo is going for it now. He dances down the track to Sodhi and caresses him over midwicket for six. But Sodhi keeps calm and carries on varying his pace and flight. Dot, dot, two, single. Eleven off the over: noted, but not quite what Mo had in mind. “Hello, joining in from Pakistan,” says Shoaib. “I don’t know if it’s a case of England being low-key or New Zealand gearing up at the right moment. In any case, what do you guys think would be a defensible total in this match?” My guess is 170, but as Rob Smyth likes to say, nobody knows anything. 16th over: England 119-3 (Moeen 26, Livingstone 2) So the first ball of Southee’s spell goes for six, the second takes a wicket, and the rest of the over is immaculate, just dots and ones. Liam Livingstone, sent in ahead of Eoin Morgan, gets away with a top-edged pull. England need some fireworks. Malan hits the first six of the day – and then gets a nick next ball. England won’t mind that too much. 15th over: England 110-2 (Malan 35, Moeen 24) As Trent Boult returns, Moeen sends two top edges into the night sky, and both land safely. Then he plays a much better shot, a whip off the toes for four, whereupon Malan tries a ramp, which is rather like your mum trying a rap. “England not scoring enough boundaries here,” says Chris Drew. “The countback could be important later on.” Ha. 14th over: England 100-2 (Malan 34, Moeen 17) Milne continues and technically drops Malan as a lofted drive comes back hard at him. Only six off the over: England need a big one. “To balance things out a bit (13.42).” says Michael Chilcott, “here’s an email from an Englishman in Sweden. I think England will squeak it, but I’d be happy with a tense nailbiter to keep me comfortably distracted from work for a few hours. Probably shouldn’t have sent this from my work email, mind you.” 13th over: England 94-2 (Malan 30, Moeen 15) Back comes Sodhi, the man of the moment after removing Buttler, but his line is awry. He gets away with a full toss outside leg as Malan sweeps it for a single rather than taking the wide. And then, at last, Moeen finds the rope – with a cut, possibly mistimed by his high standards, but effective. “Hello Tim, a Kiwi in France here,” says Alistair Connor. “NZ’s run has been stereotypically, irritatingly low-key. Just look at the net run rate: unlike all the other semi-finalists, they didn’t smash anybody. This had the salutary effect of giving Scotland its finest hour in cricket: heroic defeat in a surprisingly competitive game (stereotypically Scottish!). Time to change gear.” 12th over: England 85-2 (Malan 28, Moeen 9) Milne returns for his second over, and Moeen’s getting them in singles – maybe he’s Malan in disguise. There’s another nice drive from Malan, into the deep but sensationally saved by Phillips, throwing himself at the Toblerone like a guilty dad at the airport. 11th over: England 78-2 (Malan 24, Moeen 6) Kane Williamson turns to his third spinner, Glenn Phillips – even though his off-breaks should suit these two left-handers. Malan says thank you very much and plays two chips over the offside ring, both for four. Here’s Rob Lewis in Istanbul. “In my English lesson just now,” he says, “this sentence came up: ‘Mr Billings is at the front door’. Is it a sign?” Ha. Mr Billings will be lucky if he gets a bat, but he might make a crucial catch or run-out later on. Rob adds: “I just dismissed the class early.” 10th over: England 67-2 (Malan 15, Moeen 4) Santner gives way to Jimmy Neesham, who looks, with his blond moustache, as if he’s come straight from rehearsals for his school production of Journey’s End. Straightaway he has Malan dropped behind the stumps by Devon Conway – such a fine cricketer, but only a makeshift wicketkeeper. Then there’s another good shot from Malan, stroking a square drive. Is he Moeen in disguise? And at the halfway stage of the innings, NZ are still in charge, but England are hanging in there. 9th over: England 60-2 (Malan 10, Moeen 2) A few singles and then Malan finds the boundary at last, with that lofted drive of his, over extra-cover. This feels like a big moment for him. Yes, hitting off. And that is the big one – Buttler had just returned to the top of the pile as the leading run-scorer in this World Cup. I suspect NZ would have settled for him making 29. Missing a reverse sweep! It looks out, hitting off, but worth a try... 8th over: England 53-1 (Buttler 29, Malan 5) It’s spin at both ends as Mitch Santner comes on with his thoughtful slow left-arm. Malan tries a big shot but doesn’t time it. Buttler pulls out the reverse sweep and gets it through for four - the first boundary for 19 balls, and it brings up the fifty. What comes after the reverse sweep? The orthodox sweep, of course – Buttler plays it and picks up two. 7th over: England 45-1 (Buttler 22, Malan 4) With the field now able to scatter, Williamson brings on his leg-spinner, Ish Sodhi. Buttler gives him the charge but doesn’t get to the pitch and has to switch to plan B, pushing for a single. Malan continues calmly practising for the Ashes. Apart from one over, this has all been NZ - but England do have wickets in hand. 6th over: England 40-1 (Buttler 20, Malan 1) In comes Dawid Malan, whose role in this England charabanc is to be the designated driver. He starts, true to form, with a tuck for a single. After a delay caused by movement behind the bowler’s arm, Buttler pulls Milne, hard, but straight to the fielder at deep square. So Milne starts majestically – 1-0-2-1 – and the powerplay ends with NZ narrowly on top. This is fabulous from Kane Williamson, swooping to his left at mid-off to hold a rasping drive - and also getting the credit as captain for bringing on Adam Milne, whose first ball this is. 5th over: England 37-0 (Buttler 19, Bairstow 13) Bairstow, feeling the need to come to the party, puts on his Bermuda shirt and clonks Southee back over his head for four. Williamson responds by sending mid-on back, so Bairstow helps himself to an easy single. Buttler hooks, also for a single, keeping it down but not middling it. Bairstow adds a third single. He has 13 off 16 balls, Buttler 19 off 14. 4th over: England 29-0 (Buttler 17, Bairstow 7) England need a big over: cometh the hour, cometh the Buttler. He drives Boult’s first ball for four, just past the diving Williamson at mid-off, then waits for some width and cuts for four more. Boult retorts with a bouncer, but it’s too big and goes for five wides. Buttler drives again, doesn’t beat Williamson, but takes a quick single and steals an overthrow too. England are up and running. 3rd over: England 13-0 (Buttler 6, Bairstow 7) Great stuff from Southee: dot, dot, single to Buttler, dot, dot, dot to Bairstow, who can’t find his timing. NZ on top! “Greeting you from a cool and sunny Bulgaria,” says Derek Stocker, “where my wife Anita has just rescued a fire salamander stuck in our wire fence.” Wow. “Are these the nicest skippers in world cricket?” Charming as they seem, I have no more idea about that than the salamander. 2nd over: England 12-0 (Buttler 5, Bairstow 7) At the other end it’s Trent Boult with his classy left-arm swing. He starts with two dots to Bairstow, then beats him outside off with one that actually swung back. Bairstow put in some extra practice yesterday, facing David Willey to rehearse for Boult. He picks up two with a comfortable cut to extra-cover, then gets lucky with an inside edge for four. England not finding it easy – yet still going at a run a ball. 1st over: England 6-0 (Buttler 5, Bairstow 1) Tim Southee takes the new ball and starts with a short one, which Jos Buttler pulls for a single. Jonny Bairstow middles his first two deliveries, finding the ring with the first and a quick single to mid-on with the second. Buttler is then beaten by some late swing and perhaps a lack of pace, before missing one angled into his pads. He needs a boundary already – and gets it with a wristy flick. Honours even! Both teams take the knee. And the umpires too – Erasmus and Dharmasena. It’s time for the anthems, a chance to see which players are way taller than their team-mates. Kyle Jamieson, who’s not even in the NZ team, is so toweringly tall, he could be a shot by Liam Livingstone. “England may not be in tip-top shape with the loss of Roy, Stokes and more,” says Luciano Howard. Something tells me there’s a “but” coming. “But, importantly, in T20 it’s all about the hitting. And here England have the firepower – lots of it – just as you said. England mastered the chase in 50-over cricket. Here’s where they will master setting the target. Then it’s all about pressure, and whilst NZ are the definition of calm, England have proven their ability there, too.” Sounds like we’re heading for a tie. The first email of the day comes, superbly, from a Kiwi in Sweden. “Speaking from an NZ perspective,” says Ben Bernards, “and fully appreciating that only a miserable collapse should entail the use of all 11 batsmen, any time Southee has two or more players lower down the order than himself makes me uncomfortable. Raining sixes on Test debut be damned, he’s a no. 11!” Ha. If that’s your biggest worry, aren’t you secretly being quite optimistic? England 1 Jonny Bairstow, 2 Jos Buttler (wkt), 3 Dawid Malan, 4 Moeen Ali, 5 Liam Livingstone, 6 Eoin Morgan (capt), 7 Sam Billings, 8 Chris Woakes, 9 Chris Jordan, 10 Adil Rashid, 11 Mark Wood. So Bairstow opens, England bat deep, their fielding gets even better, but the bowling could be a touch light – and they have to deal with the dew. Morgan is honest enough to tell Nasser Hussain that he would have bowled first too. New Zealand 1 Martin Guptill, 2 Daryl Mitchell, 3 Kane Williamson (capt), 4 Devon Conway (wkt), 5 Glenn Phillips, 6 Jimmy Neesham, 7 Mitchell Santner, 8 Adam Milne, 9 Tim Southee, 10 Ish Sodhi, 11 Trent Boult. The first sign of karma. Simon Burnton is at the ground and keeping his eye on the England pre-match huddle. “Sam Billings getting the back-slaps,” he reports. “Looks like he’s got the nod to replace Jason Roy.” And that, in turn, probably means that Bairstow moves up to open with Buttler. Afternoon everyone, and welcome to the most mouthwatering match so far in this World Cup. England v New Zealand, it has to be said, wasn’t always a contest to get the juices flowing. For decades it was tediously one-sided, then tight but taciturn. You would have got long odds on these two nations ever meeting in a World Cup final, let alone concocting the greatest cliffhanger in cricket history. And now here they are in Abu Dhabi, the 50-over World Cup holders taking on the world champions of Test cricket. If there’s any justice, New Zealand will win by the widest of margins. But the gods of sport reserve the right to be fickle at all times, and on paper this looks too close to call. Kane Williamson has the stronger seam attack, led by Adam Milne, the understudy who has become a star. Eoin Morgan has the edge on spin, thanks to the reliable Adil Rashid and the resurgent Moeen Ali. England have more injuries, and may badly miss Jason Roy, but they also have the greater firepower. Even when one masterblaster drops out, there are still three left – Jos Buttler, Jonny Bairstow and Liam Livingstone. And then there’s Moeen, who’s more of a mastercaresser. England have Morgan, an all-time great captain, even if he did borrow half his ideas from the nation he faces today. NZ have Williamson, a man so cool and calm that he can claim his team look back “fondly” on the 2019 World Cup final. Either side would make a worthy finalist this time, and NZ have more momentum, after getting their one bad day out of the way early on. It should be a treat. Play starts at 2pm UK time – do join me around 1.35 for news of the toss and the teams.My mother, Grace Makonyola, who has died aged 60 from Covid-19, was a nurse and NHS manager, and a health advocate in the UK and Malawi. An altruist with a strong Christian faith, she was committed to serving others. Born in Mangochi, on the shoreline of Lake Malawi, Grace was the daughter of Kapito Mtimuni, who headed the southern region forestry department and Eneles (nee Sapanga Roben). Her fortunes changed dramatically at the age of seven, when Kapito died. Following custom, her uncle intended to assume his brother’s possessions, which to his mind included his widow. Eneles fled to an isolated village, Chingale, with her children. When her elder brother briefly fell ill, money was freed up for Grace to attend school for one term. However, once at Masongola secondary school, she secured the first of many scholarships through to college. She graduated as nurse of the year in 1982 from Kamuzu College of Nursing. In 1983 she married Aubrey Makonyola, a chartered accountant, and I was born the following year. In 1985 Dad’s work relocated the family to England, and we eventually settled in Southend, Essex. Grace became a founding trustee of Malawi Healthcare Support UK, hosting its first fundraiser, an African fashion show, in our garden. Dad returned to Malawi in 1992, and died there eight years later. The tiny community of Malawian, Zimbabwean and Nigerian health workers in Essex supported Grace to work her way up from staff nurse in Southend hospital (1987) to assistant director at Westminster Primary Care Trust (2008). Career highlights include Grace establishing two of the first walk-in centres in the country, for Hammersmith and Fulham Primary Care Trust (2000-03), welcoming the then-prime minister Tony Blair to the Parsons Green one. She retained a soft spot for him, crediting New Labour for the conditions in which a black, immigrant single mother could excel. Grace also led her team at Westminster to win the 2006 UK Social and Health Care award for innovative leadership. In 2011 Grace retired to Malawi, to the home she had built in Kalimbuka, north of the city of Zomba, and cared for her mother. She volunteered as health director across five centres in Zomba, before serving as country director for the charity Maternity Worldwide in Malawi (2014-18). Her work caught the attention of the fashion designer and philanthropist Brunello Cucinelli, who was involved in the Italian charitable group Amici del Malawi di Perugia, and he sponsored the founding of her organisation Mlambe Health and Social Trust (MheST), on her birthday in 2018. Her warmth, dedication and selflessness are felt throughout the trust. Malawi’s Italian community and this philanthropic connection introduced Grace to a culture she came to love. Italy became one of many places she could call home; such was her talent for making friends into family. Grace is survived by me and her grandson, Zion, her eight siblings and her mother. She also cared for several children in our home, in particular my cousins Mia, Kondwani, Charity and Pemphero, and her former partner’s daughter, Hazel, all of whom survive her.Boris Johnson has insisted the UK is “not remotely a corrupt country” and said MPs should be investigated and punished for breaking the rules, as the Conservative party continues to be embroiled in sleaze allegations. Johnson has used a press conference at Cop26 to urge world leaders to “pull out all the stops” to make the summit a success. After a brief visit where he met negotiators, he held a press conference where he said: So this is the time for everyone to come together and show the determination needed to power on through the blockages. To look at the science with dispassionate eyes and think about how we can compromise, how we can be flexible to meet the needs of the planet. And for world leaders who are back in their capitals to pick up the phone to their teams here and give them the negotiating margin, give them the space they need in which to manoeuvre so we can get this done. Here in Glasgow, the world is closer than it has ever been to signalling the beginning of the end of anthropogenic climate change. It’s the greatest gift we can possibly bestow on our children and grandchildren and generations unborn. It’s now within reach, at COP26 in these final days, we just need to reach out together and grasp it. When asked what tangible difference his presence at the summit had made, Johnson said that was for others to comment on. But he said he had tried to listen, particularly to NGOs, and to talk to the negotiators, and to encourage them to keep going and to make progress. Sir Geoffrey Cox, the Conservative former attorney general, is facing a conflict of interest claim after it emerged that he had lobbied against imposing tougher financial regulation on the Cayman Islands just months after he gained more than £40,000 from legal firms based in the tax haven. Keir Starmer, the Labour leader, earned money from legal work in the past on top of his job as an MP, the Commons register of interest shows. David Frost, the Brexit minister, has underlined the UK’s threat to suspend its deal with the EU, while saying that talks with Brussels to avoid a possible descent into a mutual trade war over the Northern Ireland protocol could yet end in an agreement. Priti Patel, the UK home secretary, has given support to a police investigation of protests outside the London School of Economics on Tuesday night that led to the Israeli ambassador being led away at speed with heavy police protection after addressing a meeting with students. Last week’s No 10 U-turn after the Owen Paterson vote was one of the swiftest and most absolute performed by a government in recent times. It is hard to imagine how it could be surpassed, but somehow Boris Johnson managed it today, with a performance in which he implied that the one thing he cares about above all, in relation to MPs standards, is that MPs who break the rules should be punished. This is the same Boris Johnson who only a week ago ordered his MPs to take the unprecedented step of voting to ensure that the exact opposite happened in the case of Owen Paterson. It was a remarkable act of re-invention, utterly disingenuous of course, but indicative of an elasticity that is probably unique in British politics at the moment. Here are the key points. Johnson claimed that “the most important thing” in relation to MPs’ standards was that MPs who break the rules should be punished. In response to the first question on this, he said: On the issue of MPs and second jobs and all that, I just want to say that the most important thing is that those who break the rules must be investigated and should be punished. He made the same point two more times. He said he was in favour of MPs being allowed to have second jobs, as long as they put being an MP first, and did not use their position for lobbying. He said: On second jobs, I would say that for hundreds of years MPs have gone to Parliament and also done work as doctors, lawyers or soldiers or firefighters or writers, or all sorts of other trades and callings. And on the whole, the UK population has understood that that has actually strengthened our democracy, because people basically feel that parliamentarians do need to have some experience of the world. But, if that system is going to continue today, then it is crucial that MPs follow the rules. And the rules say two crucial things: you must put your job as an MP first and you must devote yourself primarily and above all to your constituents and the people who send you to Westminster, to parliament. And they also say that you should not use your position as an MP to lobby or otherwise intervene on behalf of any outside commercial interest. And it is not only that you have to register those interests - you can’t lobby or make representation while an MP on behalf of those interests. Those are the rules and they must be enforced and those who don’t obey them should of course face sanctions. This is arguably hypocritical, because when Johnson was re-elected to parliament as MP for Uxbridge and South Ruislip in 2015, he was still mayor of London and for the next year being mayor continued to be his main job. (Government ministers also put their ministerial jobs first, and Johnson devotes much more time to being PM than to serving the people of Uxbridge, but this is function of the way the parliamentary system works, and voters have accepted it for years.) Johnson again refused to apologise for his handling of the Paterson vote last week. He was asked if he would apologise twice, and refused both times. Johnson refused to say anything in support of Geoffrey Cox. When asked about Cox, he said he did not want to comment on invidual cases. But he did not say anything in his favour, and he used that moment to again make the point about the importance of MPs being punished if they break the rules. And later he made a comment that appeared to pre-judge the Cox case. He said: I think what you’ve got is cases where, sadly, MPs have broken the rules in the past, may be guilty of breaking the rules today - what I want to see is them facing appropriate sanctions. He declined to say that everything he has done as an MP and as a minister is “above reproach”. Asked if he was confident that his actions as an MP and as a minister were “entirely above reproach and would pass muster in any standards investigation that might come up”, Johnson replied: All my declarations are in conformity with the rules, and you can certainly study them, and that will remain the case. He did not address the wider point about his behaviour. But he may have mentioned declarations because of the threat of an investigation into the financing of the Downing Street flat, which focuses to a large extent on whether a donation was properly registered. He insisted Britain is not corrupt. He said: I genuinely believe that the UK is not remotely a corrupt country, nor do I believe that our institutions are corrupt. We have a very, very tough system of parliamentary democracy and scrutiny, not least by the media. I think what you have got is cases where, sadly, MPs have broken the rules in the past, may be guilty of breaking the rules today. What I want to see is them facing appropriate sanctions. This sounded like a response to Labour claims that he has enabled corruption. Q: Are you confident that your conduct as an MP would always pass muster? Johnson says he is confident all his declarations are correct. Q: Will you stay here if necessary? Johnson says he has been trying to encourage the negotiators, and to get them to focus on the three issues that matter. Finance is the key isssue, he says. And that’s it. His presss conference is over. I will post a summary soon. Q: Will you say sorry for what happened last week? Johnson says, since he is speaking in an international context, he wants to say the UK is not remotely corrupt. Today we have seen MPs maybe breaking the rules, he says. He says MPs who do break the rules should face punishment. Q: Do you think Geoffrey Cox has been putting his constituents first? Johnson says he does not want to comment on individual cases. But people who break the rules should face punishment, he says. Johnson says Cop26 will not fix climate change in one go. But, if things go well, he says it is possible to come away from this “with the first genuine roadmap to a solution to angthropogenic climate change”. He says they must keep holding governments and business to account. Q: Will you apologise for the vote last weeek? Johnson says he said last week that people who break the rules should be punished. But he also wanted reform. He says those issues should have been kept separate. Q: Is the negotiating paper published this morning the goal? Johnson says the risk of sliding back would be a disaster. In the final furlong, that is the moment when horses change. He says there are three pillars: adaptation, mitigation and finance. Q: Have you get an reassurance for the public on sleaze? Johnson says “the most important thing is those who break the rules must be investigated and should be punished”. He says there is a good reason for allowing second jobs for MPs. That has happened for years. But if that is going to continue, MPs must follow the rules. They should work primarily for their constituents. And they should not engage in lobbying. [Reminder: last week Johnson ordered his MPs to back an unprecedented motion to stop Owen Paterson from being punished for breaking the rules.] Johnson says the vulnerable nations have demanded action now. If other countries applauded the speeches from these nations, they should act. The world will find it “absolutely incomprehensible” if Cop26 fails to deliver. He says the leaders will deserve the world’s opprobrium if they fail to deliver. They must now plough on. He urges world leaders to pick up the phone to their negotiators, and to give them the negotiating margin, the space they need to get this done. This could be the Cop that ends anthropogenic climate change, he says. Boris Johnson starts by saying last week he warned about the danger of false optimism. He says, having spoken to people here today, it is clear that after game-changing announcements last week, they are now in the “hard yards”. The negotiations are getting tough. They have moved the ball down the pitch. But they are stuck in a rolling maul. They need to be more ambitious if they are going to keep the dream of restricting temperature rises to 1.5C alive. The Boris Johnson conference is starting in about 10 minutes, Sky says. Boris Johnson is about to hold his press conference at Cop26. I’ll be covering it here, but mostly focusing non-Cop26 issues. We’ll be covering the Cop26 aspects more on our Cop26 live blog. As Heather Stewart reports there, Ed Miliband, Labour’s shadow business secretary, said the prime minister should remain in Glasgow until the end of the summit, and call out countries that are not doing enough. Miliband said: You’re going to have to have a big, public fight about this. Don’t go back home after a few hours: stay! The latest edition of the Guardian’s Politics Weekly podcast is out. As the Conservative party remains split on how to respond to allegations of sleaze, Rowena Mason and Heather Stewart bring us up to date on what is happening. Plus, Nesrine Malik and Daniel Bruce of Transparency International look at how political systems may become corrupt over time. Mark Spencer, the chief whip, has defended the advice he gave to Sir Geoffrey Cox about it being acceptable for him to vote remotely from the Caribbean, the Times’s Steven Swinford reports. On Brexit, it is worth flagging up this statement issued yesterday by four senior Democratic congressmen in Washington on the Northern Ireland protocol. It is from Gregory W Meeks, chair of the house foreign affairs committee; William R. Keating, chair of the Europe, energy, the environment and cyber subcommittee; Earl Blumenauer, chair of the ways and means subcommittee on trade; and Brendan Boyle, chair of the European Union caucus. They say: In threatening to invoke article 16 of the Northern Ireland protocol, the United Kingdom threatens to not only destabilize trade relations, but also that hard earned peace. We call on the UK to abandon this dangerous path, and to commit to implementing the Northern Ireland protocol in full. Katya Adler, the BBC’s Europe editor, has a good Twitter thread on the latest thinking in Brussels about how the EU would respond if the UK did trigger article 16. It starts here. Labour has said the government should include Northern Ireland’s political, community and business leaders in the talks with the EU on revising the Northern Ireland protocol. In a statement responding to what Lord Frost told the Lords earlier (see 12.08pm), Jenny Chapman, the shadow Brexit minister, said: Once again, Lord Frost has come to parliament just to tell us why none of the problems with the deal that he personally negotiated are his fault – it’s like trying to deal with a spoilt teenager. He should start taking responsibility for his actions and buckle down to the serious work of resolving differences that are damaging the UK’s reputation. The government is making a serious mistake in not bringing together political, community and business leaders to resolve the problems of Northern Ireland. Lord Frost should be bringing those leaders into crucial discussions with the EU. The Daily Record’s Torcuil Crichton has footage of Boris Johnson arriving at Cop26. For full coverage of the events today at Cop26, do read our separate live blog. On Radio 4’s The World at One Prof Sir John Curtice, the psephologist and polling expert, said the recent controversy about Tory sleaze had clearly cost the party some support. He told the programme: We’ve now had four opinion polls done by companies where all the fieldwork was done after this story first broke this time last week, and in each case the company had also polled the previous week. Three of those four polls shows support for the Conservatives down by three points. The other suggests it’s down by two, and three of the four polls suggest that Labour are marginally up a bit. Of course, any one of those individual polls, I would immediately say to you, if that’s all the evidence you’ve got, that just could be the random variation of polls. But when we’ve got four polls, all showing more or less the same movement in the same direction, it’s very difficult to avoid the conclusion that this indeed, for the time being at least, has cost the Conservatives some support. And because support for the Conservatives has been falling in recent weeks anyway, partly because of the various shortages, partly because of an adverse reaction to the government’s tax increases, that does mean that the polls now suggests that Conservative lead is down to no more than a point or so, which puts them now in about as weak position as they have been for the last 12 months or so. And this is from Louise Haigh, the shadow Northern Ireland secretary, on Lord Frost’s statement today on relations with the EU. (See 12.08pm.) Here are some Twitter comments on the significance of Lord Frost’s statement on relations with the EU in the House of Lords earlier. (See 12.08pm.) From the BBC’s Jessica Parker From my colleague Lisa O’Carroll From Mujtaba Rahman, the Brexit specialist at the Eurasia Group consultancy From the Daily Mirror’s Pippa Crerar While travelling to Glasgow, Boris Johnson spoke to Mohammed bin Salman, Crown Prince of Saudi Arabia, No 10 said. In its read-out of the call, Downing Street said: [The prime minister] welcomed Saudi Arabia’s commitment to reach net zero by 2060 and their efforts to transition away from fossil fuels. They discussed the importance of making progress in negotiations in the final days of Cop26, including on finalising the outstanding elements of the Paris rulebook. The prime minister said all countries needed to come to the table with increased ambition if we are to keep the target of limiting global warming to 1.5C alive. Tens of thousands of care home residents face losing vital support as unvaccinated carers clock off for the last time before double jabs become mandatory, my colleague Robert Booth reports. Back in the House of Lords, in response to Jenny Chapman and other peers who responded to his statement, Lord Frost, the Brexit minister, says it is “not inevitable” that the UK will trigger article 16. He says it is not true to say that the UK and the EU are growing further apart in the talks on the Northern Ireland protocol. “We have inched a little bit closer,” he says - but just not quickly enough. He says the gap between the two sides is still “extremely wide”. As an example, he says the EU proposals to reform the protocol do not eliminate customs declarations for any goods going from Britain to Northern Ireland. The much-quoted figure about a 50% reduction refers to the number of fields to fill in on customs forms, not the number of goods subject to these forms, he says. He also says that threats from the EU side about triggering article 16 leading to a trade war have not been helpful. Angela Rayner, Labour’s deputy leader, has responded to Sir Geoffrey Cox’s statement. (See 11.47am.) She claims it is clear that he did break the rules. Here are tweets from two journalists on Sir Geoffrey Cox’s statement. (See 11.47am.) From the Atlantic’s Helen Lewis From Politico’s Alex Wickham Jenny Chapman, the shadow Brexit minister, is responding in the Lords on behalf of Labour. She suggests the government is again talking up its threat to trigger article 16 to distract attention from the sleaze allegations surrounding the government. Frost turns to the Northern Ireland protocol. This is not working, he says, and he say talks with the EU to reach a solution have not succeeded. If the talks do not reach a satisfactory conclusion, the government would have no option by to trigger article 16, suspending parts of the protocol, he says. He says the UK would set out its case for doing this. But the EU is arguing that triggering article 16 would not be justified. And it is threatening “massive and disproportionate” retaliation, he says. He says he would urge the EU to stay calm. He says if the EU retaliated disproportionately, that would destabilise Northern Ireland. He says in the “short number of weeks” ahead they can find a sustainable solution. I do hope in the short number of weeks before us the commission and the EU member states will look at what we have in common, will look at our collective strategic interests as Western countries and help us find a stable and sustainable solution so that we can all move on. He says there is still a chance to turn away from confrontation. And that’s it. Although there was nothing in Frost’s statement that suggests the UK is backing away from its threat to trigger article 16, it does imply that the UK government will wait a little longer. There has been speculation that article 16 could be triggered as soon as Cop26 is over, and at the Conservative party conference Frost was setting a deadline of around now for the end of talks on the protocol. Frost says under the trade deal the UK is supposed to be participating in the Horizon science programme, and related programmes, at a cost of £15bn over seven years. But the EU has not allowed that yet, he says. He says if the EU does not intend to allow this, it would be in breach of the trade and cooperation agreement. He says he hopes the EU will allow UK participation as a matter of urgency. Lord Frost, the Brexit minister, is making a statement in the House of Lords about relations with Europe. He says the trade and cooperation agreement, the free trade deal, is generally working well. But there are two problem areas: fisheries, and participation in EU programmes. On fisheries, he says the UK has granted 98% of applications to fish in UK waters. Licences for Jersey and Guernsey are decided by their governments, he says. But he says the UK supports the approach they have taken. He says the government wants to keep working with the French, who have objected to some licences being granted, to find a fair solution. Sir Geoffrey Cox has put a lengthy statement on his website addreessing the various criticisms that have been made of his work as a lawyer for the British Virgin Islands. (See 9.50am.) Here are the main points. Cox says Mark Spencer, the government chief whip, told him that it would be acceptable for him to vote by proxy in the Commons from the British Virgin Islands. The statement says: Prior to his visit to the BVI, [Cox] consulted the chief chip specifically on this issue and was advised that it was appropriate. He admits using his Commons office to participate remotely in a British Virgin Islands commission of inquiry hearing - but says he thought that was within the rules. The statement says: As for the allegation that [Cox] breached the parliamentary code of conduct on one occasion, on 14 September 2021, by being in his office while participating in an online hearing in the public inquiry and voting in the House of Commons, he understands that the matter has been referred to the parliamentary commissioner and he will fully cooperate with her investigation. He does not believe that he breached the rules but will of course accept the judgment of the parliamentary commissioner or of the committee on the matter. He says his legal work - and even his work in the Caribbean - did not interfere with his work as an MP. The statement says: Sir Geoffrey regularly works 70-hour weeks and always ensures that his casework on behalf of his constituents is given primary importance and fully carried out. Throughout this period, he continued to have online meetings with organisations, businesses and individuals within the constituency and it made no difference where he was for that purpose since it was not practicable or desirable at that time to meet face to face. And the statement says voters in his constituencies have, at previous elections, shown that they do not object to the extent his outside interests. Sir Geoffrey’s view is that it is up to the electors of Torridge and West Devon whether or not they vote for someone who is a senior and distinguished professional in his field and who still practices that profession. That has been the consistent view of the local Conservative association and although at every election his political opponents have sought to make a prominent issue of his professional practice, it has so far been the consistent view of the voters of Torridge and West Devon. Sir Geoffrey is very content to abide by their decision. He says it is wrong to say that, in working for the British Virgin Islands, he was defending a tax haven. This has been one of Labour’ claims. But the statement says: [Cox] was asked to advise the attorney general and the elected government of BVI, a British Overseas Territory, in a public inquiry into whether corruption, abuse of office or other serious dishonesty may have taken place in recent years in the Virgin Islands and to carry out a review of its systems of government in preparation for that Inquiry. Prior to accepting the role, he sought and obtained the approval of the Office of the Attorney General of England and Wales that there would be no conflict of interest with his former role as attorney general. This is not to “defend” a tax haven or, as has been inaccurately reported, to defend any wrongdoing but to assist the public inquiry in getting to the truth. No evidence of tax evasion or personal corruption has been adduced before the Inquiry and if it had been, that person would have been required to seek their own representation. Edwin Poots, agriculture minister in the Northern Ireland executive and DUP leader briefly earlier this year, said today that, if the EU starts a trade war with the UK, in response to the likely triggering of article 16 by the UK to suspend parts of the Northern Ireland protocol, that would be a political bid to weaken Ulster’s place in the UK. He told BBC Radio Ulster that the EU should address the problems with the protocol by eliminating checks on goods entering Northern Ireland from Great Britain if they are not destined for Ireland. He went on: What causes me real concern is that we have a solution to this and the European Union are not applying it currently. So, we can provide solutions to ensure the integrity of the single market, allegedly that was what it was about. And if the European Union won’t accept those solutions and choose to go down a route of a trade war then that demonstrates that there was some political influence being used to damage Northern Ireland’s place within the United Kingdom. Later this morning Lord Frost, the Brexit minister, is due to be making a statement on relations with the EU in the House of Lords. Gordon Brown, the former Labour prime minister, told the Today programme this morning that unless Boris Johnson takes action, this parliament will be remembered for sleaze. He told the programme: I think, where there’s a conflict of interest using a public office for private gain, it should be banned outright and I’ve always said this. I think there are three issues that have now got to be dealt with. One is these conflicts of interest - we’ve got to have tighter rules. Secondly, we’re now dealing with dubious appointments, for example, to the House of Lords - we’ve got to do something about this - and, thirdly, I think there’s a bigger issue emerging about foreign money entering British politics ... I do believe that, unless the prime minister takes a grip of this issue, this parliament will be remembered for the extent to which sleaze has [been] allowed to become a feature of British politics again. Chris Bryant, the Labour chair of the Commons standards committee, was also giving interviews this morning. He declined to comment directly on the latest Cox allegations, because if the parliamentary commissioner for standards does investigate, ultimately his committee will have to adjudicate. But, like Sajid Javid (see 10.35am), he implied that what Cox was doing was hard to justify. He told BBC Breakfast: You might end up occasionally meeting other people in your office but you’re not meant to run a commercial operation out of your taxpayer-funded office either in Parliament or in your constituency - it’s a really important, I’d have thought, kind of basic rule. The Conservative MP Andrew Bowie has announced he will resign as a vice-chair of the party in the wake of the sleaze scandal engulfing Boris Johnson, Aubrey Allegretti reports. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, was up for the government on the broadcast media this morning, and he refused to back Sir Geoffrey Cox over the latest allegations he is facing. (See 9.50am.) He said Cox had been an “outstanding” attorney general. But, while trying not to comment on the Cox story directly, he implied that he thought using a Commons office as a virtual courtroom for outside legal work was problematic. Here are the main points he made in his interviews on sleaze-related issues. Javid refused to back Cox in the light of claims that Cox misused parliamentary facilities. He said he did not want to comment on the case directly, but he also told the Today programme: Look, as a general rule, no-one should be using things that are funded by the taxpayer, whether that’s your parliamentary office or whatever else for your personal gain in any way, as a general rule. I’m not talking about any particular case. Now, obviously someone might take a phone call or might use their own phone for a video meeting or something like that, wherever they are, but I think as a general rule that should not be happening. Javid made the same point in other interviews, including one in which he said: If you’re asking, can you be in your Commons office or walking in the corridors of parliament and your phone rings, and the person on the other side is talking to you about something that’s got nothing to do with your parliamentary affairs, then of course that can happen, and of course you might take a phone call. What Cox was doing seemed to go beyond holding a video meeting on a phone, or taking a calling in the corridor. Javid said he personally regretted voting for the Owen Paterson motion last week. He said: Look, I voted for that motion, I do regret it, because I think it was wrong for me to conflate the Owen Paterson case with the right of an appeal. I do think it’s important for parliamentarians on a cross-party basis to think about how they might always be able to improve a system, but it was wrong to conflate it with Owen Paterson. Other ministers have said it was a mistake for the government to conflate the Paterson case with the general issue of reform of the standards committee. (The government ordered its MPs to vote for a motion linking the two.) But they have not accepted making a personal mistake, in the way Javid does here. He defended his decision to take a well-paid second job with the US bank JP Morgan while he was a backbencher, claiming it was good to get outside experience. This is from Tom Newton Dunn from Times Radio. But when asked about the same job on the Today programme, and how this work benefitted his constituents in Bromsgrove, Javid struggled to to give a clear answer. He just said it was good for MPs to have outside experience, and that this had not taken up a lot of his time. He said that if the Commons does ban MPs from working as political consultants, as Labour and others are proposing, some MPs would leave the Commons. He said: I wouldn’t leave. Do I think others would leave? Look, I can’t speak for them, perhaps there will be some. The front page of the Times this morning is dominated by a picture from a video grab of Sir Geoffrey Cox participating virtually in the British Virgin Islands commission of inquiry. As the Daily Mail revealed yesterday, he has been representing the BVI at this commission, earning considerable sums alongside his work as an MP. Yesterday the Mail focused on the fact that Cox was doing some of this work from the Caribbean, and used the remote voting rules introduced by the Commons during the pandemic to ensure that he could still take part in divisions. Today Cox is being criticised for doing that work from Westminster. In its splash (paywall) the Times says the screengrab shows that on 14 September Cox was participating in the inquiry from what looks like a Commons office. Cox has not denied this, and this detail from Henry Zeffman’s story seems to clinch it. Zeffman writes: On September 14, the day of the hearing in question, MPs were debating the government’s plans for a new levy to fund health and social care. Cox did not contribute to the debate. There were six votes on the issue over the course of the day, all of which Cox took part in in person. About two hours into the BVI hearing he left his desk for 20 minutes, later telling the hearing’s chairman: “Forgive my absence during some of the morning, I’m afraid the bell went off.” This was an apparent reference to the division bell that indicates when votes in the House of Commons are taking place. What makes this problematic is that Cox’s use of his office in this way seems hard to square with the rule in the code of conduct for MPs saying “members are personally responsible and accountable for ensuring that their use of any expenses, allowances, facilities and services provided from the public purse is ... always in support of their parliamentary duties. It should not confer any undue personal or financial benefit on themselves”. Angela Rayner, the Labour deputy leader, has written to the parliamentary commissioner for standards, Kathryn Stone, calling for an investigation. She said: This appears to be an egregious, brazen breach of the rules. A Conservative MP using a taxpayer funded office in parliament to work for a tax haven facing allegations of corruption is a slap in the face and an insult to British taxpayers. The parliamentary commissioner for standards must investigate this, and the prime minister needs to explain why he has an MP in his parliamentary party that treats parliament like a co-working space allowing him to get on with all of his other jobs instead of representing his constituents. Good morning. The Commons has started a mini-recess, which means Boris Johnson will not have to face what would otherwise have been a awkward PMQs, which would doubtless have been dominated by futile attempts to get him to admit what almost everyone else in government will admit - that last week’s Owen Paterson vote was a serious mistake, for which an apology is necessary. Instead Johnson is going by train to the Cop26 conference “to meet negotiators, to get an update on progress in the talks and encourage ambitious action in the final days of the negotiations”, as No 10 put it yesterday. Johnson will hold a press conference in the afternoon. The press conference will focus on the climate crisis, and what has been achieved at Cop26. There have been welcome developments at the summit, but overall the verdict so far is very mixed, at best, and Greenpeace International has described the draft text of the summit agreement published this morning as “not a plan to solve the climate crisis ... [but] an agreement that we’ll all cross our fingers and hope for the best”. My colleague Alan Evans has full coverage on our Cop26 live blog. But Westminster political journalists are heading to Glasgow for the press conference too, and Johnson is bound to face some questions about the sleaze/corruption allegations that continue to dog the Tories. Downing Street was struggling to defend Sir Geoffrey Cox yesterday, and this morning his position is looking even more perilous in the light of new allegations that he seems to have used taxpayer-funded parliamentary facilities to appear in a court hearing virtually. Other Conservatives facing fresh questions about their outside interests include Sir Iain Duncan Smith, the former party leader (see here), and Daniel Kawczynski (see here). Ed Miliband, the shadow business secretary, said this morning that Johnson’s trip to Glasgow - which had been expected later this week - looks like an attempt to distract attention from sleaze. He said: It’s hard to avoid the suspicion that the prime minister sees a day trip to the Cop as a useful way of distracting from the sleaze surrounding the Tory party rather than a chance to get a grip and engage in the substance like a statesman. It’s high time Boris Johnson recognised that he is not a commentator but needs to take charge of a summit that is not on track to deliver. We are miles off where we need to be in the halving of emissions required by 2030. It’s time the government faced this truth, stopped the greenwash, and put maximum pressure on all parties to step up and agree a path out of Glasgow to keep 1.5 alive. Here is the agenda for the day. 9.30am: The ONS publishes a series of of reports, including one covering the impact of the budget on inflation, labour costs and labour income and Covid antibody levels. 4.30pm: Boris Johnson is due to hold a press conference at the Cop26 summit. I try to monitor the comments below the line (BTL) but it is impossible to read them all. If you have a direct question, do include “Andrew” in it somewhere and I’m more likely to find it. I do try to answer questions, and if they are of general interest, I will post the question and reply above the line (ATL), although I can’t promise to do this for everyone. If you want to attract my attention quickly, it is probably better to use Twitter. I’m on @AndrewSparrow. Alternatively, you can email me at andrew.sparrow@theguardian.comPatient safety in the NHS in England is being put at “unacceptably high” risk, with severe staff shortages leaving hospitals, GP surgeries and A&amp;E units struggling to cope with soaring demand, health chiefs have warned. The health service has hit “breaking point”, the leaders say, with record numbers of patients seeking care. Nine in 10 NHS chief executives, chairs and directors have reported this week that the pressures on their organisation have become unsustainable. The same proportion is sounding “alarm bells” over staffing, with the lack of doctors, nurses and other health workers putting lives of patients at risk. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, has come under fire for recently claiming, at a No 10 press conference, that he did not believe the pressure on the NHS was unsustainable. But the survey of 451 NHS leaders in England finds the health service already at “tipping point”. The results of the poll, conducted by the NHS Confederation, which represents the healthcare system in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, show that 88% of the leaders think the demands on their organisation are unsustainable, and 87% believe a lack of staffing in the NHS as a whole is putting patient safety and care at risk. The survey of the most senior executives running hospitals, ambulance services, mental health providers, community services, primary care and integrated care systems comes hours before new performance figures for the NHS in England are due to be published. The number of people waiting for hospital treatment in England has hit a record high of 5.7 million as the NHS struggles to clear the backlog of care that has been worsened by the pandemic. Updated figures are expected on Thursday. The greatest areas of concern for NHS leaders are primary care, and urgent and emergency care, according to the survey. Matthew Taylor, the chief executive of the NHS Confederation, said: “Almost every healthcare leader we’ve spoken to is warning that the NHS is under unsustainable pressure, and they are worried the situation will worsen, as we head into deep midwinter, unless action is taken. They are also sounding alarm bells over risks to patient safety if their services become overwhelmed, on top of a severe workforce crisis. “The health and social care secretary says the NHS is not under unsustainable pressure, but NHS leaders are clear that we have reached a tipping point. Frontline providers across all parts of the NHS are under intolerable pressure.” A hospital trust chief executive in the south-east said: “Systems are at breaking point and risk is unacceptably high [for] some cohorts of patients, be that in emergency, primary care, cancer or elective care [or elsewhere]. But where is the honesty and openness about this?” An ambulance leader revealed that pressures were so severe they were hampering the organisation’s “ability to respond to immediate life-threatening calls” and meant “some patients will die”. Taylor said that while the NHS was approaching winter with more than 90,000 vacancies, the “number one measure” ministers could take now to stop the NHS plunging into crisis would be providing emergency funding for social care, which had even greater numbers of unfilled jobs. The Guardian revealed last month that the NHS was facing a mounting beds crisis because care homes with unprecedented staff shortages had to stop taking in patients from hospitals. Health leaders are trying to free up space in the NHS to tackle the backlog of 5.7 million people – equivalent to almost 10% of the population of England – awaiting treatment. But efforts to speed up the discharge of patients into the community are being hampered by care-worker shortages. The most endorsed recommendation by health leaders in the NHS Confederation poll was for ministers to provide urgent extra support for social care. This should be targeted at ensuring effective discharge arrangements so that people can live more independently in care homes or in their own homes, health leaders said. The NHS beds crisis is now so serious that as many as one in five beds in some hospitals are occupied by patients who are medically fit to be discharged, the Guardian was told. In most cases that is because there is no care package available to enable them to leave hospital. Taylor said the required extra support for social care services should include more money to increase care assistants’ wages to help fill staffing vacancies, and to increase the staff’s fuel allowance so more people could be persuaded back into the sector. He added: “We welcomed the government’s recent extra investment in the NHS, but we cannot immediately buy our way out of this potential crisis due to the 90,000-plus vacancies in the NHS. It would be better to allocate more immediate funding, from the recent funding settlement, to social care services, as boosting the numbers of care staff will have much greater impact on reducing pressures on hospitals and other parts of the NHS.”John Cleese has withdrawn from an event at the Cambridge Union, saying he was “blacklisting” himself before “someone else does”. The move by the Monty Python and Fawlty Towers star was in protest after the debating society banned art critic Andrew Graham-Dixon for impersonating Adolf Hitler. Cleese had been due to address the union on Friday, but withdrew, saying he had also impersonated Hitler in a Monty Python sketch. He said on Twitter: “I was looking forward to talking to students at the Cambridge Union this Friday, but I hear that someone there has been blacklisted for doing an impersonation of Hitler. “I regret that I did the same on a Monty Python show, so I am blacklisting myself before someone else does. I apologise to anyone at Cambridge who was hoping to talk with me, but perhaps some of you can find a venue where woke rules do not apply.” According to reports, Cleese was visiting Cambridge as part of a documentary he is making on “woke culture”. The Cambridge Union president, Keir Bradwell, said it was a “huge shame” that Cleese felt he could no longer attend the event. “We were really looking forward to hosting John here. “It would have been a really fantastic event and our members are really excited to hear from him – the documentary he is making is extremely topical. He’s the kind of speaker that would thrive with our audience and in our room.” Graham-Dixon’s Hitler impression and remarks came during a debate last week on the motion “This house believes there is no such thing as good taste.” In a statement, the art historian said it was not his intention to upset people, but to persuade the audience “that bad taste and bad morality often go hand-in-hand”. He added: “I apologise sincerely to anyone who found my debating tactics and use of Hitler’s own language distressing; on reflection I can see that some of the words I used, even in quotation, are inherently offensive.” He rejected the “implication that I am racist and antisemitic … The speech I gave was a strident attack on Hitler’s racism and antisemitism”. In a letter posted on Facebook, Bradwell said the remarks made by Graham-Dixon during the event were “thoughtless and grotesque”, and apologised for his own failure to intervene. He said he had consumed “two glasses of wine over dinner beforehand, as did our speakers”, but added that he was “not impeded in my ability to chair the debate”.A group of congressional Republicans who helped pass the Biden administration’s infrastructure bill last Friday are facing calls for political punishment by their own party, including the threat of having their committee assignments stripped for supporting the president’s agenda, according to reports this week. Several hardline Republicans, including the Colorado congresswoman Lauren Boebert and former Trump White House chief of staff Mark Meadows, have publicly urged retaliation against party colleagues who voted for the $1tn bill. Some members who were among the GOP rank and file who helped the bill pass the House say they have received death threats. Many of the Republicans who backed the bipartisan bill have ranking positions on full committees or subcommittees, including the homeland security committee and the natural resources committee. The bill, which passed 228 to 206, would have failed if no Republicans voted for it in the House late last Friday, prompting widespread fury and intra-party threats, Punchbowl news reported. “That 13 House Republicans provided the votes needed to pass this is absurd,” the Texas representative Chip Roy said, and the Washington Post has reported. Florida’s Matt Gaetz had fumed early on Saturday, tweeting: “I can’t believe Republicans just gave the Democrats their socialism bill.” On Tuesday, Meadows said: “They stripped Marjorie Taylor Greene of her committees for not even voting against the Republican party.… These people voted for Joe Biden, for an infrastructure bill that will clear the way for more socialist spending that, quite frankly, gives Joe Biden a win.” Greene, a radical rightist from Georgia, was demoted earlier this year for promulgating conspiracy theories and untrue claims about issues including mass shootings. She has also been fined several times for refusing to wear a mask to help prevent the spread of coronavirus on Capitol Hill. Before the legislative vote, some Republicans threatened to mount primary challenges to any party members who supported the legislation, according to the Washington Post. “Vote for this infrastructure bill and I will primary the hell out of you,” said Representative Madison Hawthorn of North Carolina. Certain GOP divides in Washington have grown in recent weeks , especially in relation to the bipartisan committee investigating the Capitol insurrection of 6 January by extremist supporters of Donald Trump, and legislative battles on Biden’s agenda. On Tuesday evening, congresswoman Liz Cheney of Wyoming, who is the leading Republican on that committee, gave a speech in New Hampshire, saying that the US was “confronting a domestic threat that we have never faced before” in the form of Donald Trump, who is “attempting to unravel the foundations of our constitutional republic” with his continued attempts to block the investigation of the insurrection and campaign to declare Biden’s 2020 victory fraudulent. Cheney added: “Political leaders who sit silent in the face of these false and dangerous claims are aiding the former president, who is at war with the rule of law, and the constitution.” She emphasized her Republican credentials by pointing out that she disagreed with almost everything Joe Biden has done since coming to power in January. But she added of her own party’s continued support of Trump that “when our constitutional order is threatened, as it is now, rising above partisanship is not simply an aspiration. It is an obligation.” Amid talk that her high-stakes strategy could break her career or set her on a path to run for the White House, observers noted the significance that she delivered her latest broadside in New Hampshire, the small New England state with outsize influence, as it holds the first primary contest in the country during presidential elections.Eddie Howe surveyed the packed media room at St James’ Park and decided an apology was in order. “Please excuse the voice,” said Newcastle United’s new manager. “It’s not quite at the normal pitch but I’ve done a lot of shouting in the last two days.” In truth Howe sounded only the tiniest bit hoarse yet his words drew smiles from an audience well aware that Steve Bruce’s successor had spent much of the previous 48 hours drilling a set of players still to win a game this season. Although the former Bournemouth manager emphasised that the response from his new charges was “outstanding”, he is certainly not underplaying the task confronting him at the club 19th in England’s top division. “Success now is staying in the Premier League; it’s going to be a real challenge,” said the 43-year-old. “I’m not underestimating it.” Someone inquired whether he had accepted football’s toughest posting. “I’m sure there are plenty of managers around the world who would put their hands up for that. But, OK, if you’re narrowing it down to English football, it’s not an easy job.” The attendant pressure is exacerbated by Newcastle’s recent Saudi Arabian-led takeover. It leaves Howe as chief football choreographer at arguably the world’s richest club during a period when the Championship is considerably closer than Europe. Then there is the awkward issue of Saudi Arabia’s appalling human rights record. How did Howe reconcile his reportedly high principles to taking the Saudi riyal? Had morals been compromised? A less eloquent speaker might have stuttered and stumbled but Newcastle’s impressively articulate manager barely broke verbal stride. “For me it was a football decision,” he said. “I’m absolutely delighted to be here. My focus is football – that’s all I’m going to concern myself with. I’ll give everything to the job, every single day. But success is going to take a lot of hard work, a lot of sacrifice and a lot of suffering from everyone here.” If managing Newcastle is a high-risk role, it also promises immense rewards. “It’s an incredible moment in my life,” acknowledged Howe. “It feels fantastic; I’m incredibly privileged. Everything just feels right: the club’s potential, the size, the history, the owners. I’ve been very, very impressed with the new owners and their vision. To come to St James’ Park for the first time as manager of Newcastle is an amazing feeling.” After leading Bournemouth from League Two to the Premier League and keeping them there for five years before departing after relegation in 2020, Howe deliberately took a year off. “I really felt the pressure I’d been living every day,” he said. “I wanted to reset, recharge, commit to my family for a period of time, further my football education and come back better. It was important to take myself into a different place mentally. I feel refreshed and energised.” Howe will endeavour to retain that work/life balance by relocating to Tyneside with his wife and sons. “My family are excited about moving,” he said. “It’s so, so important to commit to the area. And, with the hours I need to work here, I’d never see them otherwise!” Certain predecessors have compared living in football-obsessed Newcastle to occupying a goldfish bowl but Howe seemed unperturbed. “The level of interest is a new experience for me but I’ll buy into that culture,” he said. “It’s a much … a very different club to Bournemouth. The amount of pressure will be different and I’ll have to handle what comes my way. I’m sure there’ll be some uncomfortable moments but I’ll always keep my dignity and respect.” Howe retained a certain circumspection, his reserve embracing not merely human rights but the January transfer window. “The last thing I want to talk about is January,” he said. “There are so many difficult games between now and then; I want to get the best out of the players we have here now.” A man who confessed to “digitalising my training sessions” during his sabbatical appeared much happier discussing football philosophy and waxed lyrical about the enjoyment he derived from watching Kevin Keegan’s famous Newcastle “entertainers” in the 1990s. “I’d love to emulate some of their incredible attacking football,” Howe said. “That was a beautiful team to watch; I’d love to give the crowd some similarly special memories.” First he must accomplish the tricky task of weaning Newcastle off their longstanding, apparently default cagey, counterattacking style. “My Bournemouth teams always tried to be on the front foot,” he said. “And I’m not going to come here and be a different manager. It’ll take gradual steps but my training will certainly be very different and, ultimately, I want to see the type of football that entertains. I think that’s what Newcastle fans want too.”