Boris Johnson has announced that arrivals to the UK have to take a PCR test by the second day of their arrival and self-isolate until they have a negative result after the first two cases of the new variant were reported in Nottingham and Essex. Face coverings will also become compulsory in shops and on public transport in the UK from next week. Israel is to ban the entry of visitors from all countries due to the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. The country’s government will also reintroduce counter-terrorism phone-tracking technology for contact testing in order to contain the spread of the new strain. Health officials in New South Wales, Australia, have begun urgent testing after two people who arrived on a flight from southern Africa overnight tested positive to the coronavirus, Reuters reports. Australia imposed new restrictions on Saturday on people who have been to nine southern African countries. Some of the 61 Covid-19 cases detected among a group of passengers that arrived in the Netherlands from South Africa this week are likely to be the Omicron variant, health authorities said. Two people with the new variant entered Germany at Munich airport on 24 November, before South Africa was designated a virus variant area and were now isolating, Bavaria’s health ministry said. Earlier, officials in the western state of Hesse, home to Frankfurt airport, said a suspected case of the Omicron variant had been found in a passenger arriving from South Africa. A case of the Omicron variant has been detected in Italy, Reuters reports. The genome was sequenced at the Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology, Virology and Bioemergency Diagnostics of the Sacco Hospital in Milan from a positive sample of a patient coming from Mozambique. Dr Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said he “would not be surprised” if the Omicron variant was already in the US. The US has praised South Africa for quickly identifying the new Covid strain and sharing the information with other countries, AFP reports. The secretary of state, Antony Blinken, spoke to South Africa’s international relations and cooperation minister, Naledi Pandor, and they discussed cooperation on vaccinating people in Africa against Covid-19, the state department said. “Secretary Blinken specifically praised South Africa’s scientists for the quick identification of the Omicron variant and South Africa’s government for its transparency in sharing this information, which should serve as a model for the world,” the statement said. The introduction of compulsory PCR tests for Covid-19 for everyone arriving in the UK has been described as a “huge blow” for the travel industry. Abta, a trade association for tour operators and travel agents in the UK, said the added cost of testing for all arrivals to the UK will have an impact on customer demand for holidays, adding pressure to an industry which has been among the “hardest hit” during the pandemic. Without a negative result, people will have to self-isolate for 10 days. “While Abta understands that this is a rapidly evolving situation and public health must come first, the decision to require all arrivals to take a PCR test and self-isolate until a negative result is returned is a huge blow for travel businesses, many of whom were only just starting to get back on their feet after 20 months of severe restrictions,” an Abta spokesman said. “These changes will add cost to people’s holidays, which will undoubtedly impact consumer demand and hold back the industry’s recovery, so it’s vital that this decision is kept under careful review and restrictions are lifted promptly if it becomes clear there is not a risk to the UK vaccination programme. “The government must also now consider offering tailored support for travel businesses, which have been amongst the hardest hit during the pandemic.” A football game in Portugal’s top divison was abandoned in the second-half after a Covid outbreak forced Belenenses to start the match with Benfica with just nine men, two of them goalkeepers. Instead of postponing the game when news emerged that 14 players and three staff members had tested positive, Portuguese league authorities sanctioned it going ahead due to both clubs still being able to field the minimum required seven players. Brazil’s health regulator Anvisa recommended on Saturday that travel restrictions be widened to include Angola, Malawi, Mozambique and Zambia due to the Omicron variant. The recommendation comes a day after Brazil shut its borders to travelers arriving from South Africa, Eswatini, Lesotho, Namibia, Botswana and Zimbabwe, Reuters reports. The Anvisa recommendation will need to be implemented by the government, as the regulator does not have the authority to enforce such travel restrictions. Health officials in New South Wales, Australia, have begun urgent testing after two people who arrived on a flight from southern Africa overnight tested positive to the coronavirus, Reuters reports. Australia imposed new restrictions on Saturday on people who have been to nine southern African countries, as the new Omicron variant raises concerns about another wave of the pandemic, Reuters reports. “Urgent genomic sequencing is underway to determine if they have been infected by the new omicron … variant of concern,” the health department of New South Wales said in a release. The passengers arrived in Sydney on Saturday evening and were transported to a hotel for 14 days of quarantine. Other passengers on the flight may be considered close contacts and will need to get tested immediately and isolate for 14 days, and compliance checks will be undertaken, NSW Health said. Brazil reported 229 new Covid-19 deaths and 9,233 additional cases, according to data released by the health ministry on Saturday. In total, Brazil has registered 614,186 deaths due to Covid-19, the world’s second highest death toll behind the US, Reuters reports. Brazil reported 229 new Covid-19 deaths and 9,233 additional cases, according to data released by the health ministry on Saturday. In total, Brazil has registered 614,186 deaths due to Covid-19, the world’s second highest death toll behind the US, Reuters reports. Switzerland has widened quarantine requirements to stem the spread of the new Omicron coronavirus variant to travellers arriving from Britain, the Czech Republic, the Netherlands, Egypt and Malawi, where cases have been detected, its health ministry said. On Friday, Switzerland banned direct flights from South Africa and the surrounding region due to the detection of the new variant while also imposing restrictions on travel from other countries including Hong Kong, Israel and Belgium. Entry from those countries would only be possible for Swiss citizens or those with a residence permit in Switzerland or the broader Schengen area, Reuters reports. It did not state whether travel from those countries would be limited to Swiss citizens and residents or not. Israel is to ban the entry of visitors from all countries due to the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. The country’s government will also reintroduce counter-terrorism phone-tracking technology for contact testing in order to contain the spread of the new strain. Prime Minister Naftali Bennett said in a statement that the ban, pending government approval, would last 14 days. Israel, the first country to shut its borders completely over the Omicron variant, has so far confirmed one case of the variant and seven other suspected cases. Bahrain has banned entry to travellers from four more African states over the spread of Covid-19, the state news agency BNA reported. The four additional countries are Malawi, Mozambique, Angola and Zambia, Reuters reports. The ban excludes Bahraini citizens and those with Bahraini residency visa holders, it said. Bahrain on Friday banned entry to travellers from South Africa and five other southern African nations. The Barbarians have claimed a decision by Public Health England led to their rugby fixture against Samoa at Twickenham being called off 90 minutes before kick-off despite their having enough players who had returned negative tests. A statement released by the Rugby Football Union revealed that four players and two members of staff from the invitational side had tested positive for Covid-19. The scrapping of the game followed last year’s fixture against England being called off after 13 players broke the Covid protocols, leading to widespread condemnation of the players’ behaviour. Boris Johnson has been accused of ignoring a senior official’s plan to prepare Britain for the emergence of vaccine-resistant Covid variants, the Observer can reveal. With the government announcing on Saturday that the first UK cases of the Omicron variant had been detected, the former head of the government’s vaccine taskforce said he could see no evidence that his blueprint for tackling the most worrying variants – submitted in the spring – had been acted upon. In an interview with the Observer, Clive Dix, a leading figure in drug development who chaired the taskforce until April, said that he believed the UK was no longer “on the front foot” in tackling the pandemic. “I wrote a very specific proposal on what we should put in place right now for the emergence of any new virus that escaped the vaccine,” he said. “That was written and handed into the [vaccine taskforce] at the end of April when I left. I haven’t seen a sign of any of those activities yet.” In response, a government spokesperson said: “This past year we’ve witnessed unprecedented scientific innovations and breakthroughs, made possible by collaboration between medical experts, governments and industry. “Earlier this year, we joined the 100 Days Mission, which will ensure industry is part of a robust collaboration alongside governments, international organisations and academia over the coming months and years to take action towards a common goal: protecting people from future pandemics through developing and deploying safe, targeted and effective diagnostics, therapeutics and vaccines at scale.” Saudi Arabia will allow entry to travellers “from all countries” as long as they have received one dose of a Covid-19 vaccine inside the kingdom, it has said, after suspending flights from seven African countries due to the Omicron variant on Friday. The ministry said the travellers would be allowed in from next Saturday and would need to quarantine for three days. It did not mention the flight suspensions, Reuters reports. Saudi Arabia has suspended flights to and from South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Lesotho and Eswatini. Dr Nathalie MacDermott, National Institute for Health Research academic clinical lecturer, King’s College London, said the detection of two individuals in England infected with the Omicron variant is unsurprising given the news of the rapid spread of the variant in southern Africa and the emergence of cases in Europe. “The action to ban flights from the most affected countries is never a decision that should be taken lightly, but for a brief period it can buy the time needed to better understand the threat posed by this new variant and ensure the implementation of more robust identification and targeted contact tracing for individuals arriving from those countries now placed on the red list. “The decision by the government to reimplement the need for a PCR test from all individuals arriving in the UK from abroad on day two, with self-isolation until a negative test is reported, while frustrating for those travelling, is essential in order to rapidly identify cases of infection with the Omicron variant and implement prompt isolation and targeted contact tracing to limit the spread of the variant in the UK. “The decision to implement a requirement to wear face masks on public transport and in shops is welcomed, and while it is not yet a requirement to wear them in other environments, the British public would be wise to consider wearing them in all circumstances when they are indoors with gatherings of anyone other than close family and friends.” Less than a week ago, UK cabinet minister Nadhim Zahawi took to the airwaves to predict that such was the progress of the vaccine programme, Britain would be the first big country to use vaccines to end the pandemic. Hours after he made those comments, scientists 9,000 miles away detected a worrying Covid variant that, just days later, prompted Boris Johnson to announce emergency measures that he had hoped would never be reintroduced. The speed at which Omicron’s initial discovery has led to the detection of cases around the world and the imposition of new restrictions has been startling. It is also a sign of desperation in Downing Street to avoid a lapse back into more severe restrictions, such as those the prime minister was forced to introduce – with great reluctance – last Christmas. Some more details have emerged about the Omicron cases in Bavaria, Germany. The two people with the variant entered Germany at Munich airport on 24 November, before South Africa was designated a virus variant area, and were now isolating, said Bavaria’s health ministry. The two had come forward for further investigations after they heard about the new variant, Reuters reports. The Bavarian ministry said anyone who had been in South Africa in the last 14 days should immediately reduce contacts, take a PCR test and contact their local health authority. “Bavaria has responded early and quickly to the very new variant,” a ministry spokesperson said. “Everything must be done to stop it spreading.” Of passengers arriving from Cape Town on Friday, 50 are in quarantine in Bavaria. Earlier, officials in the western state of Hesse, home to Frankfurt airport which is one of Europe’s busiest airports, said a suspected case of the Omicron variant had been found in a passenger arriving from South Africa. An update on an earlier story from the Netherlands. Some of the 61 Covid-19 cases detected among a group of passengers that arrived in the Netherlands from South Africa this week are likely to be the Omicron variant, health authorities said. “In a number of the tested persons the Omicron variant is presumed to have been found,” the Netherlands Institute for Health (RIVM) said. A spokesperson for the RIVM said it was “almost certain” the cases were of the new variant but further testing is needed, Reuters reports. Lyn Rickman and her family were hoping to travel across the ditch from Australia to visit her daughter Ellie, who lives in New Zealand and is due to graduate in Auckland at the beginning of May. Rickman is one of many Australians frustrated by New Zealand’s gradual border reopening timeline, which keeps Australians out until at least 30 April. Under the plan, fully vaccinated New Zealanders currently in Australia will be able to return home without quarantine from 17 January. But fully vaccinated non-citizens won’t be able to enter the country until 30 April next year, and they will still need to isolate for a week. Kuwait is to suspend direct flights from nine African countries from Sunday due to the Omicron variant of the coronavirus discovered in South Africa, the government communication centre said. The countries are South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zambia and Malawi, Reuters reports. A case of the Omicron variant has been detected in Italy, Reuters reports. The genome was sequenced at the Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology, Virology and Bioemergency Diagnostics of the Sacco Hospital in Milan from a positive sample of a patient coming from Mozambique. The patient and his family contacts were in good health, the ISS said, adding that the sequence of the sample, “attributable to the one now known as variant of concern (VOC) and defined yesterday by WHO as Omicron”, was in the process of further confirmation. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, welcomed the UK government’s decision to impose tighter restrictions on face masks. He wrote on Twitter: “Today’s announcement that face coverings will be compulsory on public transport nationwide, as they already are across TfL [Transport for London], is welcome. “Evidence shows they help stop the virus spreading, and this is a measure I’ve repeatedly urged the Government to take.” Here is the full story on the UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, announcing fresh measures to curb the spread of coronavirus, including mandatory masks in shops and PCR tests for travellers entering the country after two cases of the Omicron variant were detected. Johnson said anyone arriving in the UK will be asked to take a PCR test for Covid-19 on the second day and must self-isolate until they provide a negative test. The rules on face coverings in shops and on public transport will also be tightened, he said. Contacts of all confirmed cases of people infected with the Omicron variant will have to self-isolate for 10 days. Health officials are also examining the case for widening access to the booster vaccine programme, he added. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the state department have advised against travel to eight southern African countries due to the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. The CDC raised its travel recommendation to “Level Four: Very High” for South Africa, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Mozambique, Malawi, Lesotho, Eswatini and Botswana while the state department issued parallel “Do Not Travel” advisories on Saturday. The Welsh government has confirmed it will introduce the same measures on international travel as announced on Saturday by Boris Johnson, PA reports. A spokesperson said: “We have repeatedly raised our concerns with the UK Government about its decision to relax international travel rules quickly, precisely because of the risk of introducing new variants into the UK. We also warned against the removal of PCR tests for returning travellers. We will be introducing the same measures on international travel as those announced this afternoon by the UK Government and the other devolved governments. “The emergence of this new variant is a serious development in the ongoing pandemic and reinforces the need for everyone in Wales to get their vaccine or booster when offered, wear face coverings when necessary, and book a test if they develop symptoms.” Face coverings will become compulsory in shops and on public transport in the UK from “next week”, a statement from 10 Downing Street said. The statement said: “Face coverings will be made compulsory in shops and on public transport from next week. “All hospitality settings will be exempt.” Two new cases of the Omicron variant have been found in the German state of Bavaria, Reuters reports. The press conference has now concluded. On whether younger people should now be vaccinated as in other countries such as the US, Prof Whitty said the JCVI is looking into it. Sir Patrick Vallance has added that boosters will give high enough antibody coverage, which should be sufficient. Also vaccine manufacturers are devising “broader vaccines” that are effective against potential new variants. And two companies have said they can tweak existing vaccines against the new variant “in about 100 days”. On reasons to be more optimistic about dealing with the new variant, Sir Patrick Vallance said we now have a “changeable platform” for vaccines and antiviral drugs coming along compared with a few months ago. In response to a question about why he is not implementing further plan B measures such as telling people to work from home, Johnson cited the differences between the Delta and Omicron variant and its approach to “slow the seeding” through the border measures being introduced, accelerating the booster programme and giving scientists more time to understand the variant. Johnson has clarified that people must now wear face covering in shops and public transport with the health secretary to provide more details. On the new variant, Sir Patrick Vallance, the chief scientific adviser, said: “The reason this one is worrying is the combination of transmissibility and the potential for some degree of escape from vaccines because of the number of changes.” Johnson insists the UK is in a much stronger position, largely due to the vaccine and booster rollout. On the ramifications for Christmas plans, he said he is “absolutely confident” that this year’s Christmas will be considerably better than last year’s festive period. Johnson acknowledges: “We don’t know how effective our vaccines will be” against the new variant. “But we have good reasons to believe they will provide at least some measure of protection,” he added. Prof Chris Whitty is explaining a series of slides that show cases rose in November after a dip in October. Hospitalisations and the number of deaths are down. Johnson said there will be ramping up of mask wearing in shops and indoor settings. All these measures are “temporary and precautionary” and will be reviewed in three weeks, he added. The prime minister said the health secretary is asking scientists to consider giving boosters to more people and reducing the gap from when an individual has their second dose. Johnson said all close contacts of a positive Omicron case must self-isolate for 10 days regardless of their own jab status. Johnson has stressed people can continue to travel but arrivals have to take a PCR test by the second day of their arrival and self-isolate until they have a negative result. He added that the new variant diverges from previous configurations of the virus and reduces protection from vaccines over time. Johnson said it does appear that Omicron spreads very rapidly and can spread between two people who are double vaccinated. The UK’s prime minister, Boris Johnson, is due to give a live press conference now on the latest on the new variant which you can follow in the blog. The UK has recorded a further 131 coronavirus-related deaths and 39,567 cases in the latest 24-hour period, government figures show. After the Omicron variant was detected in Germany in a passenger arriving from South Africa, Peter Tinnemann, head of the Frankfurt Health Authority, said: “Our current routine procedures enable us, together with Frankfurt airport, to quickly implement the necessary measures to minimise the risk of spreading.” The Czech Republic’s president, Miloš Zeman, left a Prague hospital on Saturday to name the country’s new prime minister a day later, his spokesman told AFP. Zeman is due to appoint Petr Fiala, head of the right-wing Civic Democratic party, as prime minister at his Lany chateau residence on Sunday morning. However, it is still not clear how the ceremony will proceed as the 77-year-old Zeman has to isolate for two weeks under health ministry rules. Zeman went to hospital on 10 October. He was released last Thursday but returned to hospital on the same day after testing positive for Covid-19. Essex county council in England has confirmed it is aware of a case of the new Omicron variant: Here are more details on the UK government adding four more countries to its red list after two cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant were detected. Scientists in the UK are responding to the news that two cases of the Omicron variant have been detected in Brentwood and in Nottingham. Infectious diseases expert Dr Neil Stone tweeted that it was no surprise that the variant had been found in the UK, but noted travels bans might not be “completely useless” as both confirmed cases were linked to travel in southern Africa. He wrote: Surprise surprise, Omicron has been found in the UK. As usual, by the time we discover it exists, it’s everywhere. Importantly, both cases apparently linked to travel in Southern Africa..so maybe travel bans not COMPLETELY pointless just yet (they will be very soon though) That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, for today. I’m handing over to my colleague Tom Ambrose. Dr Anthony Fauci, the director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said he “would not be surprised” if the Omicron variant was already in the United States. Speaking to NBC News today, the president’s chief medical adviser said there was yet to be a confirmed case of the variant in the US but added: You know, I would not be surprised if it is. We have not detected it yet, but when you have a virus that is showing this degree of transmissibility and you’re already having travel-related cases that they’ve noted in Israel and Belgium and other places, when you have a virus like this, it almost invariably is ultimately going to go, essentially all over. Its ability to infect people who have recovered from infection and even people who have been vaccinated makes us say this is something you have to pay really close attention to and be prepared for something that’s serious. It may not turn out that way, but you really want to be ahead of it. Singapore has recorded 1,761 new cases, up from 1,090 the previous day. A further six deaths were also reported, compared with three on Friday. The latest figures take the total number of fatalities in the country of 5.7 million people to 690. England is to add four more countries to its travel “red list”, health officials have announced, after two cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant were detected in the UK. Following fresh advice from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA), from 4am on Sunday Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola will join the red list. Travellers who have returned from these four countries in the last 10 days must isolate and get a PCR test, officials said. The Guardian understands the UKHSA is now following up recent arrivals from these countries. Ministers are not ruling out adding further countries to the red list. Sajid Javid, the health secretary, said: We will do all we can to protect the UK public against this emerging threat and that is why we are surging testing capacity to the impacted communities and introducing travel restrictions on a further four countries: Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola. We will not hesitate to take further action if required. From 4am on Sunday non-UK and Irish residents who have been in Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola in the previous 10 days will be refused entry into England, officials said. This does not apply to those who have stayed airside and only transited through any of these countries while changing flights. UK and Irish residents arriving from 4am on Sunday must isolate in a government-approved facility for 10 days. During their stay, they will be required to take a PCR test on day 2 and day 8. South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zimbabwe and Namibia were added to the red list on Thursday and passengers arriving in the UK from these countries from 4am on Sunday will be required to book and pay for a government-approved hotel quarantine for 10 days. Asked if the UK public should now expect changes “as we head into Christmas”, the health secretary, Sajid Javid, said: We’ve always been really clear that we will do whatever is necessary to protect the progress that we’ve made as a country. We’ve come a long way, especially since the summer, and we keep all of this under review and if we need to take further action, we will. Boris Johnson is due to take part in a news conference at 5pm with the chief medical officer for England, Prof Chris Whitty, and the UK’s chief scientific adviser, Sir Patrick Vallance, “to set out further measures”. When asked what the public’s response should be, Javid replied: If anyone is sitting at home, thinking what can I do – get vaccinated. Four more countries are being added to the UK’s travel “red list” from 4am on Sunday: Angola, Mozambique, Malawi and Zambia. Sajid Javid, the UK health secretary, said: We have moved rapidly and the individuals are self-isolating while contact tracing is ongoing. We will do all we can to protect the UK public against this emerging threat and that is why we are surging testing capacity to the impacted communities and introducing travel restrictions on a further four countries: Malawi, Mozambique, Zambia and Angola. We will not hesitate to take further action if required. This is a stark reminder that we are not yet out of this pandemic. Getting the vaccine has never been more important – please come forward for your first jab if you haven’t already and if eligible, book your booster as soon as possible. After overnight genome sequencing, the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has confirmed that two cases of Covid-19 with mutations consistent with B.1.1.529 have been identified in the UK. The individuals that have tested positive, and all members of their households, are being retested and told to self-isolate while further testing and contact tracing is under way, officials said. One case has been located in Chelmsford and the other in Nottingham. The two cases are linked, officials said, and there is a link to travel to southern Africa. The UKHSA is carrying out targeted testing at locations where the positive cases were likely to have been infectious. Two cases of the Omicron coronavirus variant have been detected in the UK, the health secretary has said. Sajid Javid said the two individuals are now self-isolating and the cases are connected. He added there would be targeted testing in the areas where the cases were found – in Chelmsford and Nottingham. The first suspected case of the Omicron Covid variant in the Czech Republic is under investigation. The prime minister, Andrej Babiš, said the suspected infection was a woman who stayed in Namibia, and then flew home via South Africa and Dubai. In Germany, a minister in the state of Hesse said the Omicron variant, known officially as B.1.1.529, had probably arrived in a traveller returning from South Africa. The country’s top health officials have raised the prospect of a national lockdown amid rapidly rising cases and hospitalisations. Dozens of people who arrived in the Netherlands on two flights from South Africa on Friday tested positive for Covid. Dutch authorities are scrambling to see if 61 passengers from South Africa who tested positive for Covid-19 have the new B.1.1.529 variant. There have been 77 fully confirmed cases of the Omicron variant in South Africa, four cases in Botswana and one in Hong Kong. Cases have also been reported in Israel and Belgium, although it is possible the variant has spread further. The Omicron variant is unlikely to “reboot” the pandemic in a population that has been widely vaccinated, according to Prof Sir Andrew Pollard, the director of the Oxford Vaccine Group. South Africa has complained it is being “punished” for detecting the Omicron variant, as countries around the world rushed to impose travel bans from southern African countries. Travel bans from certain African countries have been introduced by the UK, US, EU, Australia, Brazil, Turkey, Canada, the United Arab Emirates, Egypt, Sri Lanka, Oman and Thailand, among others. BioNTech, the company that developed the Pfizer jab, has said it could manufacture and distribute an updated version of its vaccine within 100 days if the new Covid variant is found to evade existing immunity. Hi, it’s Léonie Chao-Fong again. South Africa has complained it is being “punished” for detecting the Omicron variant. The foreign ministry made the statement as countries around the world rushed to impose travel bans from southern African countries. “Excellent science should be applauded and not punished,” it said. The bans on flights was said to be “akin to punishing South Africa for its advanced genomic sequencing and the ability to detect new variants quicker”. Members of the UK’s Independent Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) have expressed concern at the emergence of the Omicron variant when Covid cases in the UK are high and people are socialising indoors. Dr Zubaida Haque called on the government to take “early and preventative action now”, saying “high cases and no mitigations means spread of new variant is faster”. Meanwhile, Prof Susan Michie and Dr Kit Yates have thrown their weight behind Prof Stephen Reicher “debunking the idea of behavioural fatigue”. “The evidence is that people respond to clear leadership from trusted sources,” Michie said. Advocating for a policy of elimination, Dr Deepti Gurdasani stressed that “with every shift in the virus we risk dealing with a shift in the pandemic”. “Progressive coordinated and supported global elimination was the only way to really deal with this threat. And with every new variant, it gets harder to do this,” she said. Gurdasani said a lack of mandatory hotel quarantine in the UK means “spread can happen in households and onward” and called for comprehensive mandatory border quarantines from all regions, mask mandates, mitigations in schools and limits on large gatherings. She also urged the booster programme and vaccine drive for children to be accelerated. Authorities in the Czech Republic reported the first suspected case of the Omicron variant has been identified in a passenger who arrived from Africa. The prime minister, Andrej Babiš, said the suspected infection was a woman who stayed in Namibia, and then flew home via South Africa and Dubai. This is Harry Taylor, bringing you Covid news for the next hour. A useful thread from Sir Jeremy Farrar, director of the Wellcome Trust, on what factors to look out for in terms of learning about the Omicron variant. Among the key points to look for are the variant’s epidemiology, its clinical impact and how it fares under existing public health measures. Farrar adds: New variants are inevitable the virus remains highly plastic still evolving and will continue to do so. New variants are not a reason to stop doing what we know works. New variants are a reminder if we needed it that the pandemic is far from over, inequity is what will extend the pandemic. We do need to do inclusive public health better including urgent equitable access to vaccines and all the tools needed stop pandemic. The unequal sharing of Covid vaccines globally is likely to lead to more variants like Omicron emerging, the international affairs thinktank Chatham House is warning. “The emergence of a new Covid-19 variant with all its myriad mutations – on this occasion from South Africa – is not unexpected,” said Dr Osman Dar, the project director of Chatham House’s One Health Project and a specialist in public health and the control of communicable diseases. What it highlights are the continuing and fundamental risks to everyone associated with not seriously addressing the inequalities still at play globally in the fight against disease and poor health. Mutations will continue to surface, as will in all likelihood other infectious viruses with pandemic potential. This latest variant – rapidly detected thanks to South Africa’s relatively advanced genomic sequencing capability and willingness to engage with international partners and collaborating agencies – has for South Africa resulted in a series of travel bans restricting their citizens and impediments to international trade. African states will pay the price of travel bans which are implemented to try to contain the spread of Omicron, while drug companies will benefit from the search for modified vaccines, he added. Movement restrictions, including international travel bans do clearly slow and limit the spread of infectious disease, and as is the case is with the current pandemic, allow countries the time and breathing space to prepare medical countermeasures as well as adapt strategies to control local outbreaks. While for drug and vaccine manufacturers, largely based in the global north, it represents the firing of a start-gun in the next race for market share and profit as they test whether their currently licensed IP-protected vaccines will be effective and whether or not a new, modified vaccine is necessary. So in effect, a low/middle income nation – along with the continent it sits in – is economically penalised, socially ostracised and socio-politically stigmatised for demonstrating global solidarity and doing the right thing through their timely reporting and sharing of the variant’s genetic data. Meanwhile, a small group of hugely wealthy pharmaceutical companies find new opportunities to generate exorbitant profits as fear starts to once again grip politicians and the wider public. What’s necessary, therefore, to limit the negative socioeconomic impacts of these restrictive measures on trade and travel, is to have a sufficiently resourced global regime in place. This should support countries reporting new variants through the significant financial and social hardships that then ensue – a disaster or pandemic fund specifically engineered around the impacts of trade and travel restrictions. Hello! It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over the live blog from Aamna Mohdin. Here’s a bit more on the 61 passengers onboard the two flights from South Africa to Amsterdam who tested positive for Covid-19. Dutch health authorities said the positive cases were being quarantined in a hotel near Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport. “We now know that 61 of the results were positive and 531 negative,” the Dutch health authority (GGD) said in a statement. “The positive test results will be examined as soon as possible to determine whether this concerns the new worrisome variant, which has since been given the name Omicron variant.” Those who tested positive will be required to stay in hotel quarantine for seven days if they show symptoms and for five days if they do not. Those who test negative are expected to isolate at home. The Dutch government had banned all air travel from South Africa early on Friday because of concerns about the Omicron variant. Testing is required before flights. Around 600 passengers arrived at Schiphol on the two KLM flights on Friday and then faced hours of delays and testing. The passengers from the two aircraft, which landed shortly after each other, were kept separate from other people at the airport, De Telegraaf reports. One aircraft came from Cape Town and landed at Schiphol around 10.30 am on Friday. The other flight, from Johannesburg, arrived at around 11am. Some people complained about the lack of information from airport officials and said it took seven hours before they were given anything to eat or drink. Lorraine Blaauw, who runs a support group for South African families in the Netherlands, told DutchNews.nl she had been contacted by several people onboard the two flights. “It was chaos,” she said. “No one knew what was going on. There was no food, no milk for the babies. KLM provided 30 blankets for 600 people. The KLM crew just went home.” The Kennemerland health board, which is responsible for testing at the airport, said it understood the frustration under passengers about the situation. “People who have just had a long journey … were confronted with a situation we have never had to deal with before,” the health board said in a statement. A German state minister has warned that the Omicron variant has “very likely already arrived” in Germany, as mutations typical of the variant were detected in a traveller returning from South Africa. “Last night several Omicron-typical mutations were found in a traveller returning from South Africa,” tweeted Kai Klose, the minister of state for social affairs and integration in the western German state of Hesse. The full sequencing of the variant hasn’t yet been carried out, but he said health authorities had a “high level of suspicion” that the person has contracted the variant. The traveller has been isolated at home. If confirmed, it would be the first case of Omicron in Germany. No further details were given about the passenger or which airport the infected person arrived at. Frankfurt international airport, Germany’s busiest airport, is located in the state of Hesse. “If you have returned from southern Africa in the last week, limit your contacts and get tested,” Klose warned. The UK should cut the gap between the second dose of a Covid-19 vaccination and the booster jab from six to five months, the Labour party said on Saturday, Reuters reports. As the new Omicron variant sparked concern around the world, Alex Norris, Labour’s junior health spokesperson, said: This new variant is a wake-up call. The pandemic is not over. We need to urgently bolster our defences to keep the virus at bay. Yesterday, Labour called on ministers to act quickly to “get a grip” of the issues before Omicron had a chance to take hold. The director of the Oxford Vaccine Group, which developed the AstraZeneca vaccine, expressed cautious optimism that existing vaccines could be effective at preventing serious disease from the Omicron variant and said it is unlikely to result in a reboot of the pandemic. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, Prof Sir Andrew Pollard said: If you look at where most of the mutations are, they are similar to regions of the spike protein that have been seen with other variants so far and that tells you that despite mutations existing in other variants, the vaccines have continued to prevent very severe disease as we’ve moved through Alpha, Beta, Gamma and Delta. At least from a speculative point of view we have some optimism that the vaccine should still work against this variant for severe disease but really we need to wait several weeks to have that confirmed. But it is extremely unlikely that a reboot of a pandemic in a vaccinated population like we saw last year is going to happen Pollard added that it was still too early from the data in South Africa to make any decisive conclusions of the impact the Omicron variant will have. He was also hopeful that a new vaccine, if needed, could be developed rapidly. He said: The processes of how one goes about developing a new vaccine are increasingly well oiled. So if it’s needed that is something that could be moved very rapidly. Morning, I’m Aamna Mohdin and I’ll be helming the blog for the next few hours. If you want to get in touch, you can email me (aamna.mohdin@theguardian.com) or message me on Twitter (@aamnamohdin) Sri Lanka is the latest country to ban travellers from six southern African countries on Saturday over concerns about the new Omicron Covid variant. From Monday, travellers will not be allowed into the country from South Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Lesotho and Eswatini, a statement from the director general of health services said, local publication the Deccan Herald reports. Travellers who arrived from these six countries over the past two days will have to undergo mandatory 14 days quarantine. The number of confirmed Omicron Covid cases in South Africa is still relatively low, with 2,828 new confirmed cases recorded on Friday, but its speed in infecting young people in the country has alarmed health professionals, the Associated Press reports. “We’re seeing a marked change in the demographic profile of patients with Covid-19,” Rudo Mathivha, head of the intensive care unit at Soweto’s Baragwanath hospital, told an online press briefing. “Young people, in their 20s to just over their late 30s, are coming in with moderate to severe disease, some needing intensive care. About 65% are not vaccinated and most of the rest are only half-vaccinated,” said Mathivha. “I’m worried that as the numbers go up, the public health care facilities will become overwhelmed.” She said urgent preparations are needed to enable public hospitals to cope with a potential large influx of patients needing intensive care. Diagnostic tests so far indicate the Omicron variant may be responsible for as many as 90% of the new cases, according to South Africa’s health officials. Early studies show that it has a reproduction rate of 2 — meaning that every person infected by it is likely to spread it to two other people. Many passengers on the two flights that arrived from South Africa to the Netherlands last night did not wear face coverings, New York Times reporter Stephanie Nolen says. Nolen, who was on one plane, said many passengers did not follow the health guidelines despite a mask mandate by Dutch airline KLM, which operated both flights. We now know that dozens of those passengers tested positive for Covid, although authorities have yet to confirm the presence of the Omicron variant. Passengers were stuck on the airport tarmac for about four hours before being sent to be swabbed, tweeted Nolen, who later said she tested negative. “... still probably 30% of ppl are wearing no mask or only over mouth. Dutch authorities not enforcing. We’re just all in this unventilated room at hour 12, breathing on each other,” she added. “After all that time with maskless yellers in an unventilated space – we shall see what the next days bring.” As Europe braces for a possible outbreak of the new Omicron coronavirus variant, here is a quick visual refresh of where the continent stands in its fight against the coronavirus. This updated map indicates incidence rates across Europe. Dutch health authorities said that 61 people who arrived in Amsterdam on two flights from South Africa on Friday tested positive for Covid-19, Reuters reports. Authorities are conducting further testing to see if any of the infections are with the recently discovered Omicron coronavirus variant. Around 600 passengers arrived at Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport on the two KLM flights on Friday and then faced hours of delays and testing due to concerns over the new virus variant. The Dutch health ministry said early on Saturday 61 tests had come back positive. “Travellers with a positive test result will be placed in isolation at a hotel at or near Schiphol,” health authorities said in a statement. “Of the positive test results, we are researching as quickly as possible whether they are the new variant of concern, now named ‘Omicron’.” The Dutch government banned all air travel from southern Africa early on Friday. The health minister, Hugo de Jonge, determined that passengers already en route to the Netherlands would have to undergo testing and quarantine upon arrival. Thailand is now the latest country to ban entry of people travelling from eight African countries it designated as high-risk for the new B 1.1.529 Covid-19 variant, a senior health official said. Starting in December, travel from Botswana, Eswatini, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa and Zimbabwe, will be prohibited, the official told a news conference, as reported by Reuters. Hi everyone, it’s Samantha Lock here, ready to take you through all the new Covid developments this weekend. It’s been a busy past 24 hours on the Covid front with nations racing to close borders and reimpose restrictions after a new Covid variant was detected last week. Today, the World Health Organization named the variant “omicron” and classified it as a highly transmissible virus of concern. Belgium detected Europe’s first confirmed case of the new variant on Friday as the US, the UK, Australia, Canada and multiple European nations imposed travel bans on south African nations. Let’s dive right back in with a quick recap of all the key developments you may have missed from the past few hours. The US and Canada introduced new travel restrictions in response to the Omicron variant. EU members also agreed to restrict travel from seven African countries. The first European case of B.1.1.529 variant has been identified in Belgium. The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has said no cases of the new Covid-19 Omicron variant detected in South Africa have so far been identified in the United States to date. New York governor Kathy Hochul issued a Covid-19 “disaster emergency” declaration on Friday, citing increasing rates of infections and hospitalisations. An order from the governor said the state was experiencing Covid-19 transmission “not seen since April 2020” and that hospital admissions has been increasing over the past month to over 300 a day. The UK reported a further 50,091 Covid cases and 160 deaths. India reported its lowest daily Covid case rise in 541 days, according to Union Health Ministry data updated today. The single-day rise of 8,318 new Covid infections and 465 deaths saw active cases decline to 1,07,019 - the lowest seen since March 2020. South Korea’s Covid deaths hit record high with new curbs expected. The country reported 4,068 new Covid-19 cases and 52 new deatgs. Critically ill patients hit an all-time high of 634, up 17 from the previous day, according to the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency (KDCA). India will resume scheduled international flights from 15 December with a limited service to 14 nations, the Civil Aviation Ministry said. Australia confirmed it will close its borders to anyone who has been in southern Africa, and is not an Australian citizen. Australian citizens, residents and their dependents arriving from these countries will need to go into immediate supervised quarantine for 14 days. Brazil will shut its borders to travellers arriving from six southern African countries, chief of staff to president Jair Bolsonaro said. Germany reports an additional 67,125 Covid cases and 303 deaths, according to data from the Robert Koch Institute. Germany’s top health officials have raised the prospect of a national lockdown amid rapidly rising coronavirus cases and a dramatic increase in the number of patients in intensive care. The Netherlands will be “effectively closed from 5pm to 5am” according to remarks by caretaker prime minister Mark Rutte, announcing new Covid restrictions from Sunday. Dozens of people are likely to have tested positive for the virus within the 600 passengers who landed at Schiphol airport in the Netherlands from South Africa on Friday. The European Centres for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) has classified Omicron, B.1.1.529, a “variant of concern”, warning the risk is “high to very high”. Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, Jordan, and Morocco have introduced varying bans on travellers from South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Lesotho and Eswatini according to AFP. Egypt has suspended direct flights to and from South Africa. Iran said it will ban foreign travellers from six countries, including South Africa. Canada introduced new border measures and ‘rigorous monitoring’, banning foreign travellers from seven African countries. Stocks in the US followed those in Asia and Europe by falling sharply on Friday in the wake of concerns about the new Covid variant.Click here to access the print version. Normal Sudoku rules apply, except the numbers in the cells contained within grey lines add up to the figures in the corner. No number can be repeated within each shape formed by grey lines. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version. Fill the grid using the numbers 1 to 9. Each number must appear just once in every row, column and 3x3 box. Buy next week’s Observer Digital Edition to see the completed puzzle.Click here to access the print version The Chambers Dictionary (2014) is recommended. Special announcement We regret to announce that, until further notice, we are unable to offer prizes for solvers of the Azed weekly crosswords. The special monthly Azed clue writing competitions are not affected and will continue as normal. Entry rules for these will appear as usual.The last of Britain’s three FTSE-listed water companies is due to report its financial results this week, but there’s little doubt any news on the performance of Pennon will be drowned out by a wider crisis in the industry. Pennon, which owns South West Water and Bournemouth Water, is expected to set out an increase in revenues following a boom in holidaymakers to the West Country over the last year that bolstered water volumes. But beyond the regulated returns a set of troubling, but familiar, issues have welled up for the sector. Water companies have faced calls to be renationalised for years because of ongoing concerns over their financial engineering, tax avoidance, hefty investor payouts and a long list of crimes against the environment. In simple terms, they are regional monopolies whose prices are set by regulator, Ofwat, every five years to make sure water is readily available at an affordable price. This allows well-run water companies to achieve reasonable and fairly predictable financial returns, and has helped to make listed water companies a favourite of utility and infrastructure investors. In return, water companies are expected to be responsible custodians of the beaches, reservoirs and waterways they manage. But this fundamental element of the social contract between water companies and the communities in which they work has been repeatedly soiled by the pollution, leaks and spills that have marked their record in the UK. Following each moment of reckoning the industry has promised a watershed moment of accountability that will result in a more sustainable future. But each time, as sure as the tides, water companies plunge back into scandal. A recent report, by Surfers Against Sewage, found earlier this month that water companies spilled raw sewage into the coastal bathing waters used by holidaymakers and families over 5,500 times in the last year, a surge of more than 87% from the year before. Just weeks later water companies were plunged into the centre of a major investigation by the financial and environmental watchdogs after several of them admitted they may have illegally released untreated sewage into rivers and waterways. The investigation by Environment Agency and Ofwat is expected to demand that water companies reveal the scale of any illegal releases of sewage from their treatment plants, and to explain how environmental performance and compliance has been taken into account when deciding on paying out dividends and executive bonuses. The companies included in the investigation have not yet been named. But they are likely to include Southern Water – the supplier for 4.2 million customers in Kent, Sussex, Hampshire and the Isle of Wight – which was fined a record £90m over the summer for deliberately dumping billions of litres of raw sewage into protected seas over several years for its own financial gain. A month later Southern announced what it called “good news for our customers, the local environment and the regional economy” in the form of the return of Australian infrastructure investor Macquarie. It promised Southern a £1bn emergency equity injection and setting plans to invest £2bn over the next four years, or the equivalent of £1,000 per Southern Water household, on upgrades of half the company’s treatment and sewage networks. Macquarie is best known in the water industry as the owner of Thames Water between 2006 and 2016, a period in which it raised Thames’s debt and earned billions from the company through dividends while paying next to no corporation tax. Macquarie also oversaw a series of pollution failings, culminating in a £20m fine for tipping raw sewage into the River Thames which was a record at the time. Why the water regulator allowed an investor like Macquarie another chance to play a major role in England’s critical national infrastructure is unclear, but it is likely to further erode public trust in this vital sector. It is in the regulator’s hands to take action, or watch another chance to reform the industry drain away.An evacuation order has been issued for towns along the Hunter River in New South Wales after emergency services rescued 12 people overnight, and 120 since the wild weather began. Heavy rain has lashed most of NSW for nearly a week, causing flooding and threatening power and water services. State Emergency Services had already rescued 30 people since Friday, among more than 745 requests for help, with SES commissioner Carlene York telling reporters the weather event is expected to continue. “The weather event that we’re experiencing at the moment is quite a significant event across the whole of New South Wales,” she said. “It is expected that the rain will continue it might ease at the beginning of the week but there’s another front coming closely behind that. So, at the moment, the circumstances are that all our dams are full and some are on alert, and are going up to capacity.” York also urged residents to follow the orders issued by emergency services, after some of the rescues overnight came from people driving through flood waters. “Some of those flood rescues over the whole event have been people driving into flood waters. It is dangerous, you can’t assess the depth of the water. “We’ve also had a number of people that have driven out and become isolated between flood waters where we’ve had to go and get those people.” The evacuation order covers about 2,000 people in Whittingham, Scotts Flat, Glenridding, Dunolly and Combo, after the Hunter River rose to 12.71 metres at Singleton causing moderate flooding. The SES said it was pushing people to get to safer areas, with fears that the waters will cut off road access. “Once flood water begins inundating the area road access water, sewerage, power, phones and internet may be lost,” the SES said in the evacuation order. “If you remain in the area you will be trapped and it may be too dangerous for SES to rescue you.” The Bureau of Meteorology forecasts that the Hunter will also rise at Maitland to about 8.40 metres on Monday. Major flood warnings were issued for the Lachlan River at Jemalong and the Namoi at Narrabri and Wee Waa for Saturday evening, with fears the flooding could cut residents off for more than a week. The bureau is also watching Coonamble, where major flooding is possible along the Castlereagh River, which has “risen significantly” on Sunday morning. It is expected to exceed moderate flood levels around midday Sunday, and could reach major flood level by evening. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Major flooding is also likely at Warren on Monday, with the Macquarie River expected exceed moderate flood levels and peak at nearly 9 metres by Tuesday. The Bureau said some of these regions were hit with more than 100mm of rain on Friday. Sydney’s Warragamba Dam began spilling shortly after 9pm on Friday. WaterNSW said the outflow volume could peak at a rate of about 60-80 gigalitres a day, just a fraction of levels in March that peaked at 500 gigalitres a day. “On current projections the spill could continue for up to a week,” WaterNSW saidon Saturday, adding that “downstream impacts are likely”.Maple syrup producers have been forced to raid the world’s only stockpile of the highly valued sweet treat, as surging worldwide demand combined with an unusually short harvest season in 2021. The Federation of Quebec Maple Syrup Producers, sometimes referred to as the “Opec of maple syrup”, has released about 22m kilograms of syrup from its strategic reserve to cover a shortfall driven by a short and warm spring in 2021, NPR reported. At the same time that production fell, pandemic-fuelled demand for the sticky substance jumped 36% from 2020 to 2021, according to federation figures. Quebec provides almost three-quarters of the world’s maple syrup, and production is tightly regulated by the federation, which maintains a vast stockpile to cover fluctuations in yearly production. It is the first time in three years the reserve has been called on. Syrup harvesting is highly dependent on the weather, and can only occur in a short window when temperatures are above freezing during the day but below 0C overnight. Syrup federation spokesperson Hélène Normandin told NPR that the release, which amounts to almost half the total reserve, would ensure that demand was catered for. The federation is already planning for next year’s harvest, and announced earlier on its website that it would tap an extra 7m trees in 2022. “What we can figure at this moment is maybe the season here in Quebec will start a bit earlier in February, instead of March, and end earlier also,” Normandin told NPR. It is not the first time the stockpile has made the news. In 2012, thieves made off with nearly 3000 tonnes of the liquid gold, which at the time was worth around $18m, or 13 times the price of an equivalent amount of crude oil. The theft was discovered by chance, when a man taking inventory on top of the pile grabbed a barrel to steady himself, only to lose his balance and nearly plunge from the stack because the empty barrel was 300kg lighter than he expected.As the final of the Women’s Big Bash League rolled into town in Perth, there were no shortage of narratives at the ready. There was the Adelaide Strikers’ 26-year-old first year captain in Tahlia McGrath up against the Perth Scorchers’ 32-year-old battle-hardened captain in Sophie Devine. The momentum of the Strikers, who had won back-to-back games during the week to qualify for the final, against the well-rested Scorchers who skipped playing semi-finals altogether. The dynamic of South African internationals and married couple Marizanne Kapp and Dane van Niekerk ready to face up against each other. Two teams who had never taken out the WBBL before, both primed and ready to seal their first premiership. After one of the most intriguing seasons of the WBBL so far, the first two finals matches had fallen a little flat. The Strikers cruised through with incredible bowling performances and simple run chases. There were plenty of skills on show – not least Amanda-Jade Wellington’s sensational bowling spell of 5-8 in Thursday’s challenger final. But in terms of memorable finishes neither game ranked up with the nail-biting semi-finals of the 2018-19 season. This only built the anticipation more, as it felt we were owed a big match. The intimidating Scorchers’ opening partnership of Beth Mooney and Sophie Devine looked ready for anything and it seemed the even match-up everyone had been waiting for had arrived. When Mooney (19 off 25) and Devine (33 off 35) departed, the Strikers appeared to have the upper hand – exposing a middle order which has not faced a lot of balls due to the dominance of their openers. But they rallied and put on a strong total of 146-5 thanks to Kapp’s steadying hand and Alana King’s late hitting. And here it was, a game that had the potential to go down to the wire, something to spark conversations in Monday morning’s Zoom meetings. Yet when the Strikers came out to bat it seemed as if neither team had read the script. The Scorchers were as fiery as their name suggests and dismissed the Strikers’ key batter Katie Mack early, before sending her opening partner van Nierkerk back to the dugout soon after. But again the momentum swung, a partnership between Strikers captain Tahlia McGrath and South African international Laura Wolvaardt kept their fingertips in the crumbling foundations of their potential premiership. Eventually the momentum of the match outran the Strikers and it was the Scorchers who prevailed by 12 runs in front of their home crowd. The best efforts of Strikers No 6 Maddie Penna pushed the game into the final over, but with 22 runs required and the economical Taneale Peschel bowling, there was too much to do. It was the exciting finish the season deserved, but the more prosaic matches leading up to it did raise some questions about the finals format. The previous system was thought to not provide enough advantage to the team that finished first after the regular season. With such an even competition, simply playing the fourth-placed team was not seen as enough of a reward for the top-placed team. But this new set-up perhaps swung too far the other way – sending a team straight through to the grand final without playing any other finals matches raised a few eyebrows, particularly considering how closely matched the top four teams were. By adding an extra finals match and adopting the Page playoff system, which is used by the Indian Premier League and the Suncorp Super Netball, there is the potential to create more excitement throughout the entire finals series in the coming years. And then there was the pandemic, which once again cast its shadow across this season, with teams on the road for most of the campaign and the second-placed Melbourne Renegades in the unenviable position of playing their ‘home’ challenger final against the Adelaide Strikers at Adelaide Oval. As the competition continues to grow and gain momentum, home games will become increasingly necessary to allow teams to build their supporter bases. The home crowds in Adelaide and Perth across the three finals games proved the importance of fired-up spectators in creating a high-energy atmosphere at the ground. But while players and teams will no doubt continue to push the WBBL forward on the field, there remains an important step Cricket Australia could take off it, one which would demonstrate their faith in the world’s premier domestic women’s competition. That is to position its two flagship competitions the way it does its national teams, and name the two leagues the Women’s Big Bash League and the Men’s Big Bash League. Although the WBBL was launched four years later, there is now simply no reason the men’s competition should be considered the default. The skill and excitement on show in the 2021 season and the international stars the competition attracts – even in the face of so much adversity – has demonstrated the time has come to make the change.The government will proceed with its roundly criticised model for a federal anti-corruption commission – but has signalled the bill will only come to parliament if Labor backs it. With Australia’s parliament entering what could be the last sitting week before the election, the government is under pressure to deliver the federal integrity commission it has telegraphed, but not delivered, for three years. One of its backbenchers crossed the floor last week to bring on parliamentary debate on a stronger proposal, advanced by the independent Helen Haines. Bridget Archer was the only government MP to back the Haines proposal but a number of other Liberals want the government to toughen up its proposal. Metropolitan Liberals are facing electoral pressure because independents are targeting incumbent moderates in the government’s blue-ribbon heartland. Independents backed by the activist Climate 200 organisation, which has raised $4m in less than four months, are campaigning locally for climate action and a strong national integrity commission. But efforts by the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, to secure internal agreement to beef up the government’s proposal have met fierce resistance in cabinet. Scott Morrison told reporters on Sunday the government would stick with its original model because it was “well-designed and well-considered”. Cash was more equivocal when asked if the proposal might be overhauled to include public hearings during political investigations, which would be a significant strengthening of the model. “At this point in time, the bill is as it stands,” she said. Haines is unlikely to move again this week to try to suspend the standing orders to bring on her own proposal for an integrity commission but she is critical of the Coalition blaming Labor for any delay. She said on Sunday if Morrison “truly believed” in his suboptimal integrity commission he should “bring it forward” and give parliament an opportunity to amend it. After she crossed the floor last week, Archer was hauled into a meeting with Morrison, the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, and the minister for women, Marise Payne. The Tasmanian Liberal backbencher expressed her displeasure at that treatment. “I would have preferred not to have the meeting at that time while I was feeling emotional,” she said last week. But the minister for families and social services, and for women’s safety, Anne Ruston, defended the prime minister on Sunday. “I think it’s an entirely reasonable proposition when somebody expresses an opinion different to government policy and then acts on it, that the prime minister would seek to find out what their concerns were in an effort to try to resolve them,” Ruston told the ABC. The minister said Morrison had met last week with the two Liberal senators refusing to pass government legislation until the prime minister moved against vaccination mandates “as he would have met, I’m sure, with every other Liberal party senator who crossed the floor in the time he has been prime minister”. Morrison last week sought to buffer the government against its obvious lack of action on an integrity commission by criticising the New South Wales anti-corruption commission. After he faced the internal revolt on his own model, the prime minister accused critics of him and the government’s integrity commission of wanting a “kangaroo court” to oversee the federal parliament. Morrison attacked the NSW Icac’s inquiry into the former premier Gladys Berejiklian. Liberals want Berejiklian to run in the seat of Warringah against the incumbent independent, Zali Steggall. Morrison declared anti-corruption commissions “should be looking at criminal conduct, not who your boyfriend is”. On Sunday Morrison tried to shift blame to Labor for the lack of progress. He said the government would like to proceed with its proposal but “there’s no support for our proposal from Labor, or others”. “Our proposal has been consulted on, we’ve had it out there for a long time, we are interested in a fair dinkum commission that looks at criminal conduct, not at who people’s boyfriends are,” the prime minister said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “Labor and others want to have a system, frankly, that is open to all sorts of abuse and game playing and politicking and we’ve seen that from Labor over the course of this term – time and time matters referred off to the Australian federal police, wasting their time”. Cash told reporters the Coalition’s proposed integrity commission was a fair and balanced model: “It will deal with instances of the most serious criminal corruption at a federal level. “That is what this bill is all about. It’s not, as the prime minister said, a political witch-hunt, which the Labor party seem to want it to be. “We have a bill, if Labor indicated they would support the bill, our situation would be very very different, but at this point in time, we have a bill, they don’t, all they have is a statement of opposition. That’s their situation.” It is routine for the government to bring forward legislation to the House of Representatives, whether it is likely to pass or not. But Ruston told the ABC: “The last thing we want to do is bring a bill into this place and then find out it won’t get through.”Australia’s George Kambosos Jr won the IBF, WBA and WBO lightweight titles from Teófimo López in a seismic upset on Saturday night at the Theater at Madison Square Garden. The unheralded Sydney native, who went off as a 6-1 underdog, dropped López in the opening round, then came off the floor himself in the 10th to win a split decision before a rollicking crowd of several thousand spectators almost entirely in the champion’s corner. Two of the ringside judges handed down scores 115-112 and 115-111 for Kambosos while the third scored it 114-113 for López. (The Guardian had it 114-112 to Kambosos.) The gripping encounter was the upset of the year and, quite possibly, the fight of the year. “I believed in myself, I backed myself,” Kambosos said in the immediate aftermath. “I said it time after time: You might not believe it, but I believe in myself. And look at me now. I’ve got all the jewels. I’m not the king, I’m the emperor because I come to every other country and I take them out one by one.” López, the 24-year-old Brooklyn native and one of the sport’s brightest young talents, was back in action for the first time since delivering on his enormous promise more than 13 months ago with a comprehensive unanimous-decision win over Vasiliy Lomachenko, the three-weight champion from Ukraine who for years had been widely regarded as boxing’s pound-for-pound best. That more than four hundred days passed between López’s star turn in the MGM Grand bubble and Saturday night’s thrice-postponed date with Kambosos, the IBF’s mandatory challenger, staged in the Garden’s smaller theater instead of the big room next door, offers an instructive if mind-numbing case study in boxing’s tragicomic institutional dysfunction. But Kambosos (20-0, 10 KOs), an unbeaten 28-year-old who earned his crack at the belts with a career-best win over the Welshman Lee Selby last year, made the most of the delayed opportunity, enduring López’s smothering onslaught in the early rounds, scoring a knockdown against the run of play and rallying from near-defeat to deliver the finishing kick of a champion in his opponent’s hometown. López (16-1, 12 KOs) had said that patience was the big lesson that he learned during his tumultuous year on the shelf, but his pell-mell approach from the opening bell as he swarmed Kambosos with loaded punches behind a menacing glare in search of a first-round knockout was the embodiment of haste and recklessness. The challenger fought deftly off the back foot as he weathered the hail from his heavy-handed foe, looking for opportunities to counter while trying to find his rhythm. Then near the end of the opening frame, Kambosos sent López crashing to the canvas with a flush counter right over the top that the champion never saw coming. López beat the count, but ate another concussive right from the Aussie right before the bell. The fight was on. “When Muhammad Ali fought an unbelievable puncher in Joe Frazier, [he] rang Cus D’Amato and said, ‘What do I do?’” Kambosos said. “And [D’Amato] said, ‘You hit him with the best right hand you’ve ever thrown in your life in the first round and you change the fight.’ And that’s what I did. I had that in my head. That was my mentality: ‘I’m going to hit this guy clean, I’m going to him hard and I’m going to put him down.’ And the fight changed after that.” López spent the early rounds largely repeating the failed formula of the first, rashly flailing into the pocket with looping shots that Kambosos either absorbed well or slipped entirely. Kambosos continued to score with well-timed counters, most notably with blind overhand rights. By the end of the fourth both fighters were throwing together in the center of the ring and it appeared Kambosos was getting the better of the exchanges, just. The champion was already far behind on all three judges’ scorecards with swelling under both eyes by the middle rounds when he realized he needed to impose his size and physicality with greater measure and ring intelligence. Kambosos enjoyed his best round of the fight in the sixth, boxing off the back foot beautifully, countering with brio and opening a cut over López’s left eye that would trouble him through the rest of the fight. By the eighth, Kambosos was beating López to the punch consistently when López, whose once-frenetic work rate had started to wane, bothered to throw at all. But even this reduced version of the champion remained dangerous in those moments he barged into the pocket throwing punches with cruel intentions. He finally seemed to wrest back the momentum of the contest in the ninth, where he landed a three-punch combination with a minute to go that moved Kambosos backward and whipped the hometown crowd into a frenzy. López finished the round unloading on the Aussie along the ropes only for Kambosos to escape danger when the bell sounded. Then came the 10th, when López dumped the bloodied challenger to the floor early in the round. Kambosos beat the count but appeared in serious trouble, scarcely throwing back and bleeding badly from above his left eye as López doggedly moved in to close the show. Perhaps one clean shot from defeat with the referee Harvey Dock prepared to intervene at any moment, Kambosos somehow made it to the bell upright and the fight pressed on into the championship rounds. “I tried to entertain the crowd a little bit too much,” Kambosos said. “Got excited a little bit too much and I got caught. But you know what? What a warrior. I got back up, against all odds, and still finished the fight and won the next two rounds.” Kambosos’s recuperative powers saw him bounce back remarkably in the 11th, peppering López with jabs and straight punches while re-opening the cut over his opponent’s left eye until it poured blood down his chest and on to his trunks. Sensing he needed something special in the final round, López went for broke over the closing three-minute session but Kambosos continued to counter sharply while keeping out of harm’s way. “All respect to Teofimo,” said Kambosos, who connected on 182 of 739 punches (24.6%) compared to 176 of 565 for López (31.2%), according to Compubox’s punch statistics. “He’s a great kid. The buildup was the buildup. We’re both competitive, young guys. But it was my night and it’s going to be my night for a very long time.” So exhaustive was the Aussie’s performance that López was booed lustily by the same fans who had cheered him all night when he interrupted Kambosos’s in-ring interview to claim he won the fight. Afterward, Kambosos said he was open to a rematch. But López, who’s drained himself to make the lightweight limit for years, appears likely to campaign at 140lbs moving forward. That opens the door to a number of lucrative opportunities for the newly minted champion, not least delicious matchups with social-media sensation Ryan Garcia, three-weight titleholder Gervonta Davis or Devin Haney, who holds the WBC’s version of the title at 135lbs. Both fighters went to the hospital afterward to be treated for their injuries, skipping the post-fight press conference. “There’s no rematch clause, there’s no network attachments,” said Lou DiBella, who signed a then-unknown Kambosos to a promotional deal in 2018. “Right now George Kombosos is the king of the lightweight division. He’s going to take a little time off and enjoy the victory and we’re going to make the biggest fight we can make.” DiBella continued: “It’s great to recognize the talent when no one else recognizes it. No one wanted George Kambosos. Peter Khan identified him. We talked about it, this Greek kid who lived in Australia that we thought had all this persona, all this confidence. We saw something. No one wanted him. And look where he is: the undisputed lightweight champion of the world. “And he won tonight, man. Fair and square, he won tonight. In a brilliant performance, one for the ages. And he has something he can be proud of for the rest of his life.”A full tank of gas, a twist of the wrist, the roar of the exhaust as you speed towards the horizon … These are the visceral touchstones of the motorcycling experience, and all are a direct product of petrol-fuelled power, as is much of the biker’s lexicon: “open it up”, “give it some gas”, “go full throttle”. For a motorcycle rider, as opposed to the modern car driver, the journey is a full-body communication game, constantly applying judgment, skill and nerve to control the thousands of explosions that are happening between your thighs in order to transport yourself, upright and in one piece, to your destination. Yet the days of the internal combustion engine are numbered. By 2050 the European Commission aims to have cut transport emissions by 90%, and electric vehicle technology is striding ahead for cars, trucks, buses and even aircraft. But where does this leave the motorcycle? Can this romantic form of transport and its subcultures survive the end of the petrol age? For some riders it is this intimate, sensory relationship with the engine that defines the pleasure of riding a motorcycle. But it’s not just about the suck, squeeze, bang, blow (hey, that’s the four-stroke cycle). The joys of motorcycling are many and varied, extending way beyond the lazy tropes of “petrol heads” and leather-clad biker gangs that have tainted its image since the 1970s. Motorcycling is also, and has always been, about exploration and adventure, autonomy and camaraderie – and, as Peter Fonda vividly described it, freedom and having a good time. The good news is that none of the above relies on the burning of fossil fuels. The bad news is that electric motorcycle design is still in its infancy and the few models that do get close to rivalling the large-engined petrol bikes are prohibitively expensive. As a form of transport that, at least in the western world, has transitioned from being the everyman’s vehicle to an expensive hobby, this is a serious blow to the motorcycle industry and those who view motorbikes as a solution to our congested streets. Zero Motorcycles, a US startup regarded as the two-wheeled Tesla, is the market leader, producing a range of street and off-road models, but its prices are around the £12,000-£20,000 mark. Small electric motorbikes and scooters designed for short, urban journeys and overnight charging at home already exist, but a motorcyclist’s heart is not quickened by the prospect of an efficient commute. It is the lure of the open road, the unfolding of a map and plotting a ride across an entire country, a continent, the world; setting off on a whim and going where the road takes you. For devoted touring and adventure riders, and the European motorcycle industry, there is a genuine fear that the phasing out of the internal combustion engine combined with the reality of limited range and sporadic charging points will sound the death knell for the long-distance ride. According to Chris Scott, author of the Adventure Motorcycling Handbook, all is not lost. It’s simply a case of adapt or die. He sees a comparison with the early motorcycle trailblazers: “Fuel scarcity is an old story but riders have always adapted. It will be the same with infrastructure for electric bikes. Unleaded fuel only supposedly became globally universal this year, once Algeria joined the fold. That took some 40 years; about as long as it will take to see fast chargers or a bank of swappable batteries on the Trans-Sahara highway.” In other words, desire is the mother of invention – and motorcyclists, especially those who use their bikes to travel to faraway places, are a resourceful breed. As soon as motorcycles were invented, adventurous souls began using them to explore the world, undaunted by the lack of fuel availability, or even roads. And as recently as 2003, when I rode my 225cc Yamaha trail bike from Alaska to Argentina, I was dumpster-diving for empty Coke bottles to fill up with petrol for the long, barren leg across Chile’s Atacama desert and the wilds of Patagonia. One thing that long-distance riding teaches you is that there is always a solution. It is no surprise, then, that some forward-thinking riders have already been pushing the limits of electric motorcycle travel. In 2015 Belgian rider Trui Hanoulle, aka #elektrogirl, rode her Zero DS from Belgium to Istanbul and back. At the same time, on the other side of the planet, Polish-American biker Thomas Tomczyk was busy setting the world record for the longest journey on an electric motorcycle: 17,325 miles on a Zero S, from Philadelphia to Cape Froward in Chile, the southernmost point of mainland South America. Both Hanoulle and Tomczyk made the point that adapting to the limitations of an electric bike became a positive feature of the journey. Hanoulle talked of being forced to ride at a moderate pace, describing the 7,000km ride as “a journey that offers, or maybe I should say, obliges one to unwind,” also pointing out, “isn’t that what we all look for on our journeys and holidays?” Tomczyk’s difficulties were also due to dwindling batteries, notably in the desolate Atacama, where he planned his route to ensure minimal headwind in order to conserve power. But his ongoing quest for places to plug in led him to a fascinating array of locations and people. “Over one week, I charged up the bike at a mining company, a roadside police station, a hospital, a rest stop on a national highway, and at Paranal – one of the world’s biggest astronomical observatories.’ He concluded that the inevitable range-related headaches were also the source of his fondest memories. “The highlight of the journey was finding places that would offer to charge the bike, people that could offer a conversation, advice, and introduction to their town, city or home. After a few days of travelling, I realised that the journey was not to be about using energy, but about sharing energy and sharing experiences.” His approach brings to mind the famous quote from veteran motorcycle traveller and author, Ted Simon, whose bestselling book Jupiter’s Travels describes his four-year ride around the world in the 1970s and has become a travel writing classic: “The interruptions are the journey.” Any long-distance motorcyclist will tell you the same. It’s not about the sitting in the saddle for hours at a time, or tearing along a motorway at top speed, or even the triumph of arriving at your destination. The best moments arise from what may seem like a disaster at the time; when you’re lost, or broken down, or have run out of fuel. These are the occasions when you have to live on your wits and inevitably find yourself reaping the kindness of strangers. There are many reasons why people are attracted to riding motorcycles, and for those who find the appeal in the throaty roar of an after-market pipe, or love nothing more than tuning their carburettor, the passing of the internal combustion engine may eventually curtail their beloved pastime. But for those who are drawn to motorcycles for the freedom of the open road and to explore new horizons – and if Simon’s maxim is correct – it would appear that the electric motorcycle could turn out to be the ultimate ride. Memorable Motorcycle Movie Moments The Great Escape (1963) Although the jump over the barbed wire has entered folklore, bike nerds will point out that the chase leading up to it is far more impressive. Steve McQueen’s extreme skill meant that the production’s on-set stunt riders couldn’t keep up with him in the chase scenes. Never has a Triumph TR6 looked so thrilling. Easy Rider (1969) The ultimate biking film that put the Harley chopper on the map and captures the great American promise of two-wheeled freedom. If the sunset ride across the desert to the The Band’s ‘The Weight’ doesn’t make you want to hit the road, you must be a total square, man. First Blood (1982) John Rambo busts out of jail, swipes a Yamaha XT250 dirt bike from an unsuspecting citizen and launches into one of cinema’s greatest motorcycle chases. A helmetless and shirtless Sylvester Stallone proceeds to jump, skid and wheelie at top speed through the forest, pursued by the hapless local plod. On Any Sunday (1971) Possibly the greatest motorcycle film of all time, a dreamy documentary that captures the carefree Californian optimism of the late 1960s. Steve McQueen is our action-hero weekend-racer who every dirt-biker has aspired to emulate ever since. The closing scene of McQueen’s sunset beach-ride, wearing an open-face helmet and jeans and riding a Husqvarna 400 Cross, will never be topped for motorcycle cool. Coogan’s Bluff (1968) Clint Eastwood’s coming-of-age starring role and the genesis of his Dirty Harry genealogy. Playing a tough Arizona sheriff who is suddenly sent to Manhattan to bring in a runaway villain. The film’s climax is a fabulous helmetless chase around a New York park on a pair of gorgeous Triumphs. Eastwood on a 650 eventually catching up with the villain on a disadvantageous 500cc model! Il Profeta (The Prophet) (1968) Women on motorcycles don’t feature heavily in the movies but swingin’ screen icon, Ann Margret changed all that. A motorcycle fanatic in real life, she oozes sultry style in this 1968 Italian comedy where she plays a groovy hippie chick, razzing round in her go-go boots on a Moto Guzzi V7. • This article was amended on 9 December 2021. An earlier version referred to Zero Motorcycles and said its prices are around the £18,000-£20,000 mark. In fact the range starts at around £12,000.We are living through what often feel like end times for genre. If recording studios had windows, rulebooks would be flying out of them constantly, endangering passersby. Crossover smashes such as Lil Nas X’s Old Town Road have been obvious manifestations of this shift. But colouring inside the stylistic lines has been in decline for a while. Few, it seems, want a creative life without hyphens or slashes. Into this free for all come Amyl and the Sniffers, a punk rock band who do one simple thing very well. This is time-honoured stuff – bass judder, scorched earth guitar, pummelling from the kit – but Amyl and the Sniffers take what could be a played-out sound somewhere unexpected, channelling singer Amy Taylor’s rage and joyous abandon. Rippling with sinew and seemingly limitless life force, Taylor is like a boxer crossed with a wood sprite; sometimes it’s a little like listening to Poly Styrene fronting Motörhead. She appears at the start of tonight’s set wearing a baggy beige jacket. Beneath are purple plastic hot pants and a lace-up top worn with boots. The effect is far more WWF wrestler than pin-up. The Sniffers’ drummer, Bryce Wilson, isn’t wearing much either; plus, who cares? “I could be in the sluttiest outfit, but you still gotta respect a bitch,” Taylor announces, to whoops. This sold-out night has been postponed twice by Covid; an extra night was added to meet demand. Next year, the Sniffers will be playing much bigger venues. Throughout Taylor’s hour or so on the stage, she struts, flexes her biceps, does press-ups, stands on monitors, shadow-boxes, climbs the lighting rig and sits on a speaker. She shakes her bleached blond mullet whenever guitarist Dec Mehrtens solos succinctly. The band’s one curveball is a cover of the disco-era track Born to Be Alive by Patrick Hernandez. But that is less a celebration of dance music than it is a reflection of Amyl and the Sniffers’ own pulsating joie de vivre. In 2019, when Australia could no longer contain them, the Sniffers made an international impact with their self-titled first album. Those curt songs were easily boiled down to sticky essences: resentment, partying, lust, frustration. The appeal then was that Taylor managed to put an original spin on so many themes. While songs such as GFY (“Go fuck yourself”) remain self-explanatory tonight, tunes such as Gacked on Anger describe a life of unrelenting financial stress and dry-eyeball rage. There the Sniffers might have remained, but for a couple of factors. Taylor did a blistering guest spot on a Sleaford Mods track Nudge It last year, alerting other demographics to her snarling brio. And the Sniffers’ second album, Comfort to Me, released in September, upped the ante considerably with more precision-tooled music – and a wider window into Taylor’s brain. Many of the new songs remain pithy. But while sticking to the band’s thuggish primalness, they also do unexpected things. Hertz is, of all things, a taut, nagging punk earworm about wanting to escape to the country. And metaphysics. “I tell you, time is not linear, especially when we’re here in this car,” she yells. On the face of it, a song such as Security finds Taylor charming a hard-hearted pub bouncer. “I’m not looking for trouble, I’m looking for love!” Within, though, is a brooding sense that Taylor is somehow different from the “normies” the bouncer has just let in. Freaks to the Front finds Taylor seething that she’s “short”, “shy” and “fucked up”, but people would do well to get out of her way. Each track seems to drill down further into her internal world, swinging between tough-girl affirmations and nuanced vulnerability. Knifey is a very female howl of resentment at the danger inherent in getting home; in the song, Taylor carries a weapon but won’t use it. Snakes takes us into her childhood, where there were “snakes in the dunny, snakes in the chook pen” (chicken run); “I was feral,” she avows, “I still am.” The extraordinary Guided by Angels kicks off the album and the gig with Taylor’s personal anthem. “Energy! It’s my currency!” she howls repeatedly. She reckons angels are “on my body”. Normally you’d raise an eyebrow at anyone’s close relationship with winged beings. Here, though, the otherwise down-to-earth Taylor is convincing: it seems not just possible, but logical that something irrepressible and inexplicable possesses her.In 1934, the newly installed housing director of Leeds city council, RAH Livett, toured Europe inspecting the latest modernist housing blocks. Quarry Hill flats in Leeds city centre was subsequently modelled on Karl Marx Hof in Vienna. When the housing scheme opened in 1938, it offered 3,000 residents modern kitchens with integrated waste disposal, as well as communal nursery and launderette facilities in what was then the largest social housing complex in Britain. Within half a century, however, Livett’s utopian project had fallen into decay and disrepair and was abandoned and subsequently mostly demolished. The photographer Peter Mitchell caught only the last act of the project’s life. Having settled in Leeds after college in London, he documented the terminal phase of Quarry Hill in his 1990 book, Memento Mori. George Orwell’s biographer Bernard Crick supplied an introduction to that book, which also included documentary material about the initial community dreams for the flats and the way things turned out. Mitchell’s work was, Crick suggested, “no easy polemic against utopianism or modernism in architecture and planning, even though Quarry Hill failed”. Recently, Mitchell – recognised as a key figure in the evolution of British colour photography – has been going through his archive of Quarry Hill photographs and has produced a new book, Epilogue, which includes previously unseen images. Here, the white horse grazing on the wasteland beside two of the derelict concrete blocks nods ironically toward arcadian ruined cottages, that staple image of the English pastoral, nature reclaiming human ambitions. The Quarry Hill area has been redeveloped as an arts and entertainment centre and is now home to the Leeds Playhouse and the BBC Yorkshire building. “Times change,” Mitchell notes of his long association with that place, “and I know there was no point in keeping Quarry Hill flats. But what it stood for might have been worth keeping.” • Epilogue: The Demise of the Quarry Hill Flats by Peter Mitchell is published by RRB Photobooks (£45)What sprang out at me from Andrew Rawnsley’s accounts of all the various factions of the Tory party crying out their frustrations was that Boris Johnson is not what they thought he was (“Boris Johnson has united every Tory faction – in anger at him”, Comment). The centre doesn’t think he’s liberal enough, the ERG and its Thatcherite fellow travellers don’t think he’s sufficiently devoted to the memory of the Iron Lady and the red wall MPs suspect that he’s not serious about levelling up. What astonishes me is that this realisation that Johnson is a political chameleon is only now beginning to dawn on them. To anyone with even vague acquaintance of his pre-prime ministerial career, it was fairly obvious that he was a man of no real firm political beliefs or ideology, other than a burning desire to become “king of the world”. It was also pretty clear that he would say and do anything he felt necessary to anyone in order to achieve that goal. Lord Heseltine said that Johnson was the sort of man who waits to see which way the crowd is running and then jumps in front of them and shouts: “Follow me!” If he could see it, why couldn’t the rest of them? Gareth Pratt Machen, Caerphilly Andrew Rawnsley quotes a veteran Thatcherite as saying: “There’s a lot of us worrying: is this a Conservative government?” It’s time to get our terminology sorted. There hasn’t been a Conservative government since 1979. The founding ideology of Edmund Burke that the then Tory party should keep the best of what there was while moving cautiously forward was the governing style, right up to its apogee under Churchill, Eden and Macmillan, but was dumped by Margaret Thatcher, who told an aide that she didn’t like the terms conservative or consensus and decried the one-party grandees as “false squires”. The Thatcherite style has always been to fracture, divide and rule, and the result after four decades has been the worst inequality since the Edwardian era and a divided, fractious people. “Pork barrel” Boris is merely the logical endgame to all this. Blue anarchists, as Rawnsley himself described them. David Redshaw Gravesend, Kent Set the vaccinated free Your experts discussing whether we should have vaccine passports don’t mention their apparent acceptance in, for example, France and Italy, nor the feelings of those of us who are fully vaccinated and wish to involve ourselves in activities again (“Should vaccine passports be used within UK? Scientists urge caution”, News). I would prefer to use public transport, go to the cinema, visit a museum or art gallery, browse an independent bookshop, knowing that the unmasked person next to me is also vaccinated or is now clear of infection. If unvaccinated people wish to sit at home that is their choice, but please don’t expect me to do the same. Janice Gupta Gwilliam Norton, Malton, North Yorkshire Linking the north No one in the north expects us to be able to ever again compete economically with London (“Punishing London will be a train wreck for regions, too”, Business). We don’t want to kill off London, but neither do we want a trickle-up economy from the capital. We want the opportunity for the businesses to be able to have the connectivity across the north to allow us to collaborate and increase output. With the funding coming from Westminster this is choked, as we saw last week. The north also isn’t asking for London businesses to relocate to the north to save on rates or overheads. That model is unsustainable and smacks of the belief that we are all part of a great commuter belt. Businesses born in the north are working internationally and its cities aren’t just “striving to achieve” culturally; there is a vibrant scene outside London. The UK is one of the worst cases of a country that focuses all of its resources, political and financial, on one bloated city. Jonathan Ashworth, small business owner Dunham Massey, Greater Manchester Eradicating racism in cricket Regarding racism in cricket, the good manners required to behave appropriately need nurturing at home and in school (“If tackling racism is just a box-ticking exercise, we lose the moral imperative to change our ways”, Comment). Bullying, the basis for the cruel and harmful behaviour of racism, sexism and the rest, has to be dealt with among the youngest to stop the hateful behaviour between adults in all team games. The number of state schools offering cricket is in decline, allowing the cricket community to develop without such scrutiny. “Banter”, unchecked and unchallenged, soon moves from bad manners to insulting and harmful assaults on religious beliefs and cultural norms. Start developing with young girls and boys the consideration needed in the game, then we may once again be proud of our cricketers, rather than ashamed. Lyn Overall Sheffield A team effort Torsten Bell’s article on “hold-up power” demonstrates the risks involved in demarcation in the workplace and placing too much reliance on individuals, such as excellent managers and highly skilled chefs (“Having the power to put a spanner in the works pays very well”, Comment). In the 90s, many employers in the motor industry broke down demarcation, instigated team working and flattened hierarchies. This meant that workers became multiskilled and that the learning resided in the team rather than the individual. Better training and consultation were intended to provide greater job satisfaction and retention. Perhaps wise employers should look at workplace culture and employee development so that they are not dependent on recruitment specialists. Yvonne Williams Ryde, Isle of Wight I’ll miss apostrophes I was worried to read David Mitchell say that my surname is to be abolished and rather than known as “O’Sullivan” I will henceforth be “Osullivan” or just “Sullivan” after the abolition of the apostrophe (“A chilling catastrophe punctuated my week”, New Review) . It was bad enough when my records at the dentist or library were misfiled under “S”. With the arrival of websites, names with apostrophes were not recognised and had to be written with no apostrophe and a lower-case second letter. Where will this all end? Joseph O’Sullivan East Wittering, West Sussex The kids are kk The Q&amp;A with Sarah Ogilvie (New Review) was one of the best pieces I’ve read in ages. Both of my sons are Gen Zers. I recognised some phenomena but learned an enormous amount as well, especially the ways of expressing “OK”, which was truly enlightening. The article should be required reading for their parents’ generation. Alison Carter Lindfield, West SussexPotential guides to Marco Polo, the 13th-century explorer, must be thin on the ground. Are there, in fact, any out there who’ve never been described as “handsy”? And, for preference, never broken their partner’s nose? An attractive on-screen personality being, like the ability to comply with Covid regulations and to not insult the public, an advantage, but by no means essential. Asking only because a week after three women identified him as a specialist in unwanted touching, the – to give him his full title – father of the prime minister, was announced as the presenter for a forthcoming documentary series about Marco Polo’s route through China. By way of qualifications: Stanley Johnson once, it’s understood, went quite near there as a student. Johnson will, admittedly, have some back-up: another Johnson from that inexhaustible supply. Max Johnson, 36, turns out to be a son, a Hong Kong businessman and the half-brother of the prime minister. The value of this novice presenter (Johnson senior having appeared on I’m a Celebrity… Get Me Out of Here! and countless TV sofas) seems to reside, supposing his genes don’t speak for themselves, in his business know-how. Max reportedly hopes, though presumably not actually on screen, “to promote tech and investment from China”. He further aspires, according to a Tatler interview last year, to be an actor and seeks a publisher for his 80,000-word memoir. It may hearten any Uyghurs who get to hear of a project likely to take the Johnsons through lands where their people are being killed and persecuted that the presenting choice of two China advocates has been noted. Johnson’s promotion of China despite its human rights abuses has previously aroused suspicion, while mini-Stanley appears, if anything, more ardent on Sino-UK bonding, with Tatler recording that he’s “disappointed in the west’s pivot away from China”. The Johnsons’ producer, Dale Templar, told the Times: “This is not a political piece. I want to show China as a fantastic country.” It remains a mystery, however, why Ms Templar should wish also to show Johnson as a fantastic person. Well before the MP Caroline Nokes described how he smacked her “hard” on the bottom, the New Statesman journalist Ailbhe Rea said she’d also experienced unwanted touching, while his supporter Isabel Oakeshott confirmed, perhaps carelessly, Johnson’s reputation as “handsy”, he was known to have put his first wife, the late artist Charlotte Wahl, in hospital. That her nose was broken by Johnson was not denied, when the incident was revealed in Tom Bower’s 2020 biography of the prime minister. Rather, friends explained, it was a regrettable “one-off” that occurred when his physically weaker victim “flailed” at him. Johnson was subsequently spared, as a one-off nose-breaker, anything approaching the condemnation that has recently been heaped upon, for instance, celebrities who composed offensive tweets as teenagers, on authors who used disappointing language or who have aired, as with Margaret Atwood and JK Rowling, contested opinions. Publication of Johnson’s books continued undisturbed, unlike Woody Allen’s latest, by staff walk-outs. Television producers have been unflinchingly loyal. Post-Bower, he was invited, for instance, to expatiate on subjects from the climate crisis (BBC’s Newsnight) to TB in alpacas (BBC’s Today programme) and to perform on Countdown (Channel 4). Regarding domestic violence and its long-term impact on children who witness it, we await, alas, his expert input. “Stanley’s violence has forever haunted Boris,” is among the conclusions in Bower’s book. Shortly after it was published, the Conservative Environmental Network announced the arrival of Johnson as its “international ambassador”, which he remains. Plausible groping accusations seem likely, along with Johnson’s disrespect for their authors, likewise to be classed as environmentally sustainable. Perhaps because initial newspaper serialisation did not reflect the extent of the violence detailed in Bower’s book, the nose-breaking, explained away, was insufficient to pause Johnson’s career. But his ex-wife had described mistreatment that began early in their marriage. “He resented that I cared about my friends,” she said, echoing many fellow survivors’ accounts, “and that’s when he first hit me”. Later, she said, doctors and her parents were made aware and spoke to Johnson about his abuse, which was known to their children. “He had hit me. He hit me many times, over many years.” She told Bower she wanted “the truth told”. Well, now it is on record and Johnson the broadcaster, with the new accounts of inappropriate touching to add to Wahl’s extended character reference, remains sublimely uncancelled, even despite growing evidence that hiring a Johnson or 10 offers programme makers no significant protection against Nadine Dorries. Last week, the Office for National Statistics marked the UN’s Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women with figures showing record levels of domestic violence: calls to the UK domestic abuse helpline rose during the pandemic by more than a fifth. The latest promotion of Johnson could hardly have been better timed to shed light on the normalisation of domestic violence. How serious can it be, after all, if a man so credibly accused can still be introduced, with neither talent nor repentance to account for the dispensation, as a broadcasting asset? On the contrary, with his history of flouting pandemic regulations, his efforts for China, his frequent-flyer environmentalism and jibes about the public’s intelligence, to say nothing of the interminable “my son the prime minister” partisanship, Johnson might be considered, even without his mistreatment of women, among the more disposable talents to have afflicted broadcasting. Though it would be unfair to blame this shameless exhibitionist, alone, for his contribution to trivialising domestic violence. For Nadine Dorries he remains “a gentleman”, more trustworthy than the woman MP whose bottom he hit. Johnson could not have outlasted Johnny Depp without the help of patrons, media and otherwise, who are aware of the brutality his ex-wife finally made known and happy to advertise their indifference. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnistAn interview with Rebecca Frecknall said she was “the first woman to direct a major production of Cabaret”. In fact, Gillian Lynne directed and choreographed the 1986 London revival (“Willkommen, bienvenue ... new life at the Kit Kat Club”, 21 November, New Review, page 20). And we misspelled “Willkommen” in that headline with a single “l”. Eagle-eyed readers noticed that Lord and Lady Mountbatten had their jackets buttoned the opposite way to normal in a photograph taken in 1958. The image had been flipped by the agency (“Anger over ‘grotesque abuse’ of £600,000 case to keep Mountbatten papers secret”, 7 November, page 31). Write to the Readers’ Editor, the Observer, York Way, London N1 9GU, email observer.readers@observer.co.uk, tel 020 3353 4736Château Capbern, St-Estèphe, Bordeaux, France 2017 (£21.68, justerinis.com) There was a time, not all that long ago, when the red Bordeaux blend was the wine style that winemakers all over the world aspired to copy and match. These days … well, let’s just say that most winemakers and sommeliers under the age of 40 are much more in love with and inspired by the earthier, small-scale vignerons of Burgundy and a flurry of more obscure flavour of the month places. “Basically Bordeaux is daddy wine”, a merchant acquaintance of mine told me recently, meaning it’s simultaneously passé and overpriced while still somehow monopolising outdated mainstream wine media just as vintage 1960s and 1970s “dad rock” rules the remnants of the printed music press. The thing is though, for all the off-puttingly snobbish luxury and conspicuous consumption associated with the region’s top châteaux, there are hundreds of delightful wines made in Bordeaux each year: the fragrant, classically cassis-scented, satisfyingly fine-grained Capbern, for example, is an enormously pleasurable partner for a Sunday roast. Vasse Felix Cabernet Sauvignon, Margaret River, Western Australia, Australia 2018 (from £26, thewinesociety.com; farehamwinecellar.co.uk; harveynichols.com; laithwaites.co.uk) Bordeaux may have been eclipsed by more fashionable upstart wine regions like a traditional Michelin white tablecloth restaurant being put in the shade by a the latest small plate pop-up. But the real vinous hipster-kryptonite is the wines made by the most famous regions to borrow Bordeaux’s recipe of grape varieties and winemaking methods. I can think of few more derided wine styles in fashion-conscious wine circles than Napa cabernet sauvignon, which is stereotyped, not always unfairly, as a kind of brash, insanely expensive, supersized version of Bordeaux claret: the Salt Bae of wine. Cabernet sauvignons from Australia get dismissed in much the same way: it’s assumed they’re all alcohol and rich but one-dimensional fruit, lacking subtlety and freshness. You can of course find examples of clumsy, overworked Bordeaux-esque wines in both Napa and Australia, but these days there are just as many beautiful, balanced bottles such as Vasse Felix’s perfectly modulated, luxuriously silky combination of ripe blackcurrant, polished tannin and cedary freshness. Casa del Colores Cabernet Sauvignon, Central Valley, Chile 2020 (£6, Marks &amp; Spencer) Much of the anti-Bordeaux backlash of recent years is part of a generalized resistance to the homogenising effects of globalisation. There was a point where the Bordeaux grape varieties were being planted everywhere wine was made, edging out harder-to-market local varieties in a kind of vinous gentrification. I won’t deny that many if not most of the tens of thousands of hectares of vineyard planted to cabernet sauvignon, merlot, and to a significantly lesser extent, cabernet franc and petit verdot in the period just before and after the millennium yielded some of the world’s least inspiring wines. Equally, places such as Margaret River and Coonawarra in Australia, Washington State (as well as California) in the USA and Bolgheri in Tuscany have adapted and shaped the Bordeaux style to produce something all their own. Chile, too, has given cabernet sauvignon its own distinct character, both in seriously fine, top-end, multifaceted collector’s items such as Seña or Almaviva and in reliable, generously fruited bargains such as Casa del Colores. Follow David Williams on Twitter @DaveydaibachSchnitzel Forever, 119 Stoke Newington Church Street, London N16 0UD (020 7419 0022). Starters £7-£10, mains £9.50-£25, desserts £4.50-£6.50, wines from £24 Schnitzel Forever, a small restaurant in London’s Stoke Newington, is the cornerstone of a blossoming high street chain with many outposts across the country. It just doesn’t quite know it yet. This is not damning with faint praise. We are, of course, required to venerate the independent over the mass-produced and cookie-cutter, and we do. Even the very word “chain” makes people twitch. I realised recently that I substitute the word “group” to describe a restaurant brand with multiple outposts that I admire, so as not to smear it with the rancid stench of chain corporatism. But, in truth, the eight-strong Dishoom, which I like very much, is just a chain by any other name. And is not the ever-delightful steakmongers Hawksmoor, now with 12 outlets, also a chain? Over the years, brands like Piccolino (18 branches), Côte (more than 80) and Nando’s (3,207,565) have served me well. Many chains are, of course, where hope and ingredients go to die. Oh Frankie &amp; Benny’s, how do I loathe thee? Let me count the ways. And while I’m doing so, please give your overlong wipe-down menus a wipe. But some can be a reassuring presence on a blighted, blasted high street. The point is that I could well imagine those good ones being joined by a rolled-out version of Schnitzel Forever, the name of which tells you most of what you need to know. Right now, it is a small standalone restaurant serving flattened things, which have been bread-crumbed and fried. Crusty, golden, fried foods are, as we all know, the good foods. Schnitzel Forever is a total crowd-pleaser, only without the crowds. I should declare a mild interest here or perhaps, more accurately, a ludicrous, overblown obsession. In 2007, I published an endlessly brilliant novel called The Oyster House Siege, about a hostage situation in a restaurant kitchen on the night of the 1983 general election. Schnitzel provides a key plot point. In that case it’s a wiener holstein, a wiener schnitzel with the addition of a fried egg, anchovies and veal jus. The yolk and sauce lubricate the crisp fried veal; the anchovies add extra poke. I would hesitate to call it the very zenith of Mitteleuropean culinary achievement, but not for very long. In my novel the hostage-taker, knowing he has to make demands of the police negotiators, panics and reads off an ingredient list from a sheet taped to the wall. A policeman, who is also a keen cook, spots he’s left off the anchovies, adds them to the order and so a dialogue develops. I have no idea why this book has not yet been turned into a major motion picture, perhaps starring Christopher Walken as the schnitzel. The movie rights remain available. Pretty much the only iteration of the dish missing from the menu at Schnitzel Forever is, as it happens, wiener holstein. I’ll let it pass as it’s my obsession, not theirs (Fischer’s in London’s Marylebone does a very good one.) What matters is that they have nailed the essential business of taking various ingredients – chicken, pork, veal and so on – beating them flat, breading and then frying them. They are bronzed and crisp and at £10 to £13 for the basic, which completely covers the plate, very well priced. There is also a halloumi schnitzel, a portobello mushroom schnitzel and something involving seabass. All dietaries are catered for. In the “specials” section, priced in the higher teens, the plate-coverer becomes a raft for additional ingredients. The classic wiener schnitzel, made as it should be with veal, comes heaped with a seriously vinegared potato salad, alongside a jug of rich, sticky demi-glace. The “cordon bleu” has emmental, ham and mash. With the “el granjero”, it’s crushed avocado, jalapeño pickles, lime and more demi-glace. Or you can adorn your own by the application of punchy sauces and relishes. I especially liked the bloody mary ketchup and the apple and cider brandy chutney. The availability of a curry sauce enables them to include a menu item called a katsu schnitzel, which will drive some of my friends to thoughts of violence. In this instance I am merely the reporter. Naturally enough, breaded fried things enjoy being shoved inside a brioche bun and being called a burger. For £12.50, you can have a tower schnitzel burger with a triple decker of veal, pork and chicken. The point here is that a single, compelling idea has been saddled up and ridden about as far into the sunset as it can possibly go. There is a very good, zippy white cabbage coleslaw for £5, although I would love to stop the kitchen adding soured cream to the cucumber salad. It makes what should be a crisp bright foil to the fried goods, weirdly cloying. Hilariously, the commitment to breading and frying things extends into the starters, where both squid and tiger prawns receive the same treatment. In keeping with their readiness for high street ubiquity, the disappointing desserts are generally over-sugary spongey items – a double chocolate brownie, a sticky toffee pudding – most of which are bought in from elsewhere. Apparently, they do make their own apple strudel but it’s off the night we are there. Like birthday cakes and ambitions, a full schnitzel should never be small and being so, few that we see ordered this evening are finished. No matter. They started out by doing delivery during the various lockdowns and, hence, they have pizza-style boxes with which to package up leftovers. It’s clear the delivery business remains strong; throughout the evening there is a steady stream of riders turning up to take schnitzel joy to the sofas of north London. At which point I should acknowledge that this is not unique. The fine people of Middlesbrough have long had their take-away parmo traditions: essentially a schnitzel of chicken or pork, topped with a cheese-boosted béchamel. All hail the mighty parmo. I like Schnitzel Forever. It’s a good idea, well priced and well executed. That extends to the restaurant design. We tend only to notice such things when big bucks have been spent. Here, a modest space has been cleverly worked over, with elegant black and white tiling, cream banquettes and the smart use of cloudy Perspex panelling behind which lurk tropical fronds of easily maintained pure plastic to make the room look bigger. Like the menu, it all works. If you soon see a queue building at the door, assume they’re hospitality industry investors. Or people who just really love schnitzel. News bites I’ve long been a huge fan of Riley’s Fish Shack, on the beach at Tynemouth to the east of Newcastle, but have always feared for them each time the winter storms roll in. Now they have Riley’s Fish Shop, a bricks and mortar restaurant (and retail operation). The ever-changing blackboard menu includes whole sea bass and turbot, and various fillets alongside lobster platters and Lindisfarne oysters as well as game dishes. At rileysfishshop.com. The results of the annual survey of the London restaurant scene by crowd-sourced restaurant guide Harden’s are in. Alongside unsurprising news of large numbers of closures as a result of the pandemic, come eye-widening accounts of price inflation at the capital’s top end. In the 2020 guide there was just one place, sushi restaurant The Araki, averaging a spend of £200 a head. Now there are seven of them. The number of restaurants averaging £150 a head has leapt from nine to 24. Visit hardens.com And another snapshot of the challenges being faced by the hospitality industry: the end of both the furlough scheme and the moratorium on winding-up petitions which had stopped creditors taking action to get back money they are owed, combined with the need to repay government loans, are all now having a serious impact. UK restaurant insolvencies rose 31% in the last quarter, from 226 to 296. Email Jay at jay.rayner@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @jayrayner1A severe shortage of midwives has led to home birth services being closed or reduced by a number of hospital trusts across the UK, with pregnant women frequently left in limbo as to where they will be able to give birth. The Observer has found more than 20 trusts that have had disrupted home birth services in the past three months. Eight confirmed their services remain suspended due to staff shortages. They include East Kent Hospitals, Swansea Bay University Health Board and NHS Dumfries and Galloway – all of which report that the situation is under constant review. Home birth services at some trusts, such as Walsall Healthcare NHS Trust and University Hospitals of Derby and Burton, have been closed since August. Others have reopened after short suspensions or have written to expectant parents to say they cannot guarantee sending a midwife when there is high demand or staff shortages. The findings come a week after midwives across Britain staged protests to call on the government to address the “crisis” in maternity care, with staff suffering from chronic burnout and stress. Midwives are being driven out of the NHS by understaffing and fears they cannot deliver safe care, according to a recent survey published by the Royal College of Midwives (RCM). Maria Booker, programmes director at the charity Birthrights, said: “Staffing pressures in maternity services are very real right now. But for many women the option to give birth at home is not a luxury but the only option that feels safe to them. “Some know they will labour better at home while some do not want to visit hospital during a pandemic. Others have a had a previous traumatic hospital birth. We cannot just accept that home birth and other choices go out the window every time a maternity service is squeezed.” Rosie Gothard’s baby is due on 5 December. Because her local birth centre has been closed since January, she opted for a home birth. She said: “I had my heart set on it but then, in July, I was told Maidstone and Tunbridge Wells had suspended the service. They kept saying it would return soon but this has not happened. I feel lost and can’t plan for my birth.” She is now considering another birth centre an hour away from her home. “It feels like my reasonable choices have been taken away and I’m not comfortable with the remaining options. An hour is too far to travel when you are in pain but I want to avoid the potential consequences of a hospital birth which include an increased risk of medical interventions and the possibility of catching Covid-19.” Katherine Revell from the patient advocacy group Aims said: “We’ve had lots of people copying us in on letters to trusts that have suspended home birth services. Some are finding out very late in their pregnancies, which is really distressing. One woman found out at 40 weeks and in the end she had an unassisted birth at home.” She said Aims has seen an increase in women turning to freebirth – a birth without medical assistance – after trusts had told them they could not guarantee sending a midwife on the day of their birth. Revell said: “That can be an empowering decision but if you don’t plan for it, and you are expecting someone to turn up, that can be a traumatising event. “The midwives are trying their hardest but they are incredibly short-staffed and some people on the day have rung up in labour and been told there is nobody free to attend.” Katya Selzer, from Olney in Buckinghamshire, was planning a home birth under Milton Keynes University Hospital: “The care during my pregnancy from the home birth team was wonderful. But in the run-up to the birth I became concerned about home birth suspensions in other regions.” She wrote to the trust expressing her concerns. “I was told it would be a very rare scenario that nobody would turn up on the day.” But when she went into labour ahead of her son’s birth on 17 October, there were no midwives free. “We decided to stay at home for as long as possible because the labour was going really well and we hoped they would find somebody to send,” she recalled. But when this didn’t happen, Selzer and her husband, Henry, felt their only option was to call an ambulance. “Despite being told to come in when I got there, I had to wait in a wheelchair in the corridor for an hour,” she said. By this point her labour had slowed down and she was told she would need to be induced. “This was everything I had wanted to avoid. I had an epidural and, after trying to push the baby out, was taken to theatre where I had a forceps delivery.” While in hospital, Selzer was acutely aware of the pressures facing staff and alarmed at the lack of resources. “At one point, there were only two midwives on duty for the whole postnatal ward. They were apologising and it was heartbreaking what I saw. I felt sorry for midwives who have to go to work under those conditions.” A spokesperson for Milton Keynes University Hospital said: “Due to the unpredictable nature of demand for maternity services, the hospital’s labour ward can quickly become very busy, with more women than expected arriving in labour. “When this happens, the home birthing service is temporarily stopped. This concentrates midwifery staff on the labour ward. We explain this to every woman who books a home birth, so they are aware their plans may need to change to ensure they, and other women in labour, receive safe care.” Birte Harlev-Lam, executive director at the RCM, said: “Despite the best efforts of maternity and other health staff, occasionally home birth services need to be suspended, often only for a few hours, but with an inevitable impact on women in labour. Suspending home birth services is only done as a last resort to ensure safe care for women. “In recent weeks, pressure on ambulance services which support home births in case of emergency, has been intense. Similarly, we have highlighted the fragility of maternity services, where chronic understaffing is being exacerbated by burnout and illness. Despite the challenges, most trusts and boards have kept their home birth services running, which is a testament to their commitment to ensure continuing choice for women.” The Department of Health and Social Care was contacted for comment.Sometimes, a tragic image or story appears set to shift the course of history for the better. The haunting photograph of three-year-old Alan Kurdi, washed up on a beach in Turkey, shocked Europe in September 2015. He was a toddler from Syria who perished alongside his mother and brother while trying to make the dangerous Mediterranean crossing. For a few weeks at least, it seemed as though public horror at how he died might propel the EU to take a more humanitarian approach on asylum. But in recent years, it has become more, not less, hardline, striking unsavoury deals with authoritarian regimes such as Turkey and failed states such as Libya to keep refugees out, regardless of the human rights abuses that are taking place in their detention centres. The tragedy has spread to our own shores, as growing numbers of desperate people try to cross the English Channel, the busiest shipping route in the world, in little more than inflatable dinghies. Twenty-seven people drowned last Thursday, including a pregnant woman and three children. Their stories, like that of Maryam Nuri Mohamed Amin, a 24-year-old Kurdish woman fleeing Iraq to join her fiance in the UK, are just starting to emerge. But there is little hope that they will engender a change in the political response. What is happening in the Channel is a humanitarian crisis, as people mostly from Iran, Iraq, Syria and Afghanistan – the vast majority of whom will qualify for refuge – try to reach the UK. What it is not, however, is any sort of crisis for the UK asylum system, with the number of people seeking asylum in the UK significantly lower than at the peak in the early 2000s and far lower than in Germany or France. Neither is it at all a new phenomenon: people have always fled conflict and torture worldwide, sometimes driven by desperation to take appalling levels of risk, as Tim Adams reports from France today. What is new is the increasing willingness of political leaders around the world, particularly in the UK, but also in countries such as Australia, to ignore their obligations under the 1951 Refugee Convention. What is first and foremost driving the British response is not reducing loss of life in the Channel, but reducing the numbers of people claiming asylum after arriving in the UK. The best way to reduce the number of deaths as people fleeing conflict try to cross the Channel – or, indeed, the Mediterranean – is to open up safe passage to Europe, thus reducing demand for the people smuggling operations of criminal gangs. It may be hard for those with a European-centric view to believe, but the majority of refugees do not aspire to come to Europe – they want to stay close to their home in the hope they can one day return. Almost nine in 10 of the world’s refugees live in the lower-income countries that neighbour their home country. Allowing safe passage and a more generous system through which people can apply for resettlement would help erode the business model of the people smugglers. But this conflicts with the government’s apparent desire to keep the numbers of people who are granted asylum in the UK unfeasibly low. Just over 13,000 refugees were granted protection in the last year: that is equivalent to just 20 people per parliamentary constituency. The UK could easily offer protection to more. But, as the Observer explained last week, because this does not fit with the political image they want to cultivate, Boris Johnson and Priti Patel are instead shifting the emphasis to deterring people from making the crossing by making the UK even more hostile to asylum seekers and by restructuring our asylum system in a way that breaks both the spirit and the letter of the 1951 convention. The UK is already a very hostile place for people seeking refuge: they are not allowed to work, are often housed in dreadful conditions and are forced to subsist on less than £5.50 a day. The government has sought to make it even harder by opening up a two-tier system whereby the 1951 convention rights of asylum seekers arriving in the UK through means other than official resettlement programmes – an entirely legal action – would be further eroded. This runs entirely counter to one of the convention’s key principles, which is that people with a legitimate claim for asylum should have them heard fairly regardless of how they arrived in a country. The government’s other “deterrence” proposals currently being considered by parliament include other measures that break international refugee and maritime law, including the dangerous forcible return of boats to France and processing asylum seekers offshore. The fight that Johnson picked with French president Emmanuel Macron perfectly encapsulates the dire state of the government’s response. France was wrong to exclude the UK from a key meeting on the Channel crisis. Yet by provoking Macron into this, by publishing an incendiary letter on social media that made a set of unreasonable demands on France, Johnson showed his true colours. He is a man who prioritises getting bombastic headlines in the sympathetic press over trying to work with our neighbours to avert further human tragedy. Wealthy nations have an ethical obligation to people fleeing conflict and disaster that they are not collectively fulfilling. It is also in their self-interest: to simply bunker down, shut off borders and look the other way would be to dangerously undermine global security. Britain was one of the founding signatories of the 1951 refugee convention, which codified the international solidarity and cooperation without which a humanitarian approach to refugees is simply not possible. To our national shame, it is today one of the countries leading the charge to rip it up.American Rust 9pm, Sky Atlantic Based on Philipp Meyer’s 2009 novel, this nine-part miniseries follows compromised chief of police Del Harris (Jeff Daniels), who is forced to decide how far he’s willing to go when the son of the woman he loves (Maura Tierney) is accused of murder. While it feels a little cruel to compare it to Mare of Easttown, the whole “complicated cop solving a murder too close to home in small-town America” thing heavily suggests it’s trying to fill that holy slot. Hollie Richardson Doctor Who: Flux 6.25pm, BBC One We’ve reached the penultimate episode in the Flux series (don’t worry, three specials are coming in 2022). Details are being kept under wraps, but we’re yet to re-encounter some classic foes – including the Master – so who will the Doctor face next? HR The V&amp;A Presents Alice: Curiouser and Curiouser 7pm, Sky Arts If you’ve been unable to attend the V&amp;A’s Alice in Wonderland exhibition, Andi Oliver tumbles down the rabbit hole to retrace the beloved character’s story for you. Exploring the collection of one of London’s most talked-about shows this year, Oliver speaks with Lewis Carroll experts and fans to paint the full picture. HR Top Gear 8pm, BBC One Iceland – a starkly beautiful but remote landscape – is not a place in which you ever want to break down. Perhaps that explains why Paddy, Freddie and Chris are tasked with navigating it in some older UK cars with questionable reliability. Can the boys stay the course? Graeme Virtue Who Wants to Be a Millionaire? Celebrity Special 8pm, ITV Jeremy Clarkson hosts a charidee special of the gameshow, with Alexander Armstrong and Gabby Logan taking on 15 increasingly fiendish questions. Whether they’re dynamite quizzers or straight on the phone, they’re likely to do better than poor Harry Redknapp, who recently left empty-handed. Hannah J Davies Showtrial 9pm, BBC One It’s make your mind up time, as the compelling whodunnit reaches its endgame. With both testy Talitha and dodgy Dhillon in the frame, just who is Hannah Ellis’s real killer? And can Cleo’s defence absolve her arrogant client? To reveal any more would be to upturn a barrel of spoilers; suffice to say, it’s proper murky. Ali Catterall Live sport Premier League Football: Chelsea v Man United 4pm, Sky Sports Main Event. From Stamford Bridge.Ghislaine Maxwell’s sex-trafficking trial is scheduled to start in earnest in federal court in Manhattan on Monday with opening statements about the eagerly awaited case. The first arguments will set the stage for a six-week trial in which the British socialite’s alleged involvement in Jeffrey Epstein’s crimes will be aired in grueling detail, outlining how prosecutors and defense attorneys will approach the proceedings. Maxwell, 59, stands accused of recruiting and grooming girls for the late disgraced financier, from 1994 to 2004, some of whom were just 14 years old. Epstein’s sometime girlfriend is also accused of participating in his sexual abuse of teenage girls. Epstein killed himself in a Manhattan federal jail on 10 August 2019, while awaiting his own sex-trafficking trial. Maxwell was arrested on 2 July 2020 in New Hampshire, a year after Epstein’s arrest. “From the prosecution, you’d expect that they would lay out their case and give a preview of the type of evidence that’s going to come in, and a preview of who the witnesses will be, and they’re going to want to try to lay out their whole story of their case,” said Jennifer Louis-Jeune, a veteran defense attorney in New York, of what to expect in the first days of Maxwell’s trial. “The defense usually holds back a little bit more in an opening statement because we don’t know what all the evidence is, and we just want the jury to really be thinking critically when they listen to each witness – and to not take what the witness says as being the truth just because they’re on the stand, and to think of how all the witnesses fit together.” David S Weinstein, a former federal prosecutor who now works on white-collar criminal defense at the firm Jones Walker, said prosecutors would be careful about what they tell jurors during openings. “As a prosecutor, you don’t want to over-promise,” Weinstein said. “Although you’ve planned your case out, things can happen in the middle of a case, objections can get raised, issues can get clouded. “And so that creates a reasonable doubt,” Weinstein said, allowing the defense to say: “They didn’t sustain the burden of proof.” Maxwell is on trial on six counts: conspiracy to entice minors to travel to engage in illegal sex acts, enticement of a minor to travel to engage in illegal sex acts, conspiracy to transport minors with intent to engage in criminal sexual activity, transporting a minor with the intent to engage in criminal sexual activity, sex trafficking conspiracy, and sex trafficking of a minor. The counts cite four accusers – listed in the indictment as Minor Victim-1, Minor Victim-2, Minor Victim-3 and Minor Victim-4 – though more are expected to testify. Maxwell also faces charges for lying under oath. Federal prosecutors have said Maxwell tried to hide her participation in Epstein’s acts, stating false information “under oath” during civil litigation. That litigation was the defamation case in which th Epstein accuser Virginia Giuffre sued Maxwell. Giuffre alleges Epstein and Maxwell forced her into sex with Prince Andrew when she was 17. Giuffre filed suit against Maxwell for saying she was a liar. Maxwell has insisted she is innocent of all wrongdoing; the Duke of York adamantly insists on his innocence too. Maxwell will be tried separately for allegedly lying under oath, meaning Giuffre’s claims will not be part of the upcoming proceedings in New York. Prosecutors allege that Maxwell met Minor Victim-1 when the girl was about 14 and interacted with her at Epstein’s homes. From about 1994 to 1997, the indicment alleges, Maxwell “groomed Minor Victim-1 to engage in sexual acts with Epstein through multiple means” and “sought to normalize inappropriate and abusive conduct by, among other things, undressing in front of Minor Victim-1 and being present when Minor Victim-1 undressed in front of Epstein”. “Maxwell was present for and involved in some of this abuse,” charging papers say. Minor Victim-2 and Maxwell are alleged to have interacted in 1996 at Epstein’s New Mexico property. The teen had come from out of state “at Epstein’s invitation for the purpose of being groomed for and/or subjected to acts of sexual abuse”, court papers say. Maxwell is alleged to have known the girl was under 18. Maxwell is alleged to have started to groom the girl for Epstein’s abuse “by, among other things, providing an unsolicited massage to Minor Victim-2, during which Minor Victim- 2 was topless”. In addition, Maxwell is alleged to have “encouraged Minor Victim- 2 to massage Epstein”. From 1994 to 1995, Maxwell allegedly targeted Minor Victim-3 in London, which included a time where she knew the victim was below 18. She is alleged to have introduced the girl to Epstein, arranging “multiple interactions” during which Maxwell urged the girl to massage him. Maxwell knew Epstein would sexually abuse the minor during these encounters, court papers maintain. Minor Victim-4 was lured into Epstein’s orbit to give Epstein sexualized massages and was paid by his employees, Maxwell among them. She and Maxwell met in 2001, when the teen was 14. Maxwell and other Epstein associates are alleged to have called her to schedule times for her to massage the financier. While Epstein looms large over proceedings against Maxwell, it is unlikely that all of his acts will be revealed in court. Judge Alison Nathan’s rulings have indicated that she does not want Maxwell’s trial to turn into a referendum on whether she is being targeted because Epstein cannot face justice in death. Maxwell, who maintains her innocence, faces up to 80 years in prison if convicted.Is there a relationship between Covid and politics? Sure seems so. By the end of October, 25 out of every 100,000 residents of counties Donald Trump won by wide margins had died from Covid. That was more than three times higher than the Covid death rate in heavily Biden counties, of 7.8 per 100,000. Counties where Trump received at least 70% of the vote had an even higher average Covid death toll than counties where Trump won at least 60%. Presumably, this is because Trump counties also have the highest unvaccinated rates in the US. Almost every reliably blue state now has a higher vaccination rate than almost every reliably red state. There are some obvious reasons why Trump voters have been hesitant to get vaccinated. Trump politicized the issue – making the jab a hallmark of his peculiar form of rightwing populism. He and Fox News spread false rumors and conspiracy theories about the vaccine. By the time Trump finally called on people to get vaccinated, the damage was already done. In other words, it’s the same trifecta of rightwing media, inadequate education and rejection of science that gave us Trump in the first place. But this isn’t the whole story, because the US as a whole trails every other advanced country in the rate of vaccinations. Why? In recent weeks I’ve discovered that several anti-vaxxers live around me – in the bluest region of the bluest county of the bluest state in America. I’ve known several for years. They are well-informed and well-educated. But they’re as opposed to getting a shot as any Trump anti-vaxxer. Some are ex-hippies, now in their late 60s and early 70s, who regard their bodies as “sacred” and don’t want anything or anyone to “invade” it. One, who grows her own food and lives by herself in a cabin not far from here, told me she didn’t want anything going into her body that she didn’t control. When I asked whether she had been vaccinated against smallpox, measles, diphtheria, tetanus and whooping cough, she told me she assumed so but had been too small to have had knowledge or control. Others – also in their late 60s and early 70s – don’t trust big pharma. They see Pfizer, Moderna and Johnson &amp; Johnson as greedy global corporations in search of people to exploit and tax havens to park their exorbitant profits. “Why in hell would I trust a fucking thing Pfizer says or does?” one of them asked me. None of these people trusts the government. Their generation (which is also mine) came to political consciousness during the Vietnam war – a time when the American flag became an emblem of fascism, particularly in lefty coastal enclaves. They now believe the government has been so corrupted by big money that they don’t trust agencies charged with protecting the public. I’m sympathetic to their distrust of both big pharma and big government. But this doesn’t mean the science is wrong. One of them referred me to a 2017 study published in the Journal of the American Medical Association which found that about a third of the drugs approved by the US Food and Drug Administration between 2001 and 2010 had safety problems after reaching the market. I checked and he’s correct. But he left out a critical fact: as soon as the FDA discovered the problems it forced manufacturers to pull the drugs or issue warnings. Deep down, I think these blue anti-vaxxers are motivated by something different from mere distrust. When I pointed out that they could well be endangering others (including me), they remained unmoved. When I suggested that their concerns, however valid, had to be weighed against the public’s overall interest in conquering this epidemic, they said they didn’t care. My conclusion: They’re infected not by Covid but by a narcissism that refuses even to consider the risks and costs they’re imposing on others. I can’t say for sure that Trump anti-vaxxers share this narcissism, although the leader of their cult surely does. And, of course, my sample size was so small I can’t even generalize to all blue anti-vaxxers. If we blame Trump and the culture that produced him for the relatively low rate of vaccinations in the US, we’re missing a character trait that may offer a fuller explanation. This trait is found among Democrats and independents in blue America as well as Republicans in Trumpland. In fact, I think it’s been near the core of the American personality since before the founding of the nation – a stubborn, selfish, me-first individualism. Robert Reich, a former US secretary of labor, is professor of public policy at the University of California at Berkeley and the author of Saving Capitalism: For the Many, Not the Few and The Common Good. His new book, The System: Who Rigged It, How We Fix It, is out now. He is a Guardian US columnist. His newsletter is at robertreich.substack.comThe Observer Magazine’s first issue of 1982 included Paul Theroux’s 1,500-mile journey downriver from Chongqing to Shanghai on the Yangtze (‘The great Observer holiday package’). ‘Every mile of it was different,’ he wrote, ‘but there were 2,000 miles I did not see. It crosses 12 provinces or regions, 700 rivers are joined to it – all Yangtze statistics are hopelessly huge and ungraspable; they obscure rather than clarify.’ Theroux admitted that it was ‘in many ways, the opposite of travel’ given that the cruise ‘frequently attracts sedentary types who would rather be carried through China than read about it’. His shipmates were all millionaires, who’d coughed up £5,000 to take the cruise. ‘Half had been to China before and knew their way around Inner Mongolia. The rest were novices and called Mao “Mayo”, and confused Thailand with Taiwan and Fuji with Fiji.’ The slightly odd atmosphere was further added to with the Blue Danube waltz playing on the loudspeaker. Theroux found that ‘The cities are bigger and filthier, the rapids have been dynamited, there are more ships; but the river today is essentially the river that the Italian missionaries proselytised on in the 17th and 18th centuries.’ ‘Stare for five minutes at any point on the Yangtze and you will see a junk, sailing upstream with its ragged, ribbed sail; or being towed by yelling, tethered men; or sniping downstream with a skinny man clinging to its rudder.’ One can hardly say he remained buoyed by his trip: ‘In 100 years or so, under a cold uncolonised moon, what we call the civilised world will all look like China, muddy and senile: no trees, no birds, short of fuel and metal and meat, but plenty of pushcarts, cobblestones, ditch-diggers and wooden inventions. Nine hundred million farmers splashing through puddles.’ One more reason never to go on a cruise.The question I’m a 24-year-old guy studying for my masters while working part-time for a management consultancy and I’m also a qualified associate accountant. I recently met a woman on a dating app after being single for a year since the start of the pandemic. She’s a similar age to myself and we’ve been dating for two months. She’s very attractive and nice, and we have a good time together – she can make me laugh. There is a red flag, though. Although she is in her mid-20s she still lives at home and seems to have no plans or ambitions to move to living independently. Plus, despite having a part-time job, she doesn’t contribute to the household bills. Now I understand that rent is high and people are staying with their parents for longer, but she isn’t even planning on going to college or progressing further in her career. She spends most of her money on going out with friends, holidays and hobbies. My friends and family say that she’s a waster who will drain me of money if we ever move in together as she has never lived life like an adult, never had to budget or think about bills, and that I should ditch her. I can see their point, but I’m having a great time with her. It is hard to know what I should do. What would you advise? Philippa’s answer Your friends and family love you and fear for you. You can appreciate them for that, but it doesn’t follow that their advice is what you need. You personally are doing so much career-planning for the future that I think you can enjoy yourself in the moment with a special friend who has different priorities. You do not know how this will pan out yet. You have time for things to run their course and discover what that course will be. A person is not their job. You’ve told me all about yours, but that only tells me what importance you put on these things rather than about you. A person is not just their prospects or their appearance. A person is a soul. Find your soul and find hers. It matters not a jot whether you stack shelves at Tesco’s or whether you are both qualified professionals. I think having the capacity to be happy, knowing how to have interests, friends and connecting with them is worth a great many accreditations. She has got a skill, one that maybe your friends and family could learn from: she knows how to enjoy herself. Yes, perhaps she has never budgeted, but that doesn’t mean she’d be incapable of it. You cannot tell what a person is like just by what your friends and family think she looks like on paper. However, you can tell whether you like someone or not by how you feel when you are with them. It sounds as if you feel great when you are with her. Feel and listen to what is real and working for you in the present, rather than throwing it away for a hypothetical idea of a future. I’ve said before in this column how society can burden us with a board game of goals and milestones that we are supposed to reach by certain ages. Now this way of life might be the best way of living for a lot of people, and it might be a game you are very invested in playing, but it is not the only valid way to approach existence on this earth. And are you not allowed, at 24, just to enjoy yourself in the present, rather than prophesise about the likelihood of having to support someone tomorrow? She hasn’t asked you to support her. It would be rather unfair to yourself and to her to dump her because of a fantasy your friends have about what she might ask of you in the future. When that time arrives, you might even want to support her, who knows? And, she might not want that. Sure, it’s good to listen and take it seriously when our friends and family challenge us, but we are – more than our qualifications – what we like doing. If we don’t listen to that and only stick to what we think we ought to be doing, we might be heading for trouble. You sound like a studious person, so I’m going to set you some homework to help you look at, and think about, your investment in doing what looks sensible on paper. I want you to read Jane Austen’s Persuasion. Jane Austen herself had a young man interested in her who was persuaded by his father to choose someone who wasn’t as poor. Maybe that influenced this novel. I don’t know. In it, the heroine, Anne, has been persuaded by the advice of an intelligent, sensible person whom she respected to turn down a young gentleman whose prospects were uncertain, not unlike your young lady. And you will learn by reading this novel what can be the effect of following sensible advice that goes against the heart. I’d also advise you to take a leaf out of your girlfriend’s book and take up a hobby – read more classical novels. This will help you to gain insight into people and relationships that you might be missing. If you have a question, send a brief email to askphilippa@observer.co.uk Philippa Perry and Bernardine Evaristo will be live on stage in London at a Guardian Live event on 6 December. Join the conversation in-person or online, book tickets hereBritish beekeepers are calling for a requirement on supermarkets and other retailers to label cheap honey imports from China and other nations with the country of origin after claims that part of the global supply is bulked out with sugar syrup. The UK is the world’s biggest importer of Chinese honey, which can be one sixth of the price of the honey produced by bees in Britain. Supermarket own-label honey from China can be bought for as little as 69p a jar. Supermarkets say every jar of honey is “100% pure” and can be traced back to the beekeeper, but there is no requirement to identify the countries of origin of honey blended from more than one country. The European Union is now considering new rules to improve consumer information for honey and ensure the country of origin is clearly identified on the jar. Lynne Ingram, chair of the Honey Authenticity Network UK, a group of beekeepers campaigning for better information for shoppers, said the government should implement its own tough new rules to ensure better transparency. “The consumer needs to be able to make an informed choice about what they are buying, and it’s impossible for them at the moment,” said Ingram, who is also the master beekeeper at Wesley Cottage Bees, near Bridgewater in Somerset. “The current labelling rules are hiding what people are eating.” Sales of honey rose to a record high last year and it has overtaken jam in recent years to become the UK’s most popular spread. Consumers bought 30,000 tonnes of honey in 2020 worth £130m, according to figures from the data and research company Kantar. About a third of the UK’s honey imports come from China, but it almost never appears on the label of supermarket jars as the country of origin. The UK also imports significant amounts of cheap honey from India, Ukraine and Vietnam. Sainsbury’s So Organic Clear Honey (340g) costs £3.15, but the supermarket did not respond to questions on the country of origin last week. It said its honey “can be traced back to the beekeeper”. The label says the product is a “blend of non-EU honeys”. The foreign-produced honeys are the cheapest on the supermarket shelves. While a jar of Tesco Stockwell clear honey (340g) costs just 69p, a jar of Tesco Finest English Set Honey costs £4.50. Supermarket sources said last week the Stockwell honey was a blend of honeys from China and Vietnam. Asda said its Runny Honey (340g) costing £1.49 was also a blend of Chinese and Vietnamese honey and was “fully traceable back to the beekeeper”. Chinese honey dominates the global market but is controversial because beekeepers in other countries say laboratory tests suggest some of the global supply is targeted by fraudsters who dilute it with cheaper sugar syrup. In China, the authorities have been warned of the threat. The Institute of Apicultural Research in Beijing stated in a research paper in March last year: “In order to seek higher profits, high-quality honey is subjected to sugar adulteration through the addition of cheaper sweeteners.” Factories in China advertise sugar syrup for sale to be mixed with honey, which it is claimed in marketing material can beat the most common tests used by food safety watchdogs. There has been legal action in the United States over claims that imports of cheap adulterated honey are pushing beekeepers to financial collapse. Last year, Mitchell Weinberg, a New York-based food fraud investigator, commissioned QSI, a leading German laboratory, to test nine jars of UK supermarket own-brand honey. Eight of the nine samples tested indicated adulteration, but the Food Standards Agency (FSA) says more work is required to ensure that such tests can be relied on. It advises trading standards officers to adopt a “weight of evidence” approach in which they also consider supply chain audits and records as well as test results. Dale Gibson, co-founder of Bermondsey Street Bees in London, which has beehives in and around the capital, including Lambeth Palace and rooftops near Tower Hill, said the FSA and trading standards officers needed to take more effective action against the threat from the food fraudsters. “They have failed to properly police the regulations,” he said. Sian Edmunds, a partner at the legal firm Burges Salmon, provides regulatory advice on the food supply chain. She said that any new changes in European food labelling laws would not automatically apply in the UK, which would need to introduce its own regulations. Any measure to improve transparency in the food chain would be welcomed, but would need to be assessed in consultation with food firms on how easily it could be implemented. She added: “Anything that improves the authenticity and traceability of food has to be a good thing, but you have to balance it with practicality. The industry may argue that a new labelling law might be tricky for blended honey from several different countries.” Rick Mumford, head of science, evidence and research at the FSA, said the food watchdog was working with other government bodies and industry experts to address some of the complexities around honey authenticity testing. He said: “Our work is seeking to put in place the most effective enforcement tools and guidance for detecting honey fraud so that consumers can have trust in the honey they buy.” A government spokesperson said: “It is essential consumers have trust in the food they eat, and food labelling should be accurate and not misleading in any way. We are working with partners to understand the emerging scientific evidence on honey testing to ensure all honey can be fairly and accurately tested for contents and origin.”There is an element I love about allotment life: the communal corrective. People gathering together in spring and autumn to clear unruly paths and overgrowth. Pitching in, cooking over a barbecue, bringing food and wine. Someone sometimes breaking into song. There has been an absence of working parties in the past year or so, since Covid came at us. Many of our gardeners have mostly stayed away. In their absence the wild has crept back, their plots conquered, quickly reclaimed. The more determined garden souls hung on. Patches of cultivation shining among the fallen apples, the tall nettles, the ever-longer grass. There have been rows of salads. There has been summer squash and corn. A few plots with climbing bean poles. One or two others scattered flower seed in spring. A neighbouring plot was bright with beds of cosmos, calendula and other annuals. Another simply sowed poppies. Though they’ve all faded now in the cooler nights. Mary, a part of whose large plot we also work, has been constant. A gifted and determined grower, there are always runner beans, giant sunflowers, tomatoes, garlic, chillies, courgettes and pumpkins of many kinds. Recently she was in need of help with some late-season tidying and packing away. So come one Sunday, Howard and I turn up with power tools and sharp spades. There are prized plants to re-home, echoes of previous years to be potted. Patiently waiting on their new space. There is a fruit cage to be cleared and stashed away. There is real pleasure is heavier garden work sometimes. Taking down structures for winter. Clearing and preparing for another spring. Within a quick couple of hours or so our work is mostly done. We level summer’s poles on our part of the plot, leaving the last two ‘wigwams’ decked with late morning glory and nasturtium vines. November frost will soon have its way. We pick and pocket tagetes and nasturtium seed and think of the coming of spring. Allan Jenkins’s Plot 29 (4th Estate, £9.99) is out now. Order it for £8.49 from guardianbookshop.comScientists have always warned that the biggest risk to the UK at this stage of the pandemic is the emergence of a more infectious, virulent and vaccine-resistant variant of the virus. It remains to be seen whether Omicron, the new variant of concern identified by the World Health Organization last week is that. But the structure of Omicron – the number of concerning mutations in its spike protein – and the preliminary evidence that there is an increased risk of reinfection with this variant have rightly prompted a global response to try and contain its spread as much as possible. It will be weeks before we understand just how much a risk Omicron presents. If it is much more infectious than the Delta variant of Covid, its global spread is to some degree inevitable, though it will of course be slowed by vaccines and travel restrictions. It is a relief that the government acted far more promptly to impose travel restrictions on South Africa and other affected countries than it did in the case of Delta and India, where a delay of weeks undoubtedly contributed to the speed at which Delta became the dominant variant here in the UK. But it is concerning that the government has not been testing all arrivals from South Africa in recent days in the same way as, for example, the Dutch government has. The emergence of Omicron should serve as a reminder of some key lessons in this pandemic. The first is the importance of genomic sequencing, which tracks the genetic structure of the virus. Omicron was spotted early thanks to South Africa’s huge investment in sequencing, which has allowed swift action to be taken. This could be valuable in terms of developing updated vaccines if needed. But this action takes the form of punishing travel bans, so there is a case for South Africa receiving global compensation in order not to disincentivise countries with similar sequencing capabilities from being transparent about their findings. Second, as highlighted yet again by former prime minister Gordon Brown in the Guardian last week, Omicron is a reminder that no one is safe until everyone is safe. By the end of the year, enough vaccines will have been manufactured to have vaccinated the whole world against Covid. Yet too many countries are facing this winter with low vaccination rates as a result of wealthier nations hoarding unused supplies. Only 3% of people in low-income countries are fully vaccinated, compared with more than 60% in high-income countries. This gap is not only ethically wrong – it increases the likelihood of a vaccine-resistant strain developing. High-income countries need to develop far more efficient and timely systems for delivering unused vaccinations to developing countries well in advance of their expiry date. Third, the importance of the precautionary principle has been proved over and again in this pandemic. With a virus that spreads so rapidly, less restriction action sooner can prevent the need for more restrictive action for longer later. Britain’s vaccination programme has been a success and means that unless we see another more vaccine-resistant variant, whether that is Omicron or another, we should be able to avoid the sorts of invasive lockdowns that were required in the first and second waves. The government was right yesterday to introduce stricter requirements around travel, self-isolation for those who have been in contact with Omicron and compulsory mask wearing in shops. As we have argued throughout the pandemic, it needs to boost sick pay in order to ensure people with symptoms can afford to take the time off work to self-isolate if they test positive. Clive Dix, the former chair of the vaccine taskforce, has sounded the alarm about the government’s lack of preparedness for a vaccine-resistant variant, as we report today. Hopefully, Omicron will prove to be less of a risk than some fear. But if so, we should treat it as a lucky escape. It is a warning that this pandemic is far from over and that the UK and other rich nations should be doing more to combat the spread of the virus in other parts of the world.Gold makeup is either dismissed as “party season” or relegated to something created for extroverts. I’d argue that gold is a classic; a neutral even. OK, maybe that’s pushing it. Still, as with most makeup, it’s how you wear it that really counts. The eyeshadow across the eyes in this Fendi haute couture look is wonderfully unapologetic, but if it’s too intimidating go for a bronzy gold. Keep lips understated. Once you apply foundation, subtly brush on highlighter. And then as you progress through the night – or day – take off any excess oil with blotting papers; you want to glow not shine. 1. Guerlain Meteorites Light-Revealing Pearls of Powder £46, guerlain.com 2. Lano Bronze Gold 101 £13, cultbeauty.co.uk 3. Fenty Invisimatte Blotting Paper £13, boots.com 4. Lisa Eldridge The Foundation £44, lisaeldridge.com 5. Hourglass Scattered Light Glitter Eyeshadow £28, spacenk.com I can’t do without… A practical book on beauty and skincare for darker skin tones When it comes to inclusivity, a lot has changed in the beauty industry. Most brands offer a foundation range that goes beyond caramel. More haircare brands are targeting Afro hair textures and the concept of a nude lip is no longer limited to the shade of a rich tea biscuit. Skincare for darker skin, however, still needs addressing. ‘But skin is skin,’ they say – a complete fallacy. Numerous skincare issues (eczema, acne, hyperpigmentation, dehydration, etc) manifest themselves very differently on darker skin tones. Most skincare products are not formulated with Black skin in mind. Most skincare practitioners have no idea how to treat darker skin. Hence this book, by respected aesthetician Dija Ayodele, is necessary. Seeing the anxiety faced by people of colour who struggle to access skincare products and treatments inspired Ayodele to create the award-winning Black Skin Directory; a resource of skincare professionals with expertise in darker skin tones. She goes a step further with her book, covering everything from social and historical insights on Black skin to practical tips. I highly recommend it; not just for people with Black skin but also as a wake-up call for the gatekeepers of the skincare industry who are yet to evolve their product development processes. Black Skin by Dija Ayodele, £20, waterstones.com On my radar… Star-studded nail varnish, scent and conditioner New direction Harry Styles has launched a beauty line – his aim is to push the boundaries of traditional beauty. And the nail varnishes are pretty good. Pleasing Nail Polish (£16 each or £50 per set), pleasing.com Good to grow We had the cream, the body oil and now Augustinus Bader has brought out a haircare range clinically proven to increase hair growth. Augustinus Bader Leave-In Hair Treatment, £38, augustinusbader.com A drop of Guinness When Daphne Guinness launched her eponymous scent in 2009, the concoction inspired by the smell of old churches and tuberose was an instant hit with insiders. Now it’s back but limited. Get it while you can. Daphne, £110, doverstreetmarket.com Follow Funmi on Twitter @FunmiFettoWhat time are you up? I get up at 3.30am on weekdays, so I desperately try to lie in on Sundays, although these days with the curse of ageing I struggle to sleep past 8am. Plus, my cat goes ballistic at 6am. I’ll fidget in bed for an hour and a half until my wife asks me to please go away. A morning routine? I’m just waiting for everyone else to get up. I might read downstairs while the cat hassles me, or watch Andrew Marr. We’ll often go for breakfast with friends: Cricks Corner in Dartmouth Park does excellent breakfast baps. And yes, we’ll have doughnuts. It’s Sunday. Don’t judge me. Do you work? I try not to, but I’ll do as I’m told: being freelance, you always fear turning something down means you’ll never get a gig again. Knowing I have to do the Breakfast Show the following day means I’ll keep across the news, checking in with the team by early evening. It’s work adjacent. How do you have fun? Sneaking in a game of pétanque on Hampstead Heath; the local club have made noises we should really be members. If Liverpool are playing, everything will, of course, be structured around the match. If they lost, the rest of the afternoon is a write off. Sundays growing up? They were a bleak affair. I graduated from washing neighbours’ cars to working in a garden centre. It was tedious and poorly paid; humping around those huge bags of compost for old people, I think, is largely to blame for my present day back problems. After work we’d play board games at home. The one I remember most is, bizarrely, called Escape from Colditz. Sunday evening? We’ll roast a chicken, too heavily seasoned if anything, and put the TV on. Week after week we boil up the carcass to make a stock and place the Tupperware in the fridge, where it’ll remain – totally unused, going mouldy – with all the other stocks we’ve previously made. And then it’s my chemically induced bedtime at 8pm: I’ll doom-scroll until the sleep-sprays and pills kick in. Rick Edwards is the new co-presenter of the BBC Radio 5 Live Breakfast Show, airing weekdays 6-9amAnd with that, we will wrap up the blog for today. Here is what went down: Two international arrivals in Sydney have tested positive to the new Omicron variant of Covid-19, having flown into Sydney from Doha on a Qatar Airways flight on Saturday night. NSW will stick with its reopening plan, with premier Dominic Perrottet saying new variants entering the country were “inevitable”. Prime minister Scott Morrison announced that the government will introduce legislation to hold social media companies accountable for defamatory and harmful posts by online trolls. NSW recorded 185 new cases and zero deaths. Victoria recorded 1,061 new local Covid-19 cases and four deaths. The ACT recorded seven new cases, and Queensland three new cases. An evacuation order has been issued to residents of towns along the Hunter River in NSW as rising flood waters threaten power and water services. NSW police took a man into custody after reports of a masked armed shooter on Windang Road near Wollongong. Police reported no casualties or injuries. Tasmanian senator Jacqui Lambie has walked back some of her speeches and comments from earlier in her career, saying an “adviser” had her say things that were “way too rightwing”. The Morrison government will give $10m for an Australia Day ad campaign on the theme of “Reflect, Respect, Celebrate: We’re all part of the story”. NSW Health has confirmed that the two overseas travellers that tested positive overnight have been infected with the new Omicron variant. Both passengers arrived from southern Africa on Saturday evening, and underwent testing last night. Both cases are asymptomatic and in isolation at Special Health Accommodation, and both are fully vaccinated. The federal government is pushing ahead with their much maligned model for a federal anti-corruption commission, but have signalled they won’t put it to parliament unless Labor backs it. Katharine Murphy with the latest from Canberra: Western Australia Premier Mark McGowan said earlier today he “won’t hesitate” keeping the borders shut if the new Omicron variant threatens WA. McGowan reaffirmed that borders are still due to be reopened next year, but warned that he would keep the borders closed if the variant spread in other states. There is a lot we do not know about the Omicron variant but it is believed to be more transmissible than the highly infectious Delta variant and could have more severe impacts on people. Details are evolving but the World Health Organisation has declared it a variant of concern based on what appears to be rampant and substantial growth seen in southern Africa. There is a great deal of uncertainty about the recently emerged Omicron variant so it is important Western Australia has strong protections in place for states which have relaxed their international borders. NSW no longer has a hotel quarantine system. It is a big risk and that is why we have had a very cautious approach about other states. Borders are effective, if you stop the flow of people coming in you virtually eliminate the prospect of the virus getting here. So earlier today federal opposition leader Anthony Albanese was asked about the government’s approach to the new variant and urged the commonwealth to be “cautious”. Yesterday Albanese called for the border to be closed to southern African nations, and today said the variant showed why Australia needed purpose-built quarantine facilities: This strain could cause a real problem and we need to make sure that the precautionary principle applies here. The government needs to get the best health advice and act cautiously on all of these measures, because what we know from this virus and its variants is that it is a lot harder to put back in the bottle once it’s out. We need to make sure as well that people coming into Australia from who potentially have had contact with that variant are quarantined properly. We know that with Delta it’s spread very quickly and we need to take whatever measures are necessary. Australian shares look set for a further hefty markdown at tomorrow’s opening with global markets sent into a tailspin on the emergence of a new coronavirus variant, AAP reports: Wall Street suffered its biggest one-day drop in months on Friday, dragging Australian share futures down 104 points or 1.4 per cent to 7166. “Shares remain vulnerable to further short-term weakness with possible triggers being the rebound in coronavirus cases globally and the new Omicron variant,” AMP Capital chief economist Shane Oliver said. The US Dow Jones Industrial Average fell 905.04 points, or 2.53 per cent, to 34,899.34, the S&amp;P 500 lost 106.84 points, or 2.27 per cent, to 4,594.62; and the Nasdaq Composite dropped 353.57 points, or 2.23 per cent, to 15,491.66. The benchmark S&amp;P/ASX200 index tumbled 128 points, or 1.73 per cent, to 7279.3 points on Friday. Potential market volatility could overshadow a busy week for domestic economic data, including the September quarter national accounts to be released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on Wednesday. Labor’s housing spokesman Jason Clare says rent prices have skyrocketed this past year while wages have flatlined. In a statement released today, Clare accused the government of allowing housing affordability to get worse. Rent in regional Australia had “gone through the roof”, he said. For example, in Byron Bay, Clare said, the median price of rent had increased by 26.7%, up to $10,400 annually. In Darwin, the median rent had increased by 25.3%, or $6,500 over the year. Labor has promised that, if elected, it will establish the Housing Australia Future Fund to build 30,000 social and affordable homes across the country over five years. Clare said Scott Morrison “needs to get out of The Lodge and into the real world”. Outspoken Coalition MP George Christensen has undermined the government’s concern about the emerging Covid-19 variant Omicron in a post to the messaging app Telegram. Christensen shared a meme suggesting that Dr Angelique Coetzee, who first alerted authorities to the presence of Omicron, isn’t concerned about the new variant. He quoted a part of the article where Coetzee said that the symptoms have so far been “unusual but mild”. Christensen left out the part of the article when the same doctor said: What we have to worry about now is that when older, unvaccinated people are infected with the new variant, and if they are not vaccinated, we are going to see many people with a severe [form of the] disease. This week, the government revealed that deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce had counselled Christensen on his online behaviour, which have included posts spreading misinformation about Covid-19. South Australia has once again recorded zero new cases: Epidimiologist Dr Mary-Louise McLaws on the new Omicron variant: Good afternoon, a quick thanks to Justine Landis-Hanley for expertly manning the blog today, its been quite a busy day for a Sunday, with lots going around, so let’s get stuck in. I’m handing over the blog to my brilliant colleague Mostafa Rachwani. An interview between Peter FitzSimons and Tasmanian senator Jacqui Lambie has been doing the rounds on social media this morning. Lambie said she “had an advier that was making me say things that were way too rightwing”. FitzSimons asked: “What sort of things did you say that you look back upon now and go, ‘Jesus, I was too strong’?” Lambie: Certainly some of my anti-Muslim comments. There was no need ... So this is what happens when you don’t have the right advice around you. And you are trusting them because you have no idea about politics, and a lot of things I was saying were very divisive. I was nearly mirroring Pauline Hanson, and it was scary. When I look back now I just cringe at some of those speeches that I made. It has taken me a long while to make amends. But now I am not holding back. I’ve wanted to say a few things about Pauline Hanson for so long – she’s just so divisive, so awful – and I am not holding back. But some have criticised Lambie for shifting blame, rather than apologising, for her earlier comments. In case you missed it, the Lajamanu community and the surrounding homelands in the Northern Territory entered into a lockdown yesterday until 6pm on 11 December 2021, following positive wastewater results. Residents must stay at home for the lockdown period and people are only permitted to leave for medical treatment, essential goods and services, essential work, one hour of daily exercise, or to provide care and support to family. Masks must also be worn outside of the home. Schools and early childhood services in Lajamanu and the surrounding homelands have also closed. Genomic testing for the passengers from southern Africa who have tested positive for Covid-19 in NSW should return tonight. We will keep you updated with what we know. The Morrison government will give $10m for an Australia Day ad campaign on the theme of “Reflect, Respect, Celebrate: We’re all part of the story”. The spending, revealed in government regulations before the mid-year economic update, is part of a total of $26.7m to be given to the Australia Day Council, including $15m for Australia Day 2022 events grants. The campaign repeats the key messages of last year’s ads, which promoted 26 January as a day for all Australians, despite a growing minority who want to change the date because the anniversary of the arrival of the first fleet marks the beginning of Indigenous dispossession. GetUp First Nations justice campaign director Larissa Baldwin attacked the ad campaign, saying the government “could spend a billion dollars on ‘Australia’ Day ads if they wanted – it wouldn’t change the fact that January 26 is a marker of colonisation, dispossession, and attempted genocide”. The government has significantly ramped up grants to the Australia Day Council, from $14.7m in 2020 to $30.8m in 2021. The Australia Day 2021 campaign, “The Story of Australia”, highlighted the diversity of the Australian people, including several Indigenous Australians, and acknowledged its history was “painful” and “raw” in parts. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard said Australia should expect the Omicron variant may already be here. He conceded that “the variant is not yet well understood”: What we do know is that it’s going to be hard to ascertain just how many people are here who have been in those African nations. Asked if authorities could prevent Omicron cases from entering NSW, premier Dominic Perrottet said it was important to be realistic: The reality is this is a highly virulent virus. I have more from opposition leader Anthony Albanese on the government’s legislation cracking down social media giants for defamatory posts and bullying: This government announcement we want to see as just not another announcement without an actual delivery. Because the government needs to explain how it can deal with the fact that domestic controls have limitations for what is a global industry. We want to see the same beings that the government says it wants, that is, to have more safety online for young people and indeed for everyone. It’s not surprising that a government that has George Christensen and other members – Gerard Rennick – as members of the government spreading misinformation about Covid, spreading misinformation about vaccines, isn’t interested in shutting down misinformation. They could start with shutting down some of their own caucus members. Albanese raised the fact that Morrison reportedly met Bridget Archer after she broke government ranks to support a call to debate independent Helen Haines’ bill for a federal corruption watchdog: It’s interesting that, Scott Morison, we gave him the capacity twice last week to call out George Christensen by name. He failed to do so. He then subsequently called the member for Bass into his office with others about the issues she had on a national integrity commission, but wasn’t prepared to even call out George Christensen and his behaviour and his entirely inappropriate comments on the floor of the House of Representatives. Brett Sutton says that it is unclear at this stage whether the Omicron variant will lead to more severe or less severe disease than Delta. There is also the big question about whether the immunity from the vaccines now available around the world will be able to help protect against transmission and severe disease from this variant. He says we should know the answers to these questions in the coming weeks. As such, Sutton says it’s “sensible” for Australia to take that precautionary approach of quarantining arrivals from several southern African nations, and halting international travel for non-citizens travelling from those countries. He says that it may be a “step too far” to close the borders to all international arrivals: It’s going to be impossible to keep [Omicron] out, I imagine … This is not back to the beginning. We are not back to square one by any means. Victorian health minister Martin Foley and chief health officer Brett Sutton are giving an update amid concerns about the new Covid-19 Omicron variant. NSW police have taken a man into custody after reports of a masked armed shooter on Windang Road near Wollongong. Police said it was an “active armed defender situation” and confirmed that there have been no injuries or casualties reported. Reports of a man wielding a semi-automatic weapon and firing randomly emerged this morning. Videos on social media showed a masked man, dressed in black, walking along the road and firing shots into the air. Police described it as a “siege situation”, with reports of a brief standoff near a liquor store. Traffic has been stopped on Windang Bridge, with roads around the town closed. Australia’s federal Labor leader Anthony Albanese has weighed in on the government’s plan to introduce legislation holding social media giants liable for anonymous users’ defamatory posts. The AAP reports that Albanese agreed with the sentiment of the government’s announcement but said it must be delivered on: The government needs to explain how it can deal with the fact that domestic controls have limitations for what is a global industry. New South Wales is sticking with its reopening plan amid concerns surrounding the Omicron variant. Premier Dominic Perrottet said it was “inevitable” that more variants will emerge and enter Australia, and the state was taking a “precautionary approach” with the changes to international arrivals announced yesterday: The clear point today is that this clearly demonstrates the pandemic is not over. We need to learn to live alongside the virus and to live alongside the various strains of the virus that will come our way, and the best thing we can do is get vaccinated and get booster shots. There are limits to what the state and federal government can do: these variants will get into the country, it is inevitable. Yesterday the government announced that hotel quarantine will return for travellers who had been in South Africa. “Urgent” genomic sequencing is under way after two passengers on a Qatar Airways flight arrived in Sydney last night. Perrottet confirmed that 29 people arrived in Sydney yesterday after spending time in southern Africa. Australia’s federal health minister Greg Hunt said with the prime minister and the chief health officer, he is meeting with state and territory counterparts to discuss developments around the Omicron Covid-19 variant. We won’t hesitate if more is needed to take those steps. As we did our first briefing on Friday, we foreshadowed that ... he would take steps. And overnight international evidence came in and we took the immediate steps yesterday and will continue todo that to protect Australians. Yesterday, there were over 3,800 passengers who arrived in Australia and the relevant public health orders; 54 were from southern Africa. They had been there and identified in the previous 14 days across the nine countries and what we are pleased to see is that all of the orders that were issued yesterday had been put in place, actions had been taken, Border Force is implementing, state and territory and public health is supporting. I thank everybody for their part in that work. South Australia has tightened its border rules after the emergence of the Omicron Covid-19 variant, AAP reports: All international travellers and people arriving in SA from high-risk locations in Australia will once again be required to quarantine for 14 days. People arriving from lower-risk locations interstate must also have a coronavirus test within the 72 hours prior to arrival and must show proof of a negative result. The provision for people to have a COVID-19 test after they arrive in SA and isolate until they get a negative result has been removed. The changes come days after SA lifted most of its border restrictions, which led to a number of infections being detected in interstate arrivals. With three new cases on Saturday, the state is currently managing eight active infections. Australia has shut its borders to nine southern African countries and NSW, Victoria, SA and the ACT have brought in new rules for all international arrivals amid concern over Omicron. Urgent genomic sequencing is also under way to determine whether two people, who tested positive for the virus in Sydney overnight after spending time in Africa, have the variant. Attorney general Michaelia Cash is providing more detail about the government’s new legislation concerning social media giants. The “social media anti-trolling legislation” will do two things. First, it will overturn the high court decision that found social media page owners will be considered as publishers of defamatory comments left by users on their pages, even if they did not know about those third-party comments. Under the government’s legislation, social media services will be deemed the publisher. It will specifically state that the social media page user – like a small business or a newspaper – won’t be deemed as the publisher. Second, the legislation will give social media companies a defence from being the publisher if they have a complaints procedure in place for defamatory and harmful posts. Under the complains process, the social media company will need to provide complainants with the details of the online troll, such as their email address, mobile phone number, or other relevant details. Cash explains this is so the complainant can take defamation action against the anonymous user. Scott Morrison announces that the government will introduce legislation to hold social media companies accountable for defamatory and harmful posts by online trolls: Digital platforms – these online companies – must have proper processes to enable the takedown of this content. There needs to be an easy and quick and fast way for people to raise these issues with these platforms and get it taken down. They have that responsibility. They have created this world. They have created the space, and they need to make it safe, and if they won’t, we will make them laws such as this, and I will campaign for these all around the world as I have done on so many other occasions with Australia taking the lead. We simply want them to make it a safe place. They will need those simple procedures. Secondly, it is important that we understand that they are the publishers at the end of the day. Just like the media who is here today who represent the traditional media, papers that are published, news bulletins that are broadcast, we all know who is putting that to air and who is putting the ink on the paper, and they are responsible and they are accountable for what is published in those mediums. So, too, should it be for these digital online companies that allow these things to be aired and published on their platforms. And where people do not identify themselves, or the digital companies provide shields – a digital shield to trolls and bots and bullies and bigots – well, we will hold them accountable for the statements that are made and they will be liable for what is said. The prime minister is holding a press conference. Scott Morrison starts by acknowledging the growing concern around Omicron. But he is here to speak about the government’s new bill to hold social media companies to account for defamatory and harmful posts by anonymous users: The online world provides many great opportunities but it comes with some real risks and we must address these, or it will continue to have a very harmful and corrosive impact on our society, on our community ... The online world should not be a wild west where bots and bigots and trolls and others are anonymously going around and can harm people and hurt people, harass them and bully them and sledge them. Morrison adds that women are one of the “biggest victims when it comes to the terrible things that we see in the online world”. Vulnerable women attempting to escape domestic violence are being offered “false hope” by a government program that potentially could be putting them at greater risk, frontline service workers say. The two-year $145m escaping violence payment trial was billed as a one-off payment of up to $5,000 to “help women establish a life free of violence”. In reality, the program offers eligible people up to $1,500 in cash, with the remainder paid in vouchers or direct payments to schools or rental bond agencies. In the month the trial has been running, frontline services are already pleading for clarity over who is eligible and how the payment works. Read the full story by Amy Remeikis: New South Wales premier Dominic Perrottet, federal health minister Greg Hunt, and opposition leader Anthony Albanese are also all expected to give updates soon. It’s going to be a busy few hours. Scott Morrison is expected to speak to reporters shortly. Standing by! Minister for women’s safety Anne Ruston told ABC Insiders this morning that the government plans to introduce legislation to prevent social media platforms from allowing anonymous users to post material that is going to be defamatory or damaging or cause injury to an individual. The federal government is moving ahead with its plan to allow travellers from Japan and South Korea to come to Australia without quarantining from Wednesday, despite concerns around the new Omicron Covid-19 variant. Our friends at AAP have the story: Allowing travellers from Japan and South Korea into Australia without needing to quarantine from Wednesday will go ahead as planned at this stage, Trade Minister Dan Tehan says. However, the Morrison government is keeping a watchful eye on developments surrounding the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus. Australia has shut its borders to nine southern African countries and NSW, Victoria and the ACT have brought in new rules for all international arrivals amid concern over Omicron. “We think that’s got the balance right at the moment,” Mr Tehan told Sky News’ Sunday Agenda program from Geneva. “But obviously there is more work to be done in understanding this new variant and the potential impacts it might have.” Mr Tehan had travelled to Switzerland for a World Trade Organization ministerial meeting, only to find it had been cancelled because of the clampdown on travellers from the southern African states. Urgent genomic sequencing is under way to determine whether two people, who tested positive for the virus in Sydney overnight after spending time in Africa, have the Omicron variant. The two arrivals are in special health accommodation and 12 others on the flight from Doha who had been in the region will do two weeks’ mandatory quarantine … NSW, Victoria and the ACT will make all overseas arrivals quarantine at home for 72 hours. People already in the state who have been in the nine countries in the past two weeks must isolate for 14 days and be immediately tested. Anyone in those jurisdictions who have been to the nine southern African countries in the past 14 days must get a PCR test and quarantine immediately. South Australia extended the length of its quarantine requirement for fully vaccinated Australian international arrivals to two weeks, and made small changes to its interstate arrival regime. West Australian Premier Mark McGowan announced SA would be designated “low risk”, introducing a quarantine requirement for international arrivals from the state. Tasmania will bar entry to people who have been in southern Africa unless they have first completed two weeks of supervised quarantine on the mainland. Commonwealth Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly said Omicron was spreading quickly, but it wasn’t clear that it caused more severe symptoms than existing strains. It is not yet known whether existing vaccines are any less effective against the new variant than prevailing strains. Finally, David Speers asks Anne Ruston about her work as minister for women’s safety. He asks when we will expect to see the draft national plan to prevent violence against women and children, given that Ruston’s department promised it would be public by the end of the year. Ruston says: We will release the draft plan this year, but obviously take the opportunity to make any changes that may come from that consultation. Speers also asks about how, six months ago, Ruston announced an extension of two years of funding for frontline family and domestic violence support services. Ruston says New South Wales is the only state that has received the funding because “no other state has signed up the documentation”: Obviously we’re very keen for them to do so and would certainly encourage them to sign the documentation so the money can flow, but at this stage we have not received any advice to suggest that states and territories are requiring the money immediately, but of course the money has been promised and the money will be delivered. Speers moves on to ask Ruston about new legislation the government is expected to introduce this week which will target online trolls. He asks how the government plans to stop social media bullying: Ruston: Well, what this particular bill that we’re proposing to bring in this week does two things: One is to say to social media platforms you cannot allow somebody to post material that is going to be defamatory or damaging or cause injury to an individual anonymously and get away with it. So what we now seek to do is have a mechanism where there is a complaints mechanism, so if somebody thinks that they are being defamed, bullied or attacked on social media that they will have an opportunity to require the platform to take it down, and if they fail to do so, then there will be a court process that would allow that person to require the platform to provide details of the identity of the abusive or defaming identity so that they can take the necessary processes through ... the court process. It is absolutely unacceptable that a platform can shirk its responsibility to say: “Well, we don’t know who it is, so you just go ahead and defame and bully.” We’ve seen the consequences of this so many times in Australia. Speers: But this is the thing, if you are going to say to Twitter and Facebook that they have to identify every one of their users, they might just laugh and say, “OK, we will not operate in Australia.” Do you think they could possibly ... identify all of their billions of users? Ruston: Well, I would really like to see any of these platforms stand up and say that they think it’s acceptable that they hide behind the anonymity of bots and bullies and bigots online ... I think the whole world should be asking these platforms to take an absolutely much more responsible approach with how they deal with this. We’ve seen people take their own lives as a result of some of this behaviour from anonymous bullies and it’s just not acceptable. You can’t do it in real life, you can’t do it offline, so why should you be allowed online? Speers points out that the eSafety commissioner has said it would be challenging for Facebook to identify or reidentify its 2.7 billion users. So how is the government going to be able to get Facebook and Twitter to go back and do this? There is a lot of back and forth as Ruston says the government needs to “work out how we can get past some of the challenges” and Speers again asks whether this is impractical. He then asks whether the government is worried if these social media platforms threaten to shut down in Australia rather than comply with its demands? Ruston: I think the government will be working with likeminded nations around the world. We’ve seen the UK take a likeminded approach. Collectively nations around the world need to protect their citizens from this really insidious new way of bullying. Speers asks about the “number of criticisms” of the Coalition’s draft bill for a national integrity commission, pointing out that “even some of your own colleagues have concerns”. Speers: Under that model, politicians can only be questioned secretly. There would be no transparency for public to see what’s going on. A federal police officer, however, would have to face a full public hearing. Does that different standard make any sense? Ruston: Well, one of the things that we do need to be really careful of is that you don’t set up a structure that then allows for political purpose and political gain; [that allows for] one party to actually prosecute somebody from another party just for the political gain. We’ve seen the shadow attorney general try to refer numerous things in relation to political gamesmanship, and we need to make sure that doesn’t happen. Equally, doesn’t matter who you are in public life, if you are found to be corrupt, then there are processes that need to be put in place and will be put in place. There are existing mechanisms in a lot of areas and what this bill seeks to do is to fill the gap that says serious corruption needs to be dealt with appropriately, but we mustn’t let this turn into something that is some sort of a sideshow. It must befit for purpose. Speers: Just before we leave this area, though, on the process: you are sticking with the original model, but you won’t introduce it unless Labor now comes out and says what they are going todo? Ruston: Well, I think a bipartisan approach to something as important as an integrity commission would send a very strong message to the Australian public that all of us take seriously the issue of serious corruption, and I would be delighted if the Labor party was prepared to come forward and support this. This – our particular bill suggests that the powers of the commission are well in excess of a royal commission, so I think it is a good balanced bill that balances out, asI said, calling out corruption, but at the same time protecting the innocence of those until they’re proven guilty. David Speers turns to the government’s national integrity commission (or lack thereof). He asks if the government will introduce any legislation for a federal corruption watchdog to come before the parliament at the end of the year? The minister blames Labor for the government’s inaction. Anne Ruston: I think the prime minister has been very clear, as has the attorney general. If the Labor party are prepared to support the legislation that is currently before them, then we will bring it into the parliament and we will pass it as quickly as they will allow us to. Speers points out the fact that the government hasn’t introduced any legislation for a corruption watchdog: “Hang on, you are in government. You need to bring it into parliament. You can’t blame Labor when you haven’t brought anything to parliament?” Ruston: Well, one of the most important things for something as important as an integrity commission is to make sure it passes. The last thing we want to do is bring a bill into this place and then find out it won’t get through ... The bill provided to the Labor party that we sought their support 12 months ago is the bill that we currently wish to bring into the parliament and we are asking for the Labor party support because we believe that the bill is a fair balance between making sure that serious corruption is called out and dealt with, but at the same time we want to maintain the rule of law in this country and that is that you must be presumed innocent until you’re proven guilty, and need to be really careful you’re not convicted in the court of public opinion before you have a chance to put your case forward. First up, David Speers asks Anne Ruston whether any of the Coalition men who crossed the floor this week were called into a meeting the prime minister, or only Bridget Archer? Ruston: Well, David, I think it’s an entirely reasonable proposition when somebody expresses an opinion different to government policy and then acts on it, the prime minister would seek to find out what their concerns were in an effort to try and resolve them, and that’s exactly consistent with how the prime minister would deal with any other backbencher that sought to cross the floor. And I can assure you that the prime minister did meet with Senator Antic and Senator Rennick last week, as he would have met, I’m sure, with every other Liberal party senator who crossed the floor in the time he has been prime minister. Speers points to the fact that Archer told news.com.au political editor Samantha Maiden that she wasn’t comfortable at her meeting with the prime minister and had wanted more time to collect herself before speaking to him. Speers asks if, given that, it was appropriate for her to be brought before him straight away? Ruston: I don’t know the circumstances in how the meeting was ... but what I do know is that it was entirely consistent. [There was] nothing different about the prime minister wanting to meet with Bridget Archer than at any other time. I’m absolutely confident that the prime minister wanted to meet with Bridget because he wanted to know what her concerns were – because we always as a government want to resolve those concerns. Minister for women’s safety Anne Ruston is speaking to David Speers on ABC Insiders. An evacuation order has been issued to residents of towns along the Hunter River in NSW as rising flood waters threaten power and water services, AAP reports. Widespread heavy rainfall led to flooding across much of the state. Rain eased on Saturday afternoon, with not much forecast for Sunday. However, the statewide situation remains volatile, with numerous watches and warnings active following a month of heavy rainfall. More than 30 people have been rescued from floodwaters since Friday lunchtime. The SES has received more than 745 requests for help. In the Hunter, major flooding is on the cards in Singleton for Sunday morning, and Maitland is also on alert. On Monday, the Macquarie River at Warren could also reach high levels. Areas of major concern include along the Namoi River at Gunnedah, in the state’s northeast, and the Castlereagh River around Coonamble in the central west. The Bureau of Meteorology said some areas of the state were hit with more than 100mm of rain on Friday. On Saturday evening, there were major flood warnings for the Lachlan at Jemalong and the Namoi at Narrabri and Wee Waa, where it’s feared residents could be cut off for more than a week. Sydney’s Warragamba Dam began spilling shortly after 9pm on Friday. WaterNSW said the outflow volume could peak at a rate of about 60-80 gigalitres per day, just a fraction of levels in March that peaked at 500 gigalitres per day. “On current projections the spill could continue for up to a week,” WaterNSW said in a statement on Saturday, adding “downstream impacts are likely”. Premier Dominic Perrottet on Saturday urged residents to follow safety advice and avoid driving through flooding, The number of flood rescues performed by SES volunteers was “way too high”, he said. “Those rescues take place in the main because people aren’t following the instructions, they’re driving through floodwaters. Don’t do that. Follow the advice, that’s the best way to stay safe.” About 40 years ago this week, Australia’s intelligence agency, the Office of National Assessments, delivered a 17-page report to prime minister Malcolm Fraser. The subject? “Fossil Fuels and the Greenhouse Effect”. Read about how Australia’s spy agency predicted the climate crisis 40 years ago – and fretted about coal exports here: Prime minister Scott Morrison is expected to hold a press conference at 10am. The Northern Territory has two new Covid-19 cases, including an international traveller from South Africa. Our friends at AAP have the story: The Northern Territory has two new COVID-19 cases, one an arrival on a repatriation flight from South Africa where the new and heavily mutated Omicron variant has been detected. Authorities as yet have no genomic sequencing in relation to the passenger’s infection strain, Health Minister Natasha Fyles says. However the person has been in supervised quarantine at the national Howard Springs facility, south of Darwin, since arriving, she told reporters on Saturday. “So there is a very low risk to the community and we wish that person well,” Ms Fyles said. NT health chief Dr Charles Pain says he expects the sequencing test results for the South African case to be processed by Monday. The passenger arrived in Darwin on Thursday and his positive virus result was confirmed on Friday evening. The Northern Territory’s other infection was locally acquired and is of a 50-year-old man from Katherine who is a household contact of an existing case. He has also been housed at Howard Springs during his entire infectious period and is considered a non-risk. Around the world, health authorities are racing to test and track down cases of the Omicron variant. Confirmed cases have so far been detected in Italy, Germany and the UK. The UK has already banned travel from several southern African nations. UK prime minister Boris Johnston announced that other travellers will have to take a PCR test by the second day of their arrival and self-isolate until they have a negative result. Face coverings will become compulsory in shops and on public transport in the UK from next week. Dr Anthony Fauci, the director of America’s National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, told NBC News that he “not be surprised” if the Omicron variant was already in the United States. We have more detail about the two travellers from southern Africa who tested positive for Covid-19 in Sydney. A Qatar Airways flight from Doha landed in Sydney about 7pm last night. Fourteen of the passengers were from one of the nine southern African countries: South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini, Malawi and the Seychelles. The passengers were tested on arrival. Two of them tested positive for Covid-19 and urgent genomic sequencing is under way to determine if they have been infected by the new Omicron B.1.1.529 variant. The two passengers have been transported to the special health accommodation where they will undertake 14 days of quarantine, according to NSW Health. All travellers who have been in South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini, Malawi and the Seychelles during the 14-day period before their arrival in NSW must enter hotel quarantine for 14 days. NSW Health says other passengers on the flight may be also considered close contacts and will be contacted and requested to get tested immediately then isolate for 14 days in accordance with a public health order. Good morning! It’s Justine Landis-Hanley here to bring you the news today, Sunday 28 November 2021. Australia is bracing for Omicron as states and territories tighten border restrictions for overseas arrivals. The variant has already been detected in UK and across Europe. Urgent genomic testing is underway in Sydney after two travellers from southern African nations tested positive for Covid-19. The flight arrived in Sydney last night. Health authorities are trying to work out whether they carry the heavily mutated Omicron variant. A traveller who arrived in the Northern Territory on a repatriation flight from South Africa has tested positive for Covid-19. Authorities are now testing to determine whether the person is infected with the Omicron variant. The traveller has been in supervised quarantine at the national Howard Springs facility, south of Darwin, since arriving. The federal government yesterday closed international borders to non-citizens arriving from South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini, Malawi and the Seychelles. Anyone who has already arrived in Australia from these countries needs to begin a 14-day quarantine. New South Wales and Victoria also announced that all vaccinated travellers from other countries would be required to isolate for 72 hours on arrival into their states.Scott Morrison, at the end of a wild penultimate parliamentary sitting week, looked to change the conversation on Sunday, hoping that something fresh to talk about may be a prelude to calmer times. Rather than agonising over the wildness of his own MPs, Morrison sought refuge in the wildness of social media. The prime minister flagged new powers forcing global social media giants “to unmask anonymous online trolls” in a move he characterised as “world-leading”. Let’s begin with a couple of affirmations. The first is the Morrison government has been attentive to negative trends in the digital badlands, intervening, for example, to force Google and Facebook to negotiate a fair payment with news organisations for using their content in Facebook’s news feed and Google’s search. The second thing to acknowledge is this policy terrain is profoundly important. Platform-accelerated cultural corrosion is one of the greatest challenges liberal democracies face. Proliferating misinformation and disinformation and the algorithms that reward conflict, sensationalism, and the global promulgation of wild theories, are the cancer of the digital age. On Sunday, Morrison zeroed in on abuse and calumny on social media. Under his proposal, Twitter and Facebook would be considered publishers and held liable for defamatory comments posted on their platforms unless they could identify the trolls hurling the abuse, in which case, the troll was in the frame. Obviously abuse, and the febrile intolerance it breeds, is dangerous. But it’s a subset of a much bigger problem. There are also very obvious questions about whether or not Morrison’s proposal is actually workable in practice. Morrison has been bumping to Sunday’s landing point in increments. But it really wasn’t that long ago that the same government now insisting the platforms are publishers thought (and said) the opposite. As recently as August 2019, the communications minister Paul Fletcher (strangely absent from Sunday’s announcement) was running a mile from that proposition. He insisted a digital platform was “a different kind of business to a traditional media organisation that has editorial obligations”. The Nationals MP Anne Webster (who had a truly dreadful experience with a troll) flagged in 2020 pursuing her own private member’s bill because she was having significant trouble persuading senior figures in the government to take on the platforms and require them to exercise editorial responsibility for defamatory content and bullying. But the roadblocks seem to have been cleared. The urgency of the prime minister’s zeitgeist hunting on a football field in the southern suburbs of Canberra on Sunday could lead a person to conclude he was racing in the direction of the parliament as we enter what could be the last sitting week before the federal election armed with the necessary troll-busting legislation. But that doesn’t seem to be the case. Morrison flagged that an exposure draft would be made public sometime during the coming week, and then there would be a bunch of consultation with stakeholders. It was a similar story with the government’s integrity commission legislation. One of Morrison’s own backbenchers thought resolving that issue was important enough to cross the floor last week. But Morrison made it clear on Sunday the government’s roundly criticised integrity commission proposal was only coming to the House of Representatives if Labor was prepared to back it. Let me repeat, this could be the last sitting week before an election, and the Morrison government is still dragging its heels on the anti-corruption body it promised voters it would deliver three years ago, and it hopes it can get away with blaming Labor for failing to present its own legislation to the parliament. It is also not clear that Morrison’s religious discrimination legislation (that began life as a religious freedom package about the same time as the integrity commission went on to the production line, before morphing into an anti-discrimination package) will pass the lower house either, or whether that will remain on ice until after a parliamentary inquiry. Liberal moderates including MPs Dave Sharma and Trent Zimmerman and senator Andrew Bragg have called for protections for gay teachers and students to be brought forward, not delayed 12 months to wait for an Australian Law Reform Commission review of discrimination laws. While much is in flux, this much is clear. The government really does want to pass its controversial voter ID legislation this week. With that package, it is either pass this week or bust. While senior government figures are hopeful the rebel alliance in the Senate might return to the fold this week, it is not yet clear whether Liberal senators will end their strike. Liberals Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic have said they won’t vote with the government on passing government legislation until Morrison does something about mandatory vaccinations. Sam McMahon, the Country Liberal Northern Territory senator, has also warned she “might not be able to vote” for the voter ID laws, citing “concerns about how they’re going to impact, particularly Indigenous territorians”. That’s before you get to the Senate crossbenchers, who may or may not be willing to say yes to that legislation this week. Morrison may crave tranquility, but the wild abounds.Almost 25 years ago, a Swiss art collector bought a Lucian Freud painting – a full-length male nude – at auction. He then received a call from the British artist, asking to buy it from him. The two men did not know each other, and the collector politely refused, as he liked the picture. Three days later, he claims he received another call from a now furious Freud who told him that, unless he sold it to him, he would deny having painted it. The collector, who wishes to remain anonymous, told the Observer: “He said: ‘I’ll give you more than you paid, I’ll double it.’ I declined, and he became very aggressive, with bad words. He said: ‘In that case, you will never sell it.’” To his dismay, the Freud estate subsequently refused to authenticate Standing Male Nude – and that could have been the end of a sad tale for the collector. Now, however, after years of research, he has been given a lifeline. Three independent studies have concluded that Standing Male Nude is very likely to have been painted by the 20th-century master. Not only that, but the painting is also thought likely to be a self-portrait that Freud may have had good reason to want to hide. Freud, who died in 2011, is today revered for his masterful depictions of other people’s naked flesh, often with brutal realism. His lifesize nude depiction of his muse Sue Tilley, also known as Big Sue, sold in 2015 for £35.6m. Standing Male Nude, an unfinished oil on canvas measuring 43cm by 65cm, was among items from a deceased individual in Geneva auctioned in 1997. It was catalogued as a Freud. With the artist’s subsequent denial of his authorship, auctioneers would be unable to sell it today – just as Freud predicted. After extensive research, the collector and his friend Thierry Navarro, a private investigator, believe that Freud’s desperation to acquire the painting was sparked by embarrassment because the male nude appears to be a self-portrait. Viewed from behind, with his face turned in profile, his facial features match photographs of him. Although Freud was known for his many female lovers, he is thought to have had early gay affairs. Navarro discovered that it had hung in a Geneva flat secretly used by fellow artist Francis Bacon and gay friends, with Freud among its visitors. He said: “There is a living witness in Geneva from the gay community. When the collector held a private exhibition of his paintings in Geneva, this person said, ‘I know this painting.’ He explained that it was in a flat used by Bacon, and that Geneva was a kind of bubble for the gay community. “This witness knew about the relationship between Freud and Bacon. He gave a lot of details. He said Bacon asked Freud to paint this for him and that Bacon had this and another painting in the entrance of the flat.” Navarro was also astonished to discover a link between the painted male nude and one of Eadweard Muybridge’s 1880s photographs of nude athletes in a book titled The Human Figure in Motion, whose homoerotic images are also known to have inspired Bacon: “Freud used the ‘Athlete. Catching at a Ball’ from this book. If you look on the figure’s back, there is a spot that’s been reproduced from the photograph, which means there is a direct link.” Asked why Bacon had left the painting in Geneva, Navarro speculated that the pair may have had a falling out and gone their separate ways, with Bacon abandoning the painting. He concluded: “Freud likely lied about this painting because it was embarrassing for him and he would probably prefer to destroy it rather than to see it in the hands of someone trying to sell it on the market.” Dr Nicholas Eastaugh, a leading British expert in scientific analysis of paintings, took minuscule pigments and compared those with data in the Tate from authenticated Freud paintings. His tests also involved using infrared images to reveal a preliminary drawing in keeping with other Freuds. He concluded: “We have found from the work presented here both a positive comparative result with Freud and an absence of negative indicators for his authorship of Standing Male Nude.” Art historian Hector Obalk studied the painting and, in his report, noted that “the manner in which the flesh is depicted is quite typical of the artist”. He concluded: “It is, to my mind, certain that the author of the pictorial gestures required for the execution can be none other than Lucian Freud, insofar as I recognise his hand”. Another study was conducted by Dr Carina Popovici, a scientist and co-founder of Art Recognition, a Swiss company based near Zurich, whose scientific tests employ groundbreaking AI technology. She said: “Our AI has classified parts of the painting as being by the hand of Freud with a high score – a positive result up to 95% – and this might imply that the remaining surface was painted by someone else.” Navarro said: “This is such a unique painting linking two masters – Bacon and Freud. It deserves to be in a museum.” In 2016, an early Freud picture was attributed to the artist, despite his own denials that he painted it. Philip Mould’s BBC show Fake or Fortune? uncovered evidence that included notes from the artist’s former solicitor. The artist had apparently refused to acknowledge the work because it was originally owned by Denis Wirth-Miller, an artist with whom Freud had a long-running feud. Freud’s estate was approached but declined to comment. • This article was amended on 28 November 2021 to provide the moniker by which Sue Tilley is most commonly known, “Big Sue”.One of the earliest signs of spring in my garden is a ring of snowdrops and winter acconites that encircles the trunk of a medlar tree outside the greenhouse. This yellow-and-white display was planted to complement a collection of elegantly engraved, moss-covered mini-headstones that mark the resting places of the previous owner’s dogs. Each of these markers has a simple but evocative dedication: “Medlar, beloved Border Terrier”; “Otter, a little treasure. Sister of Medlar”; “Skip, grandson of Genghis. Sweet eccentric.” Every time I see this pet cemetery I am reminded that, despite a complex denial structure that involves a sneaking suspicion that he is immortal, there will come a time when I have to face the death of Hector, dog of dogs. Hector is a cockapoo and not ashamed to admit it. He sneers at terms such as “designer dog” and “hybrid” and is rightly proud of his spaniel/poodle heritage. Although many people have an origin myth of how their pet chose them, in Hector’s case it is true. When I went with my wife Alexa to see a friend whose working cocker had recently given birth, a blind, chocolate-brown caterpillar of a pup freed himself from the wriggling furry mass of his siblings and crawled his way towards us. Bonding was instant and, on our side, unconditional. Eight years later, Hector is my companion, confidant and friend. Our relationship is uncomplicated; we don’t argue, we are always pleased to see each other and I never go to bed angry with him (even if he is taking up half of the duvet). Hector’s antics have, at times, astonished me: at the funeral of Marion, an aunt whose life had been dedicated to loving, breeding and showing poodles, Hector, like the dogs of Antioch at the fall of the Roman Empire, threw his head back and released a lupine call at the exact moment the celebrant released Marion’s ashes to the wind; an action he has never repeated. (A friend recently recommended reading Dogs That Know When Their Owners are Coming Home, by the renowned biochemist Rupert Sheldrake, who studies phenomena that conventional science cannot explain, to shed light on Hector’s more baffling behaviour.) While many of my friends understand and even identify with the depth of feeling I have for Hector, others see it as mawkish. How can a relatively sane and intelligent person invest such emotion in an animal? I have seen this attitude expressed when others who have lost a much-loved dog have been grief stricken. “We dismiss and don’t legitimise people’s grief for a dog,” says Julia Samuel, psychotherapist and author of Grief Works: Stories of Life, Death and Surviving. “It is as if people have more value and those that make a fuss about a pet are somehow trivial. As our relationships, however, can be more straightforward with our dogs than with family members or friends, we can invest huge amounts of love and time in our pets. We have no right to begrudge or dismiss people’s grief at the loss of a dog. Indeed, it can be very important to have a ritual or a physical reminder to mark the death of a pet.” Short of enacting a reverse Greyfriars Bobby, I am pushed to come up with a suitable memento for such a special beast as Hector. Cloning? Too Silicon Valley nutter. Taxidermy? Too mad cat lady. Brian Sewell, in his wonderful autobiography Sleeping With Dogs, suggests planting a tree, but bemoans that he won’t be around to see the Sequoia sempervirens reach its full potential in 200 years’ time, a sentiment I cannot help sharing. As a more immediate memorial, I consider having Hector sit for a portrait and contact the artist Sally Muir, whose work always manages to capture the innate doggishness of her sitters. “I have been obsessed with dogs all my life,” she says, “and I also love how so many artists have portrayed them. I am particularly fond of Hogarth’s pug paintings and Freud’s whippets. He was much more sympathetic to his canine sitters than his human ones.” “I do work from photographs,” Muir says, “but ideally I like to meet my subjects and look them in the eye. If you are going to have your dog painted as a memorial, wait until he is quite old. Like people, as dogs age they become an extreme version of themselves; there is a dignity to old dogs.” A portrait would be a fine way to remember Hector and, looking at Sally’s work, I know she would be able to produce a painting that would capture everything but his bark. There is, however, something a little too static, too frozen in time about an image that does not quite get Hector’s delight in being Hector. He is a true energy and like all his kind, simply can’t help living in the moment. Several years ago, Laurie Anderson composed and performed music intended only for dogs. Performed in a low frequency perfectly adapted to its canine audience’s sense of hearing, this piece complemented her film Heart of a Dog, a work inspired by the bardo – the Tibetan concept of transitioning into the afterlife. It was Anderson’s idea of combining Tibetan mysticism, dogs and music that inspired my final choice of a suitable memorial for Hector: a piece of music composed to celebrate his life and death. I did not, however, want this to be any mass of the dead in the tradition of Brahms, Fauré or Mozart, but more an uplifting anthem evoking the exuberance, joy and chaos Hector brings to life. Not a Requiem but a Hequiem. Although I have always suspected Hector of being a rock fan due to his resemblance to Robert Plant when he is overdue a groom, for the Hequiem I took my starting point to be works that brought to life big landscapes, freedom and hope, such as Vaughan Williams’s Lark, the Scherzo: Molto Vivace from Dvořák’s 9th and the “Open Prairie” from Aaron Copeland’s Billy the Kid Suite. My search for the right composer began with a conversation with William Mival, head of composition at the Royal College of Music. “A good composer will write to order and provide what a client wants,” says Mival. “Mozart did exactly the same. Indeed, his commission for the Requiem was from a client who wanted to pass the music off as his own. As I was attacked by a dog as a child, however, I am not your man, but I can think of a number of Royal College students who would be thrilled with this idea.” After discussing Hector’s personality and my ideas for the piece I was put in touch with dog lover, composer and recent graduate from the Royal College, Nahum Strickland. Making his own music since the age of three, Nahum is something of a prodigy and was featured in a Guardian piece on child composers in 2004. His approach to composition is also remarkable. “When I watch a video or look at scenery or an image, the music appears to me fully orchestrated, already complete,” he says. “It is just there and if I don’t write it down it disappears – I’ll never get it back again.” So Nahum can get as good an idea as possible of Hector’s nature, I send numerous videos of him charging through the countryside, playing with his dog walking pack and sleeping in his bed. We talk of his loves: playing ball (endlessly), guarding; and his hates: his nemesis the cocker spaniel who taunts him from the back of a quad bike – and being ignored, cyclists. For Nahum, the Hequiem presented a welcome challenge. “In composition you usually start with an arc – a beginning, middle and end – but Hector is always charging around. He seems to find it hard to concentrate on one thing and I get the idea he will always do what he feels like; he is a very immediate dog. So I got this very fast-moving time and this piece became more of a progression and odyssey. The piece builds to something a little bit bombastic – like Hector.” Not only is Nahum’s assessment of Hector’s character spot on but also the piece he produces – from the acerbic timbre of the opening oboe solo that captures Hector’s playful nature to the climax that immediately brings to my mind the sight of Hector charging after a ball or a rabbit – is sublime. I can imagine myself weeping uncontrollably at his grave side. Hector, however, remaining blissfully unaware of his mortality, appears unmoved and gives me a look that reminds that it is time for supper.‘Excuse me, sir, but why are you wearing a poppy? Remembrance Day was on Thursday.” The speaker was a Spanish gentlemen. The scene: the breakfast room of a hotel in Valladolid, an hour’s train ride north-west of Madrid, on Saturday, the 13th of this month. I was struggling with the toaster. You know how it is when one arrives at a self-service breakfast room. I replied that I always wore a poppy until Remembrance Sunday, when there was the traditional Cenotaph parade in London. “Ah,” he said. “Forgive me, but why on earth did your country vote the way it did?” It turned out that my interlocutor was a history professor at Madrid University. He proceeded to pour his heart out about the tragedy of Brexit, and the appalling impact it is having on Britain’s relations with the countries that Boris Johnson refers to – after all the economic and diplomatic carnage his Brexiters are inflicting – as “our European partners”. Visiting Spain after almost two years of absence from the continent was an almost euphoric experience. Europe! A fine historic Spanish city, none the worse for being relatively unknown – except, perhaps, for its football team – to the Brits who favour the Costa del Brexit. What a treat to be revisiting the European Union we became part of under more enlightened Conservative leaders than the present shower. True, to visit our daughter – who teaches English in Valladolid – there was an awful lot of frustrating Brexit bureaucracy. This was on top of the tiresome, if wholly understandable, paper, computer and smartphone work necessitated by Covid precautions. But what a relief it was to see that, unlike in Johnson’s England, masks were being worn everywhere: some connection, surely, with the low Covid casualty rate in Spain. I had just read, in an interview with the New European, that great European Kenneth Clarke observing that under Johnson, whose Brexit-inflicted damage can no longer be confused with the impact of Covid, “we are now getting dangerously close to the ‘elected dictatorship’ that Lord Hailsham, the former lord chancellor, warned us about half a century ago”. But there is hope. The would-be dictator is being found out. I have been re-reading Anthony Powell’s Dance to the Music of Time. There is a great passage: “However, like most untrustworthy persons, Uncle Giles had the gift of inspiring confidence in a great many people with whom he came in contact. Even those who, to their cost, had known him for years, sometimes found difficulty in estimating the lengths to which he could carry his lack of reliability – and indeed sheer incapacity – in matters of business.” Does this remind you of anyone? The good news is that not only are his parliamentary colleagues and those hoodwinked “red wall” voters beginning to rumble Johnson: it looks as though the leader of the opposition, Sir Keir Starmer, has finally discovered, in the spirit of his great predecessor Harold Wilson, that ridicule is a fine debating tool. Among the Johnson appointees who certainly deserve to be ridiculed is his so-called “negotiator”, David Frost. Unfortunately, Starmer cannot get at him directly because Johnson catapulted Frost into the House of Lords. But I gather Lord Adonis has a good go at him there. Frost is on record before the referendum as pointing to the considerable advantages of membership of the customs union and single market, which he then put at up 8% of GDP, or £1,500 a year per person on average income. He should have stuck to his guns, and not sold his soul to the Brexit devil. Which brings us back to Starmer, who was right to oppose Brexit, and should also most certainly have stuck to his guns. The disaster of Brexit is an open goal for the opposition. It is no good espousing a policy of “making Brexit work”. The fact of the matter is that Brexit isn’t working and cannot work. Despite all the irritation Brexit has inflicted on our partners in Europe, they are aware that the sensible thing for us would be to prepare the way back, albeit with our tail between our legs. The countries of Europe know that they benefited from British membership – not least from the single market that the UK championed before losing its senses. In his new book Europe Beyond the Euro, Charles Enoch of St Antony’s College, Oxford, quotes Emmanuel Macron as saying: “In a few years’ time, the UK will be able to find its place, if it wishes” in the EU – an EU that would be “refocused on uncompromising values and an effective market”. Meanwhile, can anyone tell me if there is any precedent for this degree of national self-harm?Symbol of Easter and scourge of Mr McGregor, the rabbit may be the cute hero of children’s books but its rapid reproduction has traditionally made it a pest for farmers and gardeners. Now, however, with British rabbit populations are being decimated by disease, the humble bunny is being hailed as an “ecosystem engineer” and landowners encouraged to create innovative “rabbit hotels” to revive its numbers. The hotels – piles of branches artfully arranged near existing rabbit warrens – provide safety from burgeoning predators, and new places for female rabbits to burrow and give birth to their kits. The brash piles are the key technique in a new “toolkit” successfully trialled in five locations as part of Shifting Sands, a four-year National Heritage lottery-funded project to restore rare species in the East Anglian Brecks. Rabbit numbers decreased by 88% in the east Midlands and 83% in Scotland between 1996 and 2018. They fell 43% across the whole of the UK over the decade to 2018, with the latest scientific survey recording no sign of the declines slowing. “Rabbits are in a lot of trouble,” said Pip Mountjoy, Shifting Sands project manager at Natural England. “They are actually an endangered species in their native region on the Iberian peninsula. It’s surprising for people that rabbits are important in some ecosystems. We think of them as a pest but in Britain they are a keystone species – they act as landscape managers and a lot of other species rely on them.” Shifting Sands is part of the Back from the Brink species-rescue effort. The European rabbit is not native to the UK but was brought here by the Normans. For nearly nine centuries they were intensively farmed for meat on the Brecks. In this unique dry, sandy biodiversity hotspot, their grazing helped rare plants and invertebrates thrive. Rabbits are selective grazers, and keep vigorous grasses in check, thereby assisting more delicate wildflowers. The animal’s earth-scratching and burrowing helps seeds germinate and creates what ecologists call “mini mosaic habitat” – patches of warm, bare earth which are havens for rare flowers and invertebrates, as well as the common lizards and adders that bask there. Rare plants assisted by rabbit grazing include purple milk vetch, rare spring sedge, spring speedwell, and prostrate perennial knawel, which is found nowhere in the world outside Breckland. The caterpillars of the declining lunar yellow underwing moth are found close to rabbit burrows and even endangered birds are helped: rabbits unearth lots of flints from the sandy soil which provide perfect camouflage for the stone curlew, which lays its flint-coloured eggs on the ground. Myxomatosis introduced into Britain in the 1950s was allowed to spread and reduce rabbit populations by 99%. While many crop-growers were pleased, the rapid loss of wild rabbits and their grazing contributed to the extinction of the large blue butterfly in 1979 (since reintroduced) and near-loss of other species that require warm, closely cropped grassland. Rabbit populations revived when individuals developed resistance to myxomatosis but a new virus, rabbit haemorrhagic disease virus type 2 (RHDV2), has caused a second crash in Britain’s rabbit population since it emerged in commercial rabbit farms in northern France in 2010. Diana Bell, professor of conservation biology at the University of East Anglia, a partner in the Shifting Sands project, has studied the impact of RHDV2 on the large rabbit warrens on her university campus. “This virus has decimated rabbit populations – they’ve just crashed everywhere, and the virus keeps coming back,” she said. “It’s become endemic like myxomatosis. Even now we still don’t see baby rabbits by the side of the road as we used to.” The virus can kill rabbits at a young age, and a typical sight are baby rabbits, or kits, sat motionless at the entrance to a hole. The earlier variant, RHD1, caused bleeding from the nose but this virus often has no visible signs. When dead animals are subject to postmortem, major haemorrhaging has been found in their livers and organs. Myxomatosis still kills rabbits as well. “When you’ve got two completely different viruses attacking them at different stages in different ways I don’t think we will ever see rabbits back in the numbers they once were,” said Bell. Under her guidance, the Shifting Sands project has trialled techniques to boost rabbit populations where family groups are clinging on. “Rabbit habitat enhancement plots” – or rabbit hotels – are built to provide refuges for rabbits to hide from aerial predators such as buzzards and create “stepping stones” to help them hop through the landscape. But the rabbit hotels have another function. Bell’s research has revealed that rabbits live in matriarchal family groups, with a dominant female assisted by daughters, nieces, aunties, grandmothers and great-grandmothers. The dominant female prevents other females from having kits – sometimes even dragging a rival’s babies above ground to die – because too many young around a warren attracts predators including foxes, badgers, stoats and polecats. The hotels provide space where subordinate females can safely have babies, so helping rabbits breed like rabbits again. Monthly monitoring by volunteers from Natural England and Suffolk and Norfolk wildlife trusts found 41% of the brash piles contained rabbit burrows – which usually leads to breeding – and 91% contained scrapes – evidence of use by rabbits. The Shifting Sands project also used diggers to create artificial banks for rabbits to burrow and breed, as originally deployed by the warreners who bred rabbits in the Brecks. But researchers found the brash piles were more effective and cheaper to construct. The findings have gone into a toolkit, which is now being given to other landowners to boost rabbit populations. “We’re hoping this toolkit can be used across the UK because it’s a national problem,” said Mountjoy. Even though the rabbit is still classified as a costly, invasive pest by some studies, Mountjoy said it had not been difficult to persuade landowners to learn to love it, with one of 10 project partners being the Elveden Estate, a major vegetable grower. “It’s definitely true that a rabbit on cropland or a golfing green is a pest,” said Mountjoy, “but the landowners are overwhelmingly on board. We’ve had a really positive response.” Private landowners and conservation charities who own lowland heaths and grassland that are designated sites of special scientific interest are often required to maintain “open, disturbed conditions” on the site. “You can either get mechanical disturbance with a digger and pay for it or you can get it for free with rabbits, so landowners and rabbits aren’t at odds in the way that you might imagine,” said Mountjoy. Where Peter Rabbit-style vegetable theft has proved problematic, non-lethal deterrents such as rabbit-proof fencing can be used, according to Mountjoy, although she said rabbit populations were so low in many locations now that they simply were not the problem they once were. She added: “There’s little we can do to tackle the virus but these works will provide a lifeline to populations and help them deal with the threats that are coming in from all directions.”One morning in October, Lynn woke up and decided she would quit her job on the spot that day. The decision to quit was the climax of a reckoning that began at the start of the pandemic when she was first laid off from a job she had been in for three years. “I’ve always had the attitude of being a really hard worker,” Lynn said, explaining that she believed her skills made her indispensable to this company. “That really changed for me because I realized you could feel totally capable and really important when, really, you’re expendable.” A few months after being laid off, Lynn, who wished to be referred to by just her first name for fear of professional repercussions, got a job as a diagnostic technician for a solar company in Massachusetts. After a year at the company, work started to become an endless cycle of stress. Her company was in the process of eliminating her department and was trying to decrease her pay. “I just needed out,” she said. Lynn is one of the millions of Americans who have experienced a tectonic shift in their outlook to work during the pandemic. In September, 4.4 million people – more than the population of Oregon – quit their jobs. Job openings have surpassed 10m since the beginning of summer. Workers have been going on strikes and speaking out about their working conditions online, particularly on the popular subreddit r/Antiwork, which has more than a million members. “Quit my job last night, it was nice to be home to make the kids breakfast and take them to school today,” one Reddit user wrote on a post that has received more than 267,000 upvotes. “I may not have health insurance, but I feel so free!” another user wrote in a post that included screenshots of their resignation via text message. To experts who study the history and cultural role of work in the US, the fact that this moment occurred during the pandemic is largely unsurprising. Millions of Americans have long been exhausted by harsh working conditions – long hours, low pay and little flexibility – and many, especially those who were considered “essential workers”, have been burnt out by the pandemic. “People are saying that they are systematically underpaid, they get a ridiculously low share of the value that they produce over the course of the day. They’re doing most of the work, and yet they’re treated badly and receive wages that they cannot live on,” said Kathi Weeks, an associate professor of women’s studies at Duke University and author of The Problem with Work: Feminism, Marxism, Antiwork Politics, and Postwork Imaginaries. “The pandemic was the straw that broke the camel’s back.” Benjamin Hunnicutt, a historian at the University of Iowa who has studied the role that work plays in the lives of Americans for decades, describes it as a mass re-evaluation of the promise that a job can be more than a means to an end and can deeply fulfill us as human beings. Work as we know it is a modern invention, Hunnicutt points out, a product of the Industrial Revolution. The revolution separated work life from home life and made it a distinct part of people’s lives. While the payoff for society was huge, it also made work the dominant factor in our lives, with some people working over 70 hours and having fewer days off. Hunnicutt notes that progress in the early 20th century was defined as higher wages and shorter working hours. Notable economists predicted that this trend would continue and people would work less. The famed economist John Maynard Keynes predicted that by 2030, people would be working 15-hour work weeks. “Free time was seen as that place where human beings could flourish,” Hunnicutt said. “Work was good, but it’s still a means to an end – the end being making a living and the promise of free time to enrich life so that we become better parents, better participants in our community.” Instead, we have been stuck at the same 40-hour workweek that came out of the Great Depression. Why we have not budged from that schedule, despite technology that has made workers far more productive, is a question that Hunnicutt says his research from the last 50 years has been trying to answer. Since the 40-hour workweek was developed over 80 years ago, Americans have developed an almost religious devotion to work, Hunnicutt argues, one where work is seen as an end itself and is “fraught with expectations”. “Our expectation is that work will continue to be ‘full time’ and it will be that place where our humanity can be fulfilled,” he said. But while Americans were raised on the idea of a dream job, one that could be both personally and financially fulfilling, work has often fallen short of providing people with what they need to live. There is a huge gap between the productivity of workers over the last 40 years and the amount that wages have grown during the same time. Wages today offer workers the same purchasing power that they had in 1979, with the highest tenth of wage earners seeing the most meaningful rise in wages each year. About 43 million Americans have student loan debt worth a total of $1.7tn. Gig and contract work, which typically comes without health insurance or retirement benefits, has risen 15% over the last decade. Even before the pandemic, the reality for many millennials is that they will be financially worse off than their parents, having less wealth than previous generations, largely because of the rising cost of houses and student debt. This reality has created a disillusionment with work among young Americans that Hunnicutt said had been observed before the pandemic but had also been exacerbated by it. “The experience of being away from work has awakened people,” Hunnicutt said. “There are other things to do – there are walks to take in the park, there’s life beyond work that [people] had not thought about before.” Companies have caught on to the decreasing tolerance for work – particularly work with long hours and bad conditions – and have indicated they are willing to implement some change. Dozens of companies have announced they will allow their employees to work remotely indefinitely. Some companies, like Kickstarter and Shopify, are experimenting with four-day workweeks, which some argue does not affect productivity while increasing employee satisfaction. Policy action at the federal level, while limited, suggests lawmakers have been paying attention. Paid family and medical leave, while under heavy debate in Congress, made their way into a major spending bill passed by the House on Friday. Mark Takano, a US representative from California, has introduced a bill for a 32-hour workweek. Some experts say the phenomenon is temporary, a product of a hot labor market that is empowering workers, and things will eventually go back to the way things were. But others are hopeful that the pandemic has permanently shifted the way that people think about work and will inspire them to question – and even change – the role it plays in our lives. Weeks said that she is excited that so many people are active on the r/Antiwork subreddit, and that they seem to come from different industries and backgrounds. “People are identifying this as a systematic problem with work,” Weeks said. “What’s interesting is the way people are making connections between their individual experiences and identifying patterns: ‘Actually, there’s something systemic here. There is a deeper problem that’s producing these similar experiences.’” Lynn said reading the subreddit made her feel validated about quitting her job abruptly. She posted her story on the page and received dozens of comments of support. One person messaged her and said that her post inspired them to quit their job. “My mindset has totally shifted on how I allowed myself to be treated,” said Lynn, who has since started a new role at a different company that is giving her higher pay and better benefits. “I definitely value my own personal time and family a lot more now that I recognize the value that a corporate entity actually sees in you.”A statue in the US Capitol honours Clio, the marmoreal muse of history. Floating above the political fray, she rides in a winged chariot that allegorically represents time and has a clock for its wheel. Looking over her shoulder as she writes in a stony ledger, she tracks events in serene retrospect. The journalists who nowadays report on happenings in Washington work at a more frantic, flustered tempo, racing to catch up with the chaos of breaking news. Jonathan Karl, a correspondent for ABC News, seems to be permanently breathless. In Betrayal, he runs for cover during an emergency lockdown at the White House, with grenades detonating in the distance. He is roused after midnight by the announcement of Trump’s Covid diagnosis; later, he has to rush to the hospital, ditch his car and scramble into place before the presidential helicopter lands on a strip of road that is suddenly “the centre of the broadcast universe”. And on 6 January Karl keeps up a live commentary as the Capitol is invaded by a mob determined to lynch Vice-President Mike Pence – reviled as a “pussy” by Trump because he refused to overturn Biden’s victory – on a makeshift gallows. The Capitol was designed as a classical temple consecrated to democracy, which is why Clio is at home there: picture the Parthenon on steroids, topped by the dome of Saint Peter’s Basilica. In Betrayal, however, it is the set for a mock-heroic battle between thugs in horned helmets wielding fire extinguishers as weapons and politicians who prepare to fight back with ceremonial hammers torn from display cases and a sword left over from the civil war. Aghast and incredulous, Karl exhausts his supply of synonyms; this final act of the expiring Trump regime is nuts, weird, crazy, kooky and bonkers. Worse follows when crackpot conspiracy theorists gather to explain to Trump how the election was rigged. One sleuth contends that wireless thermostats made in China for Google reprogrammed voting machines in Georgia. A shadowy figure called Carlo Goria blames an Italian company and its “advanced military encryption capabilities”; Trump had two government departments investigate this claim, although the picture in Goria’s Facebook profile identifies him as the deranged scientist played by Peter Sellers in Dr Strangelove. Numerous high-level functionaries shiftily justify themselves by telling Karl that the main concern of the administration was to control or at least frustrate its chief executive. During the Black Lives Matter unrest, Trump ordered out the troops to impose martial law on Washington. His wily secretary of defence, Mark Esper, deployed an army unit, but confined it to a fort outside the city. The ruse was a pacifier; rather than calming the streets, Esper’s aim was “to quell the dangerous and dictatorial urgings of his commander in chief”. Our prime minister may be a clown, but for four years the US had an outright lunatic as its president. Like all reality TV, what Karl calls “the Trump show” is the product of fantasy and fakery; its star is an existential fraud who admits his unease by referring to himself in the third person. “You must hate Trump,” says Trump when Bill Barr, his previously compliant attorney general, rebuffs his lies about a stolen election. He then says: “You must hate Trump” a second time, making it an exhortation as much as an accusation. He can’t command love and suspects that he doesn’t deserve it: will hatred do as a second best? Elsewhere, Trump re-enacts for Karl an exchange with his sullen adolescent son. “Do you love your dad?” he wheedles, as needy as a black hole. “Uh, I don’t know,” grunts Barron. “Too cool,” remarks the paterfamilias, frozen out. Karl’s anecdotes offer some sharp insights into Trump’s compulsions. He fawns over autocratic thugs such as Putin because he is himself a weakling. While demanding “total domination” of demonstrators outside the White House, he is hustled to safety in a fortified basement, which prompts an internet wit to nickname him “bunker bitch”. As a populist, he cares only about popularity and purchases it with tacky giveaways; while in hospital with Covid, he sends lackeys to distribute “cartons of M&amp;M’s emblazoned with his signature” to the fans outside. When Karl prods him to denounce the riot at the Capitol, he fondly recalls that “magnificently beautiful day” and grumbles that the fake news didn’t give him “credit” for attracting such a large crowd. Negotiating with Karl over his attendance at the White House correspondents’ dinner, where the president usually delivers a jocular speech, Trump asks: “What is the concept? Am I supposed to be funny up there?” Yes, the psychotic shtick of this would-be dictator is dictated by whatever audience he is playing to. When the counting of electoral votes resumed late at night on 6 January, Karl notes that the senators picked their way into the chamber through splintered wood, shattered glass and a surf of ransacked documents, with the stink of pepper spray lingering in the air; the bust of President Zachary Taylor had been smeared “with a red substance that appeared to be blood”. In a poem about the statue of Clio written in 1840, former President John Quincy Adams regretted that she had to listen to “the conflicting jar/ Of ranting, raving parties”. Adams didn’t know the half of it. Perhaps Clio’s marble pallor reflects her state of mind: she must be appalled by what she has recently had to record in her open book. • Betrayal: The Final Act of the Trump Show by Jonathan Karl is published by Dutton Books • This article was amended on 3 December 2021. The poem which includes “the conflicting jar/ Of ranting, raving parties” was written in 1840 by former President John Quincy Adams, not in 1851 by President John Adams.Even before the pandemic, I used to find TV newsrooms, on the rare occasions I had cause to visit them, anticlimactic: hoping for (if not exactly expecting) the adrenalised mayhem of Network or Drop the Dead Donkey, their preternatural quietness always bemused me. But in the age of Covid, things have, it seems, moved up a notch. At ITV’s headquarters in London, the hush is almost eerie. Many people, if not most, still seem to be working from home. The building brings to mind some sleek new hotel in a city unpopular with business travellers. Lifts move silently up and down. The atriums are cold and empty. As I sit and watch and wait, only rarely does a human being cross the expanse of grey carpet. But then Jon Snow appears, looking like a giant kingfisher in his suit of teal corduroy, and I cheer up a bit. Is he presenting Channel 4 News tonight? The crisp shirt and rainbow tie suggest that he is. “Yes, I am,” he says, though he can’t tell me what will be on the programme; uncharacteristically, he missed the meeting. “I went for a haircut.” A pause. “Not because you were coming. I booked it a long time ago.” His hand goes to his head, and then to the knot of his tie, which he waggles a bit before sitting down. At this point, two things strike me. First, there is his restlessness; he needs settling. Second, that it is very strange indeed that a journalist of his experience and standing should turn up with a minder. Will she be sitting in on our interview? Apparently, she will, and every so often, he will suddenly address a remark to her, rather than to me, his eyes sliding beyond my shoulder to where she sits on a sofa. I can’t explain, let alone justify, the minder, but I can hazard a guess at the cause of the restlessness. At the end of this year, Snow will leave ITN after 45 years – he has been the main presenter of Channel 4 News, which ITN produces, since 1989 – and though this was announced last April, I’m not sure he is yet fully resigned to the prospect of retirement. “I think it’s very difficult to adjust to,” he says, his voice dimmed just a little of its usual enthusiasm. “They just sort of said we should probably think about it. I hadn’t really thought about it myself. It’s an incredible job. To be paid to interrogate the news; to have so much freedom; to be able to do something every day about what you learn is going on when you first wake up. Not being able to do that… it’s part of your whole life. It has been so extremely enjoyable.” Will he be able to function without the tick and tock of deadlines? Is there a danger he might just… collapse? He smiles. “We’ll find out. I’ll make sure there are plenty of soft furnishings to collapse into. But it’s so difficult to analyse what you do, and what effect not doing it will have. The main thing is not being able to help people understand a moment – a new moment. I don’t think I’ll be able to switch off completely from that.” Four decades in front of the camera. It is, he says, an inordinately long time. He shouldn’t complain; he has been lucky. “And I’ve the compensation of a young son. Isn’t that amazing?” He and his wife, the epidemiologist Precious Lunga, had a baby, born by surrogate, earlier this year. “He’s eight-and-a-half months,” he says. Is he knackered? “No. My wife has developed a regime in which he goes to sleep at six o’clock for a couple of hours, and then he gets up, so that at 10, when we’re going to bed, he goes, too. He doesn’t wake up until the next morning.” Was he surprised, at the age of 74, to find himself a father again? “Well, I knew it was coming…” He laughs. “But, no, not really. I don’t feel any older than I did that last time I had children, 35 or more years ago [he and his former partner, the human rights lawyer Madeleine Colvin, have two daughters], and there is a naughty side to it, which is that you’re not quite expected to do so much as you absolutely had to last time.” In the world of TV news, it’s all change, several big beasts now on the move: at Sky, Adam Boulton is going; Andrew Marr has announced that he is to leave the BBC. Snow thinks this is an entirely good thing; it’s possible that he has been guilty of the TV equivalent of bed-blocking. But unlike Marr, who has spoken of wanting to find his voice again after years of studied impartiality, he doesn’t see the future as one in which he will be unleashed. “I’ve never felt particularly leashed,” he says. “The number of times I’ve been carpeted… well, she carpets me occasionally [a grin in the direction of the Channel 4 News director of comms]. But in terms of the editor saying, ‘You just can’t do this’. No. I know people think I’m a mad, bonkers, lefty oddity, but I’ve never been to Ofcom.” Actually, this isn’t quite true. In 2019, for instance, Snow was cleared by the media regulator after saying he had “never seen so many white people in one place” while describing a pro-Brexit rally (this remark prompted thousands of complaints to Ofcom that his comments had been racist or offensive, implying a link between Brexit and white supremacism). Perhaps what he means is that he’s never been ruled against. Is news journalism in a better or worse place than it was, say, 10 years ago? “That’s a very interesting question,” he says. “It goes to the heart of what’s happening.” But he’s about to answer a different question to the one I’ve asked. “I do believe that Channel 4 News’s status is under discussion in ministerial circles because they don’t particularly like what we do – and that’s not a good idea. I think it’s better that we have an open debate – that the evidence is called, and if they’re dissatisfied after that, then they can say: time we sell it off [the government has proposed that Channel 4, state-owned but funded through advertising, be privatised – though no mention has ever been made of the role of its news output in this decision].” What does he believe to be the cause of this dissatisfaction? “I genuinely have no idea. It can’t just be about the money. It mystifies me. So many people tell me they like what we do.” Is he anxious for Channel 4’s future? “Who wouldn’t be? It’s healthy that there are two state broadcasters. I’m not asking for more, but I don’t think we can do with less.” What about journalism more generally? Is it as robust as it should be? “That’s difficult. One can both imagine that things were better than they were, and that they are worse now than they are. I don’t think better or worse is a useful debate. The point is that this country’s brilliance in publishing and in television is [down to the fact] that they’re well regulated. Compared to other countries, we can hold our heads high.” Hmm. Some years ago, extolling the virtues of the “democratisation” brought by the internet, Snow said that he would not pay for content; that it should all be free. Has he revised this point of view since? Because regulation is neither here nor there if journalism is not well funded. “Did I say that? I didn’t say that.” Don’t deny it! “I’m not going to deny it. But I must have had a brain freeze.” So what does he pay for? “I pay for the FT and the Guardian and, obviously, if I get something at the station, I pay for it, too.” Well, phew. What about social media? Has it degraded debate? Has it made people fearful and self-censoring? “I tweet a lot,” he says. He looks at his minder again. “Do I?” he asks her. And then: “To be honest, I have a very happy online life. I don’t feel criticised. People do occasionally offer abuse. I’m going to sound arrogant in the face of other people’s suffering [at the hands of trolls], but I feel there is still a lot of good out there. I don’t particularly want it to be regulated, but I can see that this is coming.” He’s the anti-Howard Beale (the character Peter Finch plays in Network, who’s “mad as hell”). He’s the Pollyanna Howard Beale. Are politicians getting harder to pin down? “They are more evasive, yes. If they can possibly not do it, they won’t. We work hard to find the right person, but often that’s the only person.” There’s responsibility involved in this – the quest for answers – but Snow isn’t pompous about it. In the moments before he goes on air, he doesn’t feel, Dan Rather-style, that he’s about to address an anxious nation. “It’s just about asking simple questions,” he says, the obvious question often being the best question. “I try, without much effort, to remain a perfectly ordinary human being. I think: what do I want to know about this?” Asking questions isn’t, he insists, the work of an intellectual, which is helpful, because he certainly isn’t one. “As you know, I’m not academically gifted. But when you spot something that doesn’t add up, you do owe it to the viewer to push it – and if they won’t give you an answer, you must also make it clear to the viewer that they refused.” * * * Snow’s place in our national lives is a strange one. He’s not quite a national treasure; for all that so many people like him, his splashy socks and his bicycle (he cycles everywhere). But nor is he fully the anti-establishment figure some people take him to be (those who describe him as such mostly belong, one can’t help but notice, to the establishment themselves; it surely takes more than turning down an honour, as Snow has done, to make one anti-establishment). Either way, in person he’s very likable and un-grand, even if his self-deprecation – again and again, he’ll talk of his academic failures; “I’m sure I’m being very boring!” he’ll wail, to the point where I’m compelled to tell him not to be so needy – is almost performative at this point. And beyond his slightly mannered vagueness, he is still, at heart, a reporter. His stories are well told: exciting, expertly edited, deployed with care. Snow’s father was, famously, the Bishop of Whitby; his mother, who encouraged her son’s musical talent, studied at the Royal College of Music before she married. What did it mean to be the Bishop of Whitby? “It’s a two-bit diocese really, though probably one of the most beautiful episcopal holdings anywhere in the world.” Was he afraid of his father? I read that he was. “Well, he was a huge man, 6ft 7in, 8ft in his mitre, and then you think about the robes.” Like Darth Vader, I say. “Fortunately, he didn’t stalk around the house looking like that. He wasn’t scary, but you wouldn’t confide in him. He wouldn’t have found it easy to understand what you were getting at.” What about God? Not all leading Anglicans, one gathers, precisely believe in God. “Oh, he was [religious], yes. Even the staff – by which I mean the cook and the butler – would have to attend morning prayers in the dining room before we sat down to eat.” Did this feel extreme? “I didn’t know anything else. I presumed everybody did it. But there was an additional complication.” His voice briefly trails off, and then he launches – I think this is the word – into another story, and it’s like a scene from a film or a novel. “I was very close to my mother,” he says. “But quite late on in my childhood… My father was driving along in our open-top Hudson Terraplane Eight. He used to drive around in it at furious speed, my poor mum in the front seat. But little did I know in the early days that her jacquard scarf was lashing down her wig because she suffered from alopecia totalis. I was about seven, I should think, when I found out. Us three [he has two brothers] were in the back. ‘Boys!’ my father said [Snow adopts a stentorian tone]. ‘I’ve got something I need to tell you. Your mother doesn’t have any hair.’” How did this make him feel? “It was a truly shocking and desperate moment. I burst into tears. My older brother said, ‘Ha! I’ve always known.’ But he’d had the disadvantage of having been at junior school at Ardingly [in Sussex], where my father had been headmaster, and where he’d been teased rotten by the kids who’d worked out that her hair was not her own.” Snow began this tale by saying that he and his mother were close. But now he amends this: “But not as close as I’d have liked to be. There was a sort of impenetrable wall. She was so defensive about it.” Thereafter, he and his brothers never talked of it again, and until the day she died, he never saw his mother without her wig. “Good Lord, no. Never, never, never. Because that was what she wanted.” Was this the moment when the notion of truth, and its overriding importance, entered his bloodstream? Perhaps. But however “traumatised” he was by the revelation, he was a resilient boy – and resilience is also a necessary qualification for a certain kind of journalist. First, there was Winchester Cathedral, where he was a chorister, and extremely happy. “An amazing education. Not only was it about Bach and Handel and Wesley, it was about community and trust. Aged eight, you’d stay on for Christmas and Easter, and you were allowed to go out into the town, this extraordinary freedom – and you were lionised by those who came along to listen. They loved you, in your ruff. There were some fishy characters, who might have importuned you, but that only happened once or twice.” Then there was a boarding school in Oxford. “Even more [resilience learned] in the awful public school system, which I think for an adolescent is a terrifying experience. It was a nice school, but those are unnatural communities that produce all sorts of tensions.” He cannot believe how many privately educated people are “still at the top of the tree… it does not develop you into a truly understanding male creature. I don’t know how they conjured up this system that shuts out half the people who populate the planet.” And so, we come back to it: his academic failure. Having flunked his A-levels, he was sent off to do retakes at Scarborough Tech, lodging with “Mrs Someone in a council house”. What the adult women in his shorthand and typing class made of him – he thought these skills might be useful – one can only guess, but for him, Scarborough was a pretty delicious prospect: “I was so innocent, but there was one particularly attractive librarian.” (She was nearly twice his age; they would sneak off together in her car in their lunch hour.) This time, he passed his A-levels – though his grades were poor – and having done so, went off to do VSO in Uganda. “Wonderful. One of the best things in my life. A very remote place on the banks of the Nile, 60 miles north of Jinja.” When he came back, it was to read law at Liverpool University, a place bagged for him by his father. “This is so terrible, but it speaks of how Britain was, and probably still is. My father was in his dog collar on a train, sitting next to a man who was a professor of law at Liverpool University. By the time the train pulled into Lime Street, he’d persuaded him to take me.” But he didn’t last long. The chancellor of Liverpool University was a Lord Salisbury, a man many students thought unsound on race, and so it was that Snow, by now an active anti-apartheid campaigner and someone who also happened to “speak posh”, was deputed to meet this fellow from his train, and tell him he was not welcome on campus. When Lord Salisbury turned on his heel and helpfully returned to London, the university took a dim view. Snow was rusticated for two years, though he never went back. Again, however, a small miracle occurred. “One of the reasons I want to write a book about inequality when I leave Channel 4 is because I survived because of inequality.” His cousin, the journalist Peter Snow, knew someone who was working for Lord Longford, the social reformer, who in turn was looking for someone to run the New Horizon Youth Centre for the young homeless in London. Snow got the job. His career as a journalist was almost as accidental. In 1973, LBC was just starting up. He got wind of this, applied for a post, and again because of his voice, soon found himself a newscaster. Three years later, he joined ITN and his glamorous, thrilling career as a foreign correspondent began. Where did he go? It would be easier to say where he didn’t. Vietnam, Washington, El Salvador. He was in Iran when the Shah fell in 1979. He was outside the Victor Verster prison in Capetown when Nelson Mandela was released in 1990. The work was, he says, sometimes “redemptive” – desperate people were often glad to see the press – and occasionally frightening: “Who are those people, you’d think at road blocks in El Salvador. Police, or bandits? Should we stop, or drive on?” It was a strange life; it’s hard to be away from your family for weeks at a time. “And yet, if you weren’t rooted in their love, I don’t think one could have managed.” How big is the icy chip in his heart? Did he have the necessary coldness for reporting war? “That’s why I am a bad journalist. I don’t see how you find out anything if you don’t get so far into it that you end up sympathising with, or loathing, whatever it is you’re looking at. I’ve always been emotional, and I think it’s a good thing.” The job presenting Channel 4 News suited him when it was offered; his daughters were teenagers, they needed him more. But he’s reluctant to differentiate between his kind of newscasting and reporting. What story did he miss? He wishes he’d been to China, and if he was starting over, that’s where he’d be. China is the big story now. After this, he takes me down to see his office in the Channel 4 newsroom, though he says he mostly prefers to be outside it with the rest of the team (and the dozens of awards that are lined up there in serried rows). I detect a lot of fondness when he appears: “I’m the one who tells him something is a mad idea,” someone says. But we can’t dally. There’s a programme to be put together, and besides, he’s eager to show me not his etchings but his watercolours, which hang on the walls of his office alongside several photographs of him as young reporter. I look at these first. There is one in which he appears in a group of reporters in Downing Street with Mrs Thatcher, and another, in similar vein, with Jim Callaghan and Jimmy Carter; microphone in hand, he’s floppy-haired, eager, one of the gang. “What do you think?” he says, showing me his paintings. I consider them carefully. Done on assignment, they are, I think, very good; miles better than those of Prince Charles. There’s one of Aleppo in Syria that I’d quite like to steal. Still, it’s hard to picture him spending his days gently at an easel. His uncommon energy fills the room. Retirement or not, I predict other assignments, other adventures. I bet his passport is in his pocket even as we speak.Two Democratic senators threatening to derail Joe Biden’s agenda have been condemned by anti-corruption watchdogs for accepting a flood of money from Republican and corporate donors. Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema present the last hurdle to the US president’s social spending and climate package after it was passed by Democrats in the House of Representatives earlier this month. Having already pressured colleagues to cut the cost of the Build Back Better plan in half, the conservative duo continue to raise concerns about its $1.75tn price tag and sprawling ambition. Manchin and Sinema’s status as holdouts in a Senate evenly divided between 50 Democrats and 50 Republicans has guaranteed outsized influence and attention. It also appears to be lucrative. In September, Sinema received a cheque from Stanley Hubbard, a billionaire Republican donor who is considering a similar contribution to Manchin because of their work to reduce the bill’s price tag, the New York Times reported this week. “Those are two good people – Manchin and Sinema – and I think we need more of those in the Democratic party,” Hubbard was quoted as saying. The newspaper also revealed Manchin, of West Virginia, and Sinema, of Arizona, travelled to an $18m mansion in Dallas for a summer fundraiser attended by Republican and big business donors who have praised their efforts to pare down the Build Back Better bill. Manchin, for example, opposed popular provisions such as paid family leave and a clean electricity programme that would boost wind and solar power while phasing out coal and gas, while Sinema rejected an increase of personal and corporate income tax rates. Their stances have not gone unnoticed by Wall Street and wealthy conservatives. The $3.3m raised by Manchin’s campaign in the first nine months of this year was more than 14 times his haul at the equivalent stage last year, the New York Times added, while the $2.6m taken in by Sinema’s campaign was two and a half times what she netted over the same period in 2020. Such sums, which include contributions from political action committees and donors linked to the finance and pharmaceutical industries, have raised ethical concerns over whether Democrats Manchin and Sinema are being unduly influenced. Kyle Herrig, president of Accountable.US, a non-partisan watchdog that targets government corruption, said: “What else but industry money could explain the manufactured excuses for resisting Build Back Better considering it remains extremely popular, is fully paid for, and would cut costs and taxes for most everyday people in Arizona and West Virginia? “Corporate interests and billionaires have done very well even during the pandemic and don’t need more special treatment. Senators Sinema and Manchin have a chance they may not get again to help so many regular families and seniors get ahead for a change, so why squander it over complaints from a handful of rich interests that exploit tax loopholes and ship jobs overseas?” Accountable.US said its own tracking of corporate activity found that Manchin had taken more than $1.5m and Sinema nearly $1m from corporate interests opposed to the Build Back Better plan as of September. It added that Sinema abandoned prior support for lowering prescription drug prices after a deluge of money from the pharmaceutical industry in the third quarter. Such patterns have angered grassroots activists who say Sinema’s positions are out of sync with the stated needs and views of her own constituents in Arizona. Stephany Spaulding, a spokesperson for Just Democracy, a coalition of more than 40 civil rights and social justice groups, said in response to the New York Times article: “Senator Sinema’s approval ratings among her base have plummeted in recent months and this donor report shows why. She’s busy chasing out-of-state corporate dollars instead of fighting for her constituents’ needs. “Crucial policies like infrastructure, Build Back Better, Medicaid expansion and voting rights are all incredibly popular, but once again she’s demonstrated how frail her commitment to Black and brown Arizonans is.” The House approved the Build Back Better legislation 220-213 as every Democrat but one backed it, overcoming unanimous Republican opposition. After a brief Thanksgiving hiatus it heads to the Senate, where changes are certain as moderates and progressives wrangle over its cost and scope. Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, told reporters on Sunday: “The House did a very strong bill. Everyone knows that Manchin and Sinema have their concerns, but we’re going to try to negotiate with them and get a very strong, bold bill out of the Senate which will then go back to the House and pass.” Manchin is facing pressure to support a provision that would grant four weeks of paid family and medical leave, bringing America into alignment with most western industrial democracies. Sinema’s priorities and red lines have been harder to discern, a source of frustration in its own right. Some observers were unsurprised that the senators are attracting cash from the right. Jordan Libowitz, communications director of Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (Crew), said: “It’s not unusual for megadonors to occasionally cross party lines with their donations. For some, this is hedging their bets, for others, rewarding a politician who came through on an issue they care about. “Ultimately, money follows power. Manchin and Sinema look to be the deciding votes on major legislation, so it really isn’t surprising that people from the other side of the aisle will be trying to win influence with them.” But others described it as an indictment of the influence of money in politics. Larry Jacobs, director of the Center for the Study of Politics and Governance at the University of Minnesota, said: “It’s an outrage. Candidates are in such a hunger for amassing large campaign war chests that they’re going to provide privileged access to the very interests are supposed to be regulating.” He added: “The appearance of what’s going on here – lavish public fundraising events – is a dagger through the trust and legitimacy of American democracy. It just captures the worst fears that Americans have that politicians are up for sale. And I think that public perception is toxic.” Manchin and Sinema’s offices did not respond to requests for comment.As the House debated whether the Republican congressman Paul Gosar should be censured for depicting the murder of his colleague, one Democratic leader took a moment to reflect on the chamber’s long history of violence. Speaking on the House floor last week, the majority leader, Steny Hoyer, argued that Gosar had grossly violated the chamber’s rules of conduct by sharing an altered anime video showing him killing Congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and attacking President Joe Biden. “When those rules were written, they did not anticipate that a member would threaten violence directly against another member,” Hoyer said. “Not because it’s never happened – a congressman from South Carolina nearly beat to death a senator from Massachusetts, Senator Sumner, because he wanted to abolish slavery.” The 1856 caning of Charles Sumner by Preston Brooks is probably the most infamous example of violence between members of Congress, but it is far from the only one. In her book, The Field of Blood: Violence in Congress and the Road to Civil War, the Yale history professor Joanne Freeman details the many threats and attacks between lawmakers during the antebellum era. The Guardian spoke to Dr Freeman about the history of congressional violence and what it can tell us about the current state of US politics and the significance of Gosar’s censure. This interview has been edited for length and clarity. Besides the caning of Sumner, what were some of the other examples of congressional violence in the pre-civil war era? The research that I did revealed there were at least 70 violent incidents in the House and in the Senate. Some of them were canings. Some of them were fist fights. Some of them were actual brawls with groups of congressmen. In the well of the House where we saw [Gosar’s] censure take place, that was actually a location for several fights in those decades before the civil war. And there was a lot of deployment of threats and intimidation. Most of these were offered by southerners and usually were deployed against people who had anything to say against slavery. Obviously the goal of that was to silence people or intimidate people so they wouldn’t even stand up to say anything that was not going to be to the liking of southerners. What effect did those threats have on public debate over slavery in Congress? There’s a diary entry from a very prominent, very aggressive anti-slavery advocate, named Joshua Giddings from Ohio. And when he first gets to Congress, he reports something like, “Our northern friends are afraid.” They’re afraid to stand up against the southerners. So there’s clearly evidence that people were afraid to stand up. And not only does it shape the direction of debate, the people who do that kind of threatening very often are wildly supported by the folks back home. I suppose that’s what we’re going to see now; the person who does that kind of bullying and that kind of threatening gets a good degree of support for it. Although Gosar was censured and stripped of his committee assignments, he was also somewhat rewarded for his behavior. Donald Trump immediately offered Gosar his endorsement, and the minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, suggested that he might get “better committee assignments” when Republicans regain control of the House. Is there a history of lawmakers being rewarded for violence? Unfortunately, yes. Most notoriously, look at Preston Brooks, who caned Charles Sumner, and Laurence Keitt, who held people off from intervening in the caning. There was discussion of expelling Brooks. He does not get expelled, but he resigns in protest when the debate is attacking him for what he did. He resigns in protest and is immediately re-elected. And Laurence Keitt, who actually is censured, is immediately re-elected. So sometimes these violent acts are done partly for the base, for constituents, for “the cause”. And sometimes that is indeed rewarded. So historically, have censures been effective in changing lawmakers’ behavior? Or do they sometimes encourage more of that same behavior? On the one hand, you could say people are proving that they’re willing to stand up for something, and for some populations, that gets applause. But the thing is, if people are really being offensive in some way or another, and they’re not called on it … that’s basically an endorsement. And it’s also a sign that the rules of Congress almost don’t exist. They’re just not in play. For reasons of just upholding that there are lines that can be crossed, I think it’s important for that to happen. The message of that kind of censuring is that this person did this thing and is accountable for that. And if you don’t hold people accountable for their actions, that too is a passive stab at democracy. How did the violence in Congress before the civil war both reflect and intensify the divisions in the country itself? The violence in Congress reflects and affects the violence and politics throughout the nation at large in a few ways. By the time you get into the 1850s and you have the telegraph, which is spreading that kind of information very quickly around the nation more broadly than ever before, Americans can see that happening. So that sets a tone for politics all by itself. Some of it is playing to an audience. Depending on how it’s acted out and the language that’s used and the posturing that’s taken by the members of Congress, it’s deliberately intended to rile up Americans, which it does. That kind of violence can encourage violence, intensify political rhetoric [and] seemingly justify extremism and violence. It has an impact on the public. If the public gets riled up, they’re going to demand more things from their representatives – more violence, more extremism. Given everything you know about the congressional violence that happened leading up the civil war, what do you think the censure of Gosar says about the direction of our country now? It certainly reflects the tone and tenor of our politics right now, and that almost goes without saying. It gestures towards what’s coming next because he’s going to be rewarded for it in some ways, and because of that, there will be others that follow in that model. It also shows a certain lack of respect for the institution of Congress. The censure doesn’t matter clearly to this person. It’s a moment that shows how far party is above government and above institutions of government and above institutional stability. That’s not a very comforting thing to consider either. We’re in very unpredictable times. We never know from one moment to the next what direction things are going to lean towards. It’s tempting to see an incident like [the Gosar censure] and assume from it we’re doomed. We’re in a moment of extreme contingency, and indeed things might become much worse. But during that kind of moment of extreme contingency where anything can happen, those are also moments where it’s possible to make positive change. It’s possible in a moment of instability to really push for some kind of a change that isn’t necessarily in the direction of force and violence, but is rather in a direction of inclusion and rights. I think we as Americans need to be thinking about that right about now.This article is the subject of a legal complaint from lawyers on behalf of Nathan Wilson and Aaron Rench The son of pastor Douglas Wilson of the controversial Christ Church in Moscow, Idaho, and a close associate have made significant inroads into mainstream culture in America with a successful streaming cartoon. The Guardian has previously reported on how the church, which aims to create a theocracy in the US, has increased its power and influence in its home town, while also campaigning vociferously against efforts to curb the coronavirus pandemic. Those developments come amid a broader rise in the right wing across the US. Prominent individuals within Christ Church are using television and book publishing to enter US popular culture and promote Christian messages. Wilson’s son Nathan Wilson and his manager and close associate, Aaron Rench, have simultaneously been attempting to crowdfund a creationist nature documentary starring Douglas Wilson’s brother, Gordon, and have continued to market young adult fiction through a mainstream publisher. The pair have in recent years taken control of two Christ Church-associated businesses through LLCs which have limited legal and financial reporting obligations. Observers of the church have raised questions about the extent to which church-aligned businesses and crowdfunding campaigns may be advancing its agenda in the arena of popular culture. Guardian investigations have shown how Christ Church has accumulated power, concentrated in the hands of Douglas Wilson’s family and a small number of other individuals. The relationship between Nathan Wilson and Rench is evident across a sprawling and lucrative enterprise which incorporates publishing, media production and real estate. Wilson, writing as ND Wilson, is the author of a number of bestselling young adult and children’s books. Some of these are published by Canon Press, a conservative Christian publisher that Wilson and Rench bought from the church in 2013. But most are published with mainstream publishers, including two trilogies and two standalone books with Penguin Random House and one trilogy with Katherine Tegen Books, an imprint of Harper Collins. Rench, who is a member of Christ Church along with his brother, Gabriel, serves as Nathan Wilson’s literary agent through his own Leaptide Literary group. The pair have also branched out into media production. This year saw the fourth season of an animated children’s program, Hello Ninja, screened on Netflix. The series is based on a picture book authored by Wilson, and published by the children’s imprint of Canon Press. The books, and the series, depict children who transform into ninjas and enter a magical kingdom. Both Rench and ND Wilson are listed as executive producers of the first series of the program in 2019. Wilson remains credited as an executive producer and is credited as creator of the show. Netflix is listed as the production company, but the pair’s production company, Gorilla Poet Productions (GPP), has elsewhere been identified as a co-producer. Previously, along with other adaptations of ND Wilson books, GPP has been involved with culture war documentaries centred on Douglas Wilson. In 2008, GPP and Rench produced Collision, which chronicled a series of debates between Wilson and the late writer and celebrity atheist Christopher Hitchens. Then, in 2015, GPP was associated with another film, The Free Speech Apocalypse, which chronicled events at Indiana University in 2012 when students and others protested against a Wilson speech on the grounds of what they saw as his homophobia. More recently, Rench and Wilson have been seeking crowdfunding for a nature documentary series, The Riot and the Dance, which is set to showcase the creationist views of Gordon Wilson – Nathan’s uncle, Douglas’s brother and senior fellow of natural history at the Christ Church-aligned college New Saint Andrews. Kristin Du Mez is professor of history at Calvin University and author of Jesus and John Wayne, a critical history of white evangelical Christianity in the United States, which includes scrutiny of Douglas Wilson’s leadership of Christ Church. Asked about Wilson’s publishing and media enterprises, Du Mez said: “Conservative evangelicals have a long history of advancing their religious and political values through popular culture.” She added that evangelicals produced media for other evangelicals seeking to shield themselves and their families from the “corrupting influences” in secular culture. As a result, Du Mez wrote that “it’s always good to follow the money”. “Since there is a captive market that has been told to distrust ‘secular’ culture, there is a lot of money to be made in producing religious-themed products, particularly those aimed at conservative audiences,” Du Mez concluded. In an SEC filing which describes the crowdfunding effort, the rationale for the series is laid out. “For too long nature documentaries, a multi-billion-dollar sector in the entertainment industry, have been completely controlled by groups who do not believe in a divine creator,” the document says. The documents show that while all of the production costs will be raised from crowdfunding patrons, who will receive equity and a share of profits in the case of a successful production, Wilson and Rench have been allocated over 90% of voting shares in the company after making no cash contribution. The pair say that they created the series and their contribution was not monetary but was instead their time and skill. Nathan Wilson did not respond to a request for comment. Netflix declined to comment on whether they were still in partnership with Wilson and Rench, or the nature of any partnership. • This article was amended on 7 January 2021. An earlier version inaccurately suggested the books and films produced by Nathan Wilson and Aaron Rench came from Christ Church, while the sub-heading wrongly implied Rench was a church “leader”. The article was amended at the same time to clarify that Hello Ninja was published by an imprint of Canon Press after Wilson and Rench acquired that publishing venture from the church in 2013. A section relating to the pair’s business affairs was also re-edited, and their position regarding the share allocation of the company behind The Riot and the Dance was added. GPP is owned by both Wilson and Rench, and while it was involved with The Free Speech Apocalypse, it did not produce the film as an earlier version implied. Collision was released in 2009 but produced the previous year.If you’ve ever used the phrases “everything’s coming up roses” or “the ladies who lunch”, you have Stephen Sondheim to thank. He coined them in his lyrics for Gypsy (1959) and Company (1970), two of his most celebrated musicals. But for all the felicitousness of his work as a lyricist, he saw himself as a composer. In truth, not only was he both, the combination catapulted him into a league of his own. Within moments of news breaking of his sudden death in the early hours of Friday after a Thanksgiving dinner with old friends, shocked tributes began flooding social media. This wasn’t only theatreland in mourning. Sondheim’s remarkable influence across popular culture was startlingly current for an artist still working at 91. Before the pandemic, his work was everywhere. In 2019 alone, Adam Driver sang Being Alive, his anthem of hope from Company, in the film Marriage Story; Daniel Craig hummed a few bars of his Follies torch song Losing My Mind in Knives Out; his biggest, Grammy-winning hit Send in the Clowns appeared to ironic effect sung by the ringleader of Joaquin Phoenix’s attackers in Joker; Ryan Murphy’s Netflix series The Politician used numbers from Assassins and Jennifer Aniston and Billy Crudup duetted his bittersweet love song Not While I’m Around from Sweeney Todd on AppleTV’s The Morning Show. His primacy within wider culture came from the widest possible acknowledgement that not only had Sondheim created a succession of groundbreaking hits, but that in the mostly reactionary world of the American musical, he was a revolutionary. It started with his Broadway debut, when he was hired aged 25 as lyricist by director/choreographer Jerome Robbins, composer Leonard Bernstein and bookwriter (Broadway’s term for librettist) Arthur Laurents for a show about New York gangland violence. It was originally called Gang Way but, mercifully, they changed the title to West Side Story. Until its 1957 opening, no other Broadway musical had ended with a pile-up of dead bodies. Its success gave him a licence to continue in his chosen vein: creative rule-breaking. Although he was later unhappy with his work on it – he particularly inveighed against his decision to give ill-educated, Puerto Rican Maria (in I Feel Pretty) the line: “It’s alarming how charming I feel” – Broadway success and the 11-Oscar-winning movie that followed put him on the map and money in the bank. The original soundtrack album sat at No 1 in the charts for a record-breaking 54 weeks and was the biggest-selling album of the entire 1960s. From the word go, people were singing his songs. Or, rather, his lyrics. Sondheim didn’t become a Broadway composer until 1962 with the uproarious Roman farce A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. With its riotously funny book by Sondheim’s friend Burt Shevelove and Larry M*A*S*H Gelbart, it ran for a hugely profitable three years, played in London starring Frankie Howerd. It formed the (unacknowledged) inspiration for Howerd’s hit TV series Up Pompeii! But Sondheim’s score was overlooked and he spent the rest of the decade being notably aggrieved, grumbling to friends and toiling with little discernible success until the opening of Company, which changed everything, not least because it ushered in his landmark partnership withthe legendary producer/director and lifelong friend Hal Prince. Over the next 11 years, they created what is now routinely regarded as the most daring succession of iconoclastic shows – musical or otherwise – in American theatre history. No one else would have had the gall to write the daringly plotless Company, the serial-killer-thriller musical Sweeney Todd (later filmed by Tim Burton) or, most audacious of all, Pacific Overtures, his musical about the opening up of Japan by the west. The last of those contained Someone in a Tree, which he often described as his favourite of his songs. Small wonder since it weaves several perspective into a richly complex song about doubt, about what people simultaneously see and don’t see. His gorgeously scored 1981 show, Merrily We Roll Along, was radically structured (it was told backwards) and dealt with artistic hope wrecked by blind ambition. A thunderous flop, it managed only 14 performances and Sondheim retreated. He’d have been forgiven for returning three years later with something crowd-pleasing but Sondheim forever believed in safety last. For the second half of his career, he became more, not less, experimental. Sunday in the Park With George, Into the Woods and Passion, all created with writer/director James Lapine, persistently reinvented musical theatre’s structural, thematic and dramatic possibilities. He believed his theatrical voice was most present in his distinctive, vividly dramatic use of harmony. But it was also present in his fascination with ambivalence, his music and lyrics in perfect balance to express conflicts coursing through character. Detractors claimed his clear-eyed vision was cynical, which he vehemently denied. He was actually a fascinating contradiction: a romantic moderated by realism. Like British playwright Caryl Churchill, whose work he admired, each of his shows sounds and feels completely different while still bearing his hallmark. He loathed the idea of repeating himself. He was forever searching for and creating new forms with which to express ideas. It’s that which made widespread commercial success for much of his work elusive. Yet it also made him the most influential theatre artist of the second half of the 20th century. His expanding of theatrical possibilities paved the way for game-changers such as Michael Bennett’s A Chorus Line and Lin-Manuel Miranda’s Hamilton. Only in September he announced the new musical, Square One, which he was writing with dramatist David Ives. It will now never be finished. Absurd though it sounds for a man of his age, it makes his death yet more untimely. I asked him a few years ago if he feared death. “I think about it a lot now,” he mused. “I have to keep telling myself how close it is. You don’t feel that unless you’re ill. And, for the most part, I’ve been very lucky with my health. So I’m used to feeling like there’s plenty of tomorrows.” He looked at me and said, decisively: “I don’t mind the idea of death at all. I don’t want to suffer. I don’t want to know that I’m dying.” Mercifully for him, he got his wish. David Benedict is the official biographer of Stephen SondheimTwo international travellers in NSW quarantine have tested positive to the new Omicron Covid variant, becoming the first cases in Australia. The results came following urgent genomic testing undertaken by NSW Health on Sunday, after the two travellers arrived in Sydney on Saturday night. The two cases, who had travelled from southern Africa and landed in Australia on a Qatar Airways flight from Doha, are both fully vaccinated and asymptomatic. They are currently in isolation in special health accomodation. It comes as authorities conceded it would be “impossible” to prevent the new variant from entering Australia. Some states have now flagged this may affect their borders reopening, while others said they would push ahead with eased restrictions. New South Wales premier Dominic Perrottet warned it was “inevitable” that new variants would enter Australia. “The clear point today is that this clearly demonstrates the pandemic is not over,” the premier told reporters on Sunday. “There are limits to what the state and federal government can do: these variants will get into the country, it is inevitable.” “We need to learn to live alongside the virus and to live alongside the various strains of the virus that will come our way, and the best thing we can do is get vaccinated and get booster shots.” Perrottet said there were no plans to change the state’s reopening timeline, with restrictions on the unvaccinated to ease on 15 December. It comes as Queensland authorities refused to guarantee the state’s borders would fully reopen in December as planned. “We’ll make that decision when there’s evidence available that needs a change in position. But at this stage there’s no evidence available to support a change in position,” acting chief health officer Peter Aitken said. Northern Territory health authorities were also running tests on an international arrival from South Africa who tested positive, and is now in quarantine at Howard Springs. Both the NSW and Victorian governments have introduced 72-hour isolation requirements for all fully vaccinated international arrivals, regardless of where they have arrived from. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard said that little was known about the new variant. “What we do know is that it’s going to be hard to ascertain just how many people are here who have been in those African nations.” NSW recorded 185 new locally acquired cases on Sunday, and Victoria recorded 1,061 new cases and four deaths. Victorian chief health officer Brett Sutton said it would be “impossible to keep out” the new strain, but that international border closures may be a “step too far”. “We just need the time to be clear about whether this virus is in this country already, and the extent to which it has spread globally. It’s going to be impossible to keep out, I imagine.” “If it’s more transmissible than Delta, then it will become the global variant for sure.” About 40 Victorians have been identified as having travelled through one of the nine southern African nations that are subject to the new restrictions. “This is not back to the beginning,” Sutton said. “We are not back at square one by any means. The vaccination coverage that we’ve got – over 90% of eligible Victorians being fully vaccinated already – is absolutely more than useful.” Federal health minister Greg Hunt announced a two-week ban on non-citizens arriving from South Africa, Lesotho, Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Eswatini, Seychelles, Malawi and Mozambique, the countries attempting to tackle the spread of the new variant. Australian citizens arriving from those countries will now need to enter 14 days of supervised quarantine upon arrival. Hunt said the federal government “will not hesitate” taking further actions if necessary. “As information is provided, as medical advice develops, if more measures are needed we will not hesitate.” “We took a big step yesterday to block flights from nine countries … and to require the quarantine for 14 days for people who have been in those nine countries. It is a significant hardship, but it was an important step forward,” Hunt said. Fifty-four people who have been in those southern African nations have arrived in Australia since Saturday. Hunt said there was preliminary advice that the new variant was not more dangerous than previous variants, in that it did not appear to cause increased hospitalisation, serious illness or loss of life. Prime minister Scott Morrison backed the move to introduce 72-hour isolation periods for international arrivals, calling the move “sensible and practical”. “It is a fast-moving issue but we will continue, as we always have, sensible, balanced, guided by the best possible medical evidence and medical expert advice.” The strain has already being detected in countries around the world such as the UK, Germany, Italy, Hong Kong and Israel.I’ll always remember my last bank robbery; it took place in June 2017 and was the last time I picked up a gun. A month later, the BBC announced that Jodie Whittaker would become the first woman to play the eponymous Doctor in Doctor Who and suddenly I saw the error of my ways. I have been a law-abiding journalist ever since. If this chain of events sounds somewhat far-fetched to you, Nick Fletcher is here to set you straight. In a debate on International Men’s Day in Westminster Hall last week, the Conservative MP said: “In recent years, we have seen Doctor Who, the Ghostbusters, Luke Skywalker and The Equalizer all replaced by women, and men are left with the Krays and Tommy Shelby. Is it any wonder that so many young men are committing crimes?” There are several points to make here. First, Skywalker did in fact feature in all parts of the latest Star Wars trilogy and Bill Murray’s Peter Venkman is hardly an inspirational character. Second, there are still countless mainstream movies in which male protagonists are the good guys, as evidenced by the roughly 7,000 Marvel movies produced in the past decade. More broadly, the Don Valley MP’s comment felt especially tone deaf because it came mere months after the Euros, during which the country rallied around the nicest football team ever seen on a pitch. Should young men be taught that education matters? They can look to Bukayo Saka, who got four A*s and three As in his GCSEs. Should they learn from a young age that it is important to care about the less fortunate? Then there is Marcus Rashford, who campaigned tirelessly for free school meals. Should they be told about the importance of doing what is right? They need look no further than Harry Kane, who wore a rainbow armband during the Germany game. Hell, should they realise that even if you are impossibly talented, it is always wise to have a back-up plan? Former part-time mortgage adviser Tyrone Mings is there for all to see. In fact, it doesn’t even have to be about each individual player; watching this group of young men from all backgrounds and corners of the country get along, work together and care about each other was enough. The England football squad, led by the equally inspiring Gareth Southgate, showcased masculinity at its best. But perhaps that was not what Fletcher had in mind anyway. Instead, looking at the first report published by the all-party parliamentary group on issues affecting men and boys, which he co-chaired and which was behind the Westminster Hall event, provides some clues. In it, psychotherapist Martin Seager argues that “we are now at a cultural low point”. “Even the celebration of heroes (and it was recently D-Day #77) is never made a gender issue in terms of positive masculinity. We talk about the ‘men and women heroes’ even when females made up less than a tenth of a percent (2 in 22,000),” Seager is quoted as saying. “Rather than focus on the sacrifice and heroism of the 99.99% men and praise their gender, we describe this event in gender-neutral terms but would not do the same if the genders were reversed.” Elsewhere, policy recommendations include “the need to tackle growing societal and gender stereotypical norms that view men, boys and masculinity as inherently bad/negative”. Clearly, the men Fletcher and his colleagues like the most are made of straw. It is frustrating because both Fletcher’s speech and the report did identify some very real societal issues. As he pointed out, 13% of men are not in employment or education (compared to 10% of women), suicide rates for men are three times higher than they are for women, life expectancy for a man today is four years lower than for a woman, 83% of rough sleepers are men and 96% of the prison population is male. These are staggering figures. Though he probably wouldn’t want them as fellow travellers, Fletcher could even get many progressives on board with his argument that “we should need fewer police, not more; we should need fewer courts, not more; we should need fewer prisons, not more”. Instead, most of his utterances on the topic seem to – sometimes implicitly, sometimes not – put the blame on those dreadful feminists who never care about poor, stupid men. Men are vilified because women talk about their experiences of rape and sexual abuse; they are left behind because women want more representation in popular culture and so on. It is a disappointing and self-defeating approach. It is absolutely possible to care about the needs of women and those of men. Treating the issue as a zero-sum game helps no one, least of all the boys Fletcher cares about so much. A world in which more men are happy and fulfilled would be a happier and more fulfilling world for women as well; there is a way to do this in which everyone wins. This was not the point he set out to make, but in a way Fletcher has made a solid case for the need of more male role models in today’s Britain. There are issues that affect men specifically and must be dealt with, but they will not be solved by men who believe that a female Time Lord is turning boys to crime. The very phrase “men’s right activist” reads like the reddest of flags because too often, the men who purport to care about men only do so because they resent women. It needn’t be the case; there is a space for men to help each other without bringing anyone else down. We need fewer Nicks and more Gareths. • Marie Le Conte is a French journalist living in LondonLast week’s tragedy in the Channel has reopened the debate on how to stop people making dangerous crossings, with the solutions presented by the government focused on how to police the waters. Less has been said about where those people come from, with most fleeing conflicts and persecution. About two-thirds of people arriving on small boats between January 2020 and May 2021 were from Iran, Iraq, Sudan and Syria. Many also came from Eritrea, from where 80% of asylum applications were approved. According to Dr Peter Walsh at the University of Oxford’s Migration Observatory, those countries have among the highest acceptance rates of asylum applications, so it is likely that most of those crossing the Channel have genuine asylum claims that should be accepted by the government. “These are people from some of the most chaotic places in the world,” said Walsh. “These are people from countries racked by civil and ethnic conflict and by political persecution. You don’t have to be Einstein to deduce why people are successful in asylum claims.” For many, the UK becomes a destination because they have relatives or know there is an established community, while others prefer an English-speaking country and some simply believe they will be treated better. Iran Iran has been the largest source of asylum seekers to Britain through all routes, including on the small boats from France. Almost three-quarters of the 4,199 applicants in 2020 had asylum granted. Until last week’s tragedy, the deaths of a Kurdish-Iranian family last year had been the worst. They had left Sardasht in north-west Iran, where relatives said they lived in poverty. The Home Office guidance on deciding asylum applications mostly concerns persecution from the state towards political opposition or ethnic and religious minority voices, but also includes women fleeing violence and people worried about persecution because of their sexual orientation. Iranians have made up the highest number of asylum applicants since 2016. A survey published that year said most believed their lives were in danger and thought the UK would offer more freedom and safety. Sudan Many of those crammed into tents in Calais are young Sudanese people, many from Darfur, where 2.3 million people remain displaced by a war that started in 2003. Though the intensity has lessened, the conflict continues, and the Home Office notes claims by non-Arab Darfuris persecuted for their ethnicity. Altahir Hashim, a Darfuri who fled Sudan 10 years ago and settled in the UK, said conditions there have not improved and that his generation have no livelihoods or hope in the displacement camps where they are forced to live. “It’s about values, dignity, self-worth. In a country where you’re raped, killed and your house is set on fire, there’s no future,” he said. Coming to the UK, he said, is not necessarily a conscious choice but one forced on them by conditions in Sudan and neighbouring countries: “In Libya you are treated like an unwanted servant, I hear from others stories about racism, about not being paid for work you do. That’s not safety.” “The circumstances you are in, they tell you this isn’t the place for you, so you make a decision at the time that you have to go to the next place and eventually you end up in the UK.” Iraq Although numbers have fallen since the height of the Iraq war, 2,185 people arrived in Britain on small boats between January 2020 and May 2021, according to Home Office data published by the Refugee Council. The Home Office approved 49% of asylum seekers from Iraq last year, a much lower figure than neighbouring Syria despite both countries being racked by conflict and the Islamic State over the past two decades. Asylum claims made by Iraqis include fleeing insecurity in the country as well as fear of persecution for being from a religious or ethnic minority and for political activity. Syria Syrians were most likely to be accepted, with 88% granted asylum or leave to stay in the UK. Since the beginning of 2020, Syrians ranked fourth in arrivals by boat – after Iran, Iraq and Sudan. For most, the war is the main driver. The retreat of Islamic State and the government’s regaining of control over most of the country has meant a reduction in fighting, but most Syrians abroad have no plans to return to the country, fearing they will be punished. While part of the debate around migration in the UK has focused on encouraging refugees to remain in countries near their homes, a UN survey in March revealed that 90% of Syrian refugees in Lebanon, Jordan, Egypt and Iraq cannot meet their basic needs. As a result, a fifth were considering moving on to new countries, which could include the UK. Eritrea Eritreans were sixth among the arrivals from 2020 to May 2021, behind Vietnamese people, but make up the fourth highest number of asylum claims, with 80% accepted. For some, religious persecution is a cause, as those practising “unauthorised” religions can be imprisoned, but for many the reason is Eritrea’s enforced military service. Eritrea remains one of the world’s most repressive countries, according to Human Rights Watch, and many young people flee to escape indefinite conscription. The UK offers for many the hope of freedom and potential economic security, especially those who have faced traumatic journeys in other countries such as Libya, where HRW has documented abuse of migrants in detention.Priti Patel is facing growing criticism from Tory MPs over the Home Office’s failure to open a programme to allow Afghans to resettle in Britain, three months after it was announced – as the crisis over the deaths of 27 people in the Channel escalates. Some Conservative MPs are understood to have confronted the home secretary directly over the delay in launching the Afghan Citizens Resettlement Scheme (ACRS), which was announced with great fanfare in August as the Taliban seized control in Kabul. MPs say the Home Office’s failure to follow up its promise with action is pushing refugees to take deadly risks and leaving vulnerable people who have remained in Afghanistan at the mercy of the Taliban. Several senior Conservatives said Britain had a “moral obligation” to Afghans who had worked with the west. Several MPs blamed Home Office officials for “dragging their feet” over opening the scheme, due to concerns over where refugees should be processed and the resources needed to house them once in the UK. Afghans are among those on the French coast attempting to make the perilous crossing to the UK. Critics of Patel’s and the Home Office’s inaction say having a legal route in place would have helped avoid tragedies such as that in which 27 people died last week when attempting to cross the Channel from France. Caroline Nokes, the former Tory immigration minister, said: “This needs to be up and running. Afghans here with family still in Afghanistan were given hope when the scheme was announced but are desperately worried that time is running out to get their family members to safety.” Iain Duncan Smith, the former Tory leader, said: “We’re all supportive of stopping illegal immigration, but these other routes are the key to getting things properly done. This needs to be open and resolved, particularly because of Afghanistan and obligations to the people there. This week illustrates that.” Former immigration minister Damian Green, the MP for Ashford in Kent who heads the 100-strong One Nation group of Tory MPs, is calling for a new approach from government which is both “realistic and compassionate”. He suggests looking at adapting a scheme used to allow Syrian refugees to come to Britain legally, implemented when David Cameron was prime minister. Green, writing in the Observer, says the blame game between the UK and France over deaths in the Channel has been a “diplomatic disaster” and calls on Boris Johnson and Emmanuel Macron to work together. “Now is the not the time for displays of wounded amour propre in either language. Careless talk costs lives,” Green writes. An Opinium poll for the Observer finds that only 18% of voters believe Patel has handled the Channel crisis well while 62% think she has handled it badly or very badly. Among Tory voters, 39% think she has handled it very well or fairly well while 45% say she has responded very badly or fairly badly. Ministers have said that the Afghan resettlement scheme is complex and that the Home Office is working “at pace” to open it as soon as possible. However, there is also said to be a Whitehall battle going on over where the processing and checks of refugees can take place. Processing within Afghanistan has been deemed too difficult. Processing outside the country, however, would cause complications if people were found to be ineligible for the scheme. Rory Stewart, the former international development secretary, said the problems were surmountable, but the opportunity for helping vulnerable people was slipping away. “We have a narrow window to get people out,” he said. “At the moment, very strangely, the Taliban is prepared to permit people out. That won’t be true for ever. It’s very likely at some point they’ll start taking more drastic measures. We have a deep moral obligation. These people, who are profoundly vulnerable – the British government said that they were going to help. It’s just astonishing that they haven’t done so. This sort of programme, actually, is the kind of thing that is the good alternative to these dangerous, unplanned routes. It moves people safely, but it’s also the way of ensuring that the most vulnerable are prioritised.” Lisa Nandy, the shadow foreign secretary, said the humanitarian situation in Afghanistan was collapsing and few details were known about the UK scheme, adding: “Even now, the government can’t even tell us who is actually responsible for the scheme. In August, the prime minister said he would move heaven and earth to bring people to safety. Since then it appears he hasn’t lifted a finger to help. This is forcing desperate people into the hands of people smugglers with no regard for human life, using increasingly dangerous routes to reach our shores.” The Law Society has warned that solicitors, prosecutors and judges who acted against the Taliban are all targets while still in Afghanistan. Marina Brilman, its international human rights adviser, said she feared the UK’s scheme would not even be up and running by the end of the year. “Most judges, prosecutors and lawyers who helped to consolidate the rule of law in Afghanistan are Afghan nationals,” she said. “They never made it on to the UK government’s evacuation list. When the last UK flight left Kabul airport, they were left stranded. Especially women. “They send us desperate pleas for help and pass on handwritten death threats saying they and their families will be killed. They constantly move house, and even provinces, to escape the violence. “Door-to-door house searches by the Taliban continue, as do extrajudicial killings and public beatings. Of course, establishing this scheme is a huge undertaking. But it should not have to take three and a half months to even open it for applications. It raises the question how much of a priority this is for the UK government.” A government spokesperson said: “We undertook the UK’s biggest and fastest emergency evacuation in recent history, helping more than 15,000 people to safety from Afghanistan, who we are continuing to support. The ACRS is one of the most generous schemes in our country’s history and will give up to 20,000 further people at risk a new life in the UK. We continue to work at pace to open the scheme amid a complex and changing picture, working across government and with partners such as UNHCR to design the scheme.”“I liked your article on Azeem Rafiq,” Monty Panesar tells me with a glint in his eye before we have even sat down. “But I want to challenge it.” Always nice to meet a reader. Albeit, these days Panesar has something of a vocational interest. He is still best remembered as one of England’s greatest modern spinners, with 167 Test wickets and a broad popular appeal based not just on his talent but his sheer enthusiasm for the game. The fall was sharp, and often painful, and though he maintains he is still good enough to play county cricket, he has begun to map out the next chapter of his life, taking the first steps towards a career in journalism. Well, anyway: challenge accepted. “I had a life coach called Dave Parsooth,” he says. “He was the director of cricket at Luton Town and Indians [Panesar’s club]. And I remember him telling me about the equation of life. The equation of life is 95% mental, 5% physical. You’ve got to be mentally tough. So when I read your article and it talked about [Rafiq] being ‘powerless’, I think he could have empowered himself.” Panesar tells a story from his days at Sussex. “There was a young keeper called Ben Brown who kept dropping catches and it was beginning to irritate me. My life coach spoke to Mark Robinson [the Sussex coach], and Mark spoke to me. He said: ‘The next time anyone drops a catch, don’t get angry, encourage them. Work with them.’ “These are the little tips of winning your teammates over, becoming a good team man in an environment.” Hang on a minute. Are you saying Rafiq was a bad teammate? “No, I’m saying that a life coach could have given him guidance. Little tips. “Sometimes we can be quite selfish as sportsmen. If my life coach was sitting with Azeem Rafiq he would say: ‘How’s your fitness? What are you doing on the yo-yo [test]? Why aren’t you taking more wickets? How much effort are you putting in with your teammates?’ “My message to British Asians coming through is just to focus on your cricket. And that takes you away from conversations about ‘fitting in’ and ‘diversity’.” We now know the problems at Yorkshire went well beyond one player not fitting in. Besides, I counter, Rafiq approached plenty of people at the club and, if anything, things got worse for him. As for his cricket, we don’t know what he was trying or saying. “No, we don’t,” Panesar says. “This is my experience of trying to win over my teammates. Some of this stuff is very embedded in Yorkshire. But parts of it seem – how do I say it? – very unique to him.” Does he at least sympathise with Rafiq, having seen what he went through? “I felt sorry for him because he needed someone to help him. I was very fortunate that I had support around me. But then you look at this case and you think: ‘Wow. Does that kind of stuff still exist?’ Because it doesn’t exist in the Hertfordshire league. It doesn’t exist in Bedfordshire. I haven’t seen it in the Essex league. Maybe it’s a north-south divide.” Panesar is the first to recognise that his own passage through the game was smoother than it was for many others. He played for a diverse, well-apportioned club. From a young age his social circle was integrated, his path to the professional game – from Luton to Bedfordshire to Northamptonshire to the Test side – encouraged by mentors and coaches. “Growing up, I thought that’s how society was,” he says. It was a similar story in the England dressing room, which Panesar first entered in 2005 and which he remembers as a warm and welcoming place. He has only kind words for his former captain, the beleaguered Michael Vaughan. Yet it is curious to reflect on Monty-mania 15 years on – the cult following, the ironic cheers at fine-leg, the fans who would turn up at England games wearing patkas and fake beards – and wonder whether this in itself was a subtle form of othering, a caricature that ultimately held back his progress. Panesar has thought about this a lot. “There were times when I thought: ‘Are people laughing at me?’ I’d have magic moments and then I’d have these really clumsy moments in the field. That’s what helped me become this cult figure. If I didn’t have those clumsy moments, I would have been taken more seriously as a cricketer.” Then, in 2008, Shane Warne made his famous jibe that Panesar hadn’t played 33 Tests, he’d played the same Test 33 times. It was cruel, but partly because it had a kernel of truth in it. “The media went off that one comment,” Panesar says. “It became a hot theme. Everyone was saying: ‘Monty’s got no variation.’ That’s when the doubts started creeping in.” So began the next, unhappier chapter of Panesar’s career. He parted ways with his life coach. His marriage collapsed after six months. He started drinking and encountering paranoid thoughts. He was released by Sussex in 2013 after a well-publicised incident when he urinated on a Brighton nightclub bouncer. A player known for his infectious love of cricket had suddenly lost all feeling for the game. “I couldn’t seem to bring calmness into my life,” he says. “Everything felt rushed and anxious. When you’re in denial, you’re like walking fire. Everybody wants to help you, but if they come too close they get burned. Then when you take antidepressants, there’s no fire. But then you feel dead. No personality. No energy. You just don’t want to do anything.” It took a long time for Panesar to come to terms with the fact he was suffering from mental illness. “Bravado,” he says. “You know the Sikh community. ‘Mental health? Doesn’t exist, man! We’re the providers. We are the strong.’ I remember a PCA [Professional Cricketers’ Association] mental health book coming to my house. I chucked it in the bin. I wish I’d read that book.” For Panesar, the turning point came when he decided to reconnect with his Sikh faith. “That’s when I realised what was the most important thing for me,” he says. “Everything fell into place.” He clung to the dream of an England recall, but when he returned to Northamptonshire in 2016 he struggled with shoulder problems and bowled poorly. At the age of 34, he was out of the county game. “It frustrates me,” he says. “The golden years for a spin bowler are 32 to 36. Now I’m 39 and when I play for Twickenham I’m bowling as well as I ever did. But is any county going to take me?” Deep down, we probably all know the answer to that and in the past few years Panesar has tried to reinvent himself as a media personality. He competed on Celebrity MasterChef. He started a YouTube channel. He began a journalism course at St Mary’s University. He makes regular appearances on GB News and has started writing columns for the Telegraph. “It feels like I’m taking my first Test wicket every time I see a column,” he says. “That’s the direction I want to go into.” The Panesar who first burst on to our screens looked vaguely dazed by the speed of his rise. He blinked nervously into the cameras and said as little as possible. The Panesar of 2021 wants to reach out and touch people. Near the end of our conversation, a woman at the next table pops up to tell us how inspiring she found his story. She knew nothing of cricket or Panesar. But there was a moving magnetic quality to his words that compelled her to speak up. Is life good? “You tell me,” Panesar says. “When you stand next to a radiator, you know what the temperature is. You don’t ask the radiator. What kind of energy are you feeling from me?” The answer: warm, with qualifications. We’ll have to agree to disagree on Rafiq. Meanwhile, there’s a certain restlessness to Panesar I still can’t place: the sense of something not quite fulfilled or complete. But his company is enthralling, his answers thoughtful, his time given generously, and bearing in mind the trials he has faced and the strength with which he has overcome them, he has earned the right to be heard on his own terms: to reach out for his own particular vision of happiness.“The most Gucci of them all” is how Patrizia Reggiani described herself in a 2014 interview and, judging by this entertainingly ripe, comedically tinged tragedy, she has a point. Variously known as “Lady Gucci” and “Black Widow”, Reggiani became the centre of a very 1990s scandal involving lust, money, fashion, murder… and a clairvoyant. To that tabloid-friendly cocktail, Ridley Scott’s latest “true story” potboiler adds a dash of pop superstardom, with Lady Gaga (Oscar- nominated for her close-to-home performance in A Star Is Born) relishing the chance to find the human cracks beneath a larger-than-life, femme fatale surface. Adapted by screenwriters Becky Johnston and Roberto Bentivegna from the nonfiction book by Sara Gay Forden, House of Gucci charts a crowd-pleasing course from the Milanese party scene of the 1970s to a high-profile, end-of-the-century trial. At its heart is the doomed romance between Patrizia and Maurizio Gucci, the latter played behind stylishly studious glasses by cinema’s sexy nerd de nos jours, Adam Driver. “I want to see how this story goes,” says Patrizia, embarking upon a twisted fairytale romance with the grandson of Guccio Gucci that starts with masked balls and talk of midnight chimes and pumpkins and ends with family back-stabbings, jealous rages and deadly rivalries. In the beginning, all is operatic passion as Patrizia scrawls her number in lipstick on the windscreen of Maurizio’s scooter. It’s a striking image: him, a dork on two wheels; her, a high-wire circus act, unicycling her way across the big top of dynastic wealth. She may not know a Klimt from a Picasso, but Patrizia has go-getting oomph to spare, like a classier relative of Nomi from Paul Verhoeven’s Showgirls. That’s certainly how Jeremy Irons’s increasingly vampiric Rodolfo sees her when he disowns his son for marrying into a family of “truck drivers!”. Sly Uncle Aldo (Al Pacino) is more enamoured, falling for Patrizia’s brassy charms, allowing her and his nephew to get their hooks into the fashion house he co-owns with his brother. One minute, Patrizia is a trucking magnate’s daughter, the next she’s Lady Macbeth, preparing to “take out the trash”. Equally swift is the transition from happy marriage to hellish separation, with spicy innuendo (“I’m sure Maurizio would love your strudel”) signalling a super-fast shift of devotions from Patrizia to Paola (Call My Agent’s Camille Cottin). Behind it all lurks the shadow of The Godfather, providing an archetypal template for everything from a rural outdoor feast over which Pacino presides to the intercutting of dark deeds and baptismal dunkings, albeit in bathwater rather than holy water. And then there is Jared Leto, an actor whose mantra of late seems to be “never knowingly underplayed”. As Aldo’s idiot son Paolo, Leto appears to be starring in his own private awards audition tape. Having walked the full length of the hair and makeup counter, he arrives on screen resembling Andy Kaufman’s absurdist alter ego Tony Clifton, a prosthetic symphony of silly suits and protruding guts. As for his voice, while others adopt faintly ridiculous Italian inflections, Leto delivers his lines in a string of high-pitched whoops that suggest he is attempting to communicate with whales. Only Pacino comes close to matching Leto’s parodic screen presence; later scenes pairing the two in states of tragic disarray look like outtakes from an Italian remake of Little Britain. Like Scott’s 2017 Getty family drama All the Money in the World, House of Gucci does a solid job of evoking its recent-history milieu, boasting a beige and brown palette that reeks of nicotine and caffeine, with occasional bursts of reportage-style monochrome. Musically, it’s a cheesy jukebox treat, Pavarotti and Tracy Chapman rubbing shoulders with Caterina Caselli and Blondie, and a wedding played out to the strains of George Michael’s Faith. Those expecting the Mommie Dearest-style camp-fest promised by the trailer will be disappointed; for better or worse, House of Gucci is a little too well behaved to become a cult classic. But Gaga deserves a gong for steering a steely path through the madness – for richer, not poorer; in kitschness and in wealth.Samsung Galaxy Z Fold 3 and Z Flip 3 £1,599, £799 Cutting-edge tech is often super-expensive, difficult to use and less than slick. Not so for Samsung’s latest folding screen phones. The Z Fold 3 tablet-phone hybrid and Z Flip 3 flip-phone reinventions are smooth, slick and even water-resistant, packing big screens in compact bodies. The Fold might be super-expensive still, but the Flip 3 costs about the same as a regular top smartphone, but is far, far more interesting. Samuel Gibbs Fairphone 4 £499 Cutting-edge in a different way, the Fairphone 4 is proof that a good phone can be ethically made, built to last and be repaired at home with just a small screwdriver. This Android handset is a bit chunkier than an iPhone or Samsung, but has its own standout design, with user-replaceable battery and pop-in modules for things such as the screen and camera. It even has 5G now. SG MacBook Air M1 £999 Unlike the first iteration, it wasn’t pulled out of a manila envelope on stage, but ditching Intel for Apple’s first custom-designed M1 chip in the MacBook Air was no less game-changing. It turned the original “ultrabook” into a thin, light and silent powerhouse with battery life practically double everything else. The best consumer laptop by a country mile. SG Sonos Roam £179 Sonos’s first truly portable speaker showed that Bluetooth speakers don’t have to suck. The good-looking Roam has Bluetooth, wifi for when at home, a mic for Alexa or Google Assistant, a 10-hour battery, supports practically every music service under the sun and has plenty of party tricks. The best bit is the sound, blowing away anything of this size or weight, so it won’t end up collecting dust in a drawer. SG Sony WF-1000XM4 RRP £250 They still have a terrible name, but Sony nailed it with its fourth-generation true wireless earbuds. They tick almost every box: top-class noise-cancelling, sparkling sound, long battery life, rock-solid Bluetooth, a much more compact case and, finally, a smaller, genuinely comfortable-to-wear design. Like most earbuds they’re sadly not repairable and you can’t replace the batteries, so some work left to do. SG Nothing ear (1) earbuds £99 If you’ve been weighing up buying a pair of true wireless earbuds but can’t quite stomach the price of Apple’s AirPods Pro (£239), the Nothing ear (1) might just fit the bill. At £99, they’re at the more affordable end of the spectrum, complete with advanced noise-cancelling technology and a comfortable fit. Their transparent design also sets them apart from the crowd of generic headphones. Rhiannon Williams Apple iPad mini £479 Apple’s latest iPad mini takes the best parts of the high-end iPad Pro and squishes them down into a more compact 8.3-inch design, including a faster A15 chip, Apple Pencil compatibility and a more powerful front-facing camera. Small enough to slip into a coat pocket, it also sports better-rounded audio, thanks to its repositioned speakers, plus a sharper, brighter screen. RW Nintendo Switch OLED £310 Provided you can get your hands on one, Nintendo’s Switch OLED is guaranteed to delight fans who’ve been hoping for an upgrade to the popular video game console. The new model features a larger 7-inch screen (compared with the previous version’s 6.2-inch display) and a vastly improved protective kickstand that allows you to tilt it backwards to play at an angle. RW Google Pixel 6 £599 If you fancy a smartphone that’s a bit different from Apple and Samsung’s standard fare, Google is making extremely competent and well-priced handsets at a fraction of the price of its rivals. The Pixel 6 is an excellent all-rounder phone that showcases the best of its Android operating system, a slick design and, most importantly, an outstanding camera for the price. RW Dyson Supersonic Flyaway attachment £30 This magnetic attachment to Dyson’s enormously popular Supersonic hairdryer promises the sleek, mirror-like shine that’s traditionally difficult to achieve at home without professional help. The device’s hooked end harnesses the hairdryer’s powerful airflow to smooth errant flyaway hairs without having to resort to higher temperatures that are more likely to damage them and also doubles up as a styling tool. RW Fitbit Luxe £130 Fitness trackers are great, nudging you to take the stairs rather than the lift, go to bed a little earlier and even forgo that extra helping of dessert, but they’re often sinfully ugly. The Luxe is attractive enough that wearing it doesn’t feel like a chore, even when it does nag you to hit 10,000 steps before bed. Cat Ellis Garmin Forerunner 55 £180 Like the idea of running, but always find yourself plodding along the same route and not actually getting any faster? The Forerunner 55 is the watch for you. It not only tracks your runs and measures your pace, it also tells you how long to rest between sessions and suggests different workouts to help mix up your training so you don’t get stuck in a rut. CE Incus Nova (multisports wearable) RRP £300 Resembling a glowing alien parasite, the Incus Nova is a little device that sits on your back and tracks your form when you’re running and swimming. Unlike a watch, it can monitor the movement of your entire body and give you advice on how to adapt your technique so you move more efficiently and don’t hurt yourself. It’ll soon be able to monitor cycling as well, making it ideal for triathletes. CE Amazfit ZenBuds £119 These tiny earplugs are specially designed to wear at night and will play a variety of soothing sounds to help you off to sleep. Options include pattering rain, crooning whales, crashing waves and even snoring kittens. Once you’ve nodded off, they’ll track your heart rate and movement and present you with a detailed sleep report in the morning. CE Oral-B iO Series 6 £100 Does your toothbrush really need Bluetooth? Well, no, but it doesn’t hurt. The iO Series 6 connects to the Oral-B app on your smartphone and gives you real-time guidance as you brush to make sure you never miss a spot. The brush also gives you feedback in the form of an emoji on the handle, which is surprisingly motivating. Nobody wants to be ticked off by their toothbrush. CE Millo blender £252 The Millo is a 500W (12,800rpm) sci-fi super-chopper that uses a magnetic power system similar to the one in your electric toothbrush. Not only is this thing twice as efficient as a standard blender, it is four times quieter. What’s more, the companion app has presets for smoothies and the like and once the wireless base is charged up, you can blitz away, moving the cable-free Millo around your house or garden willy-nilly. Jeremy White Cowboy 4 e-bike £2,290 This 18.9kg aluminium-framed e-bike has an excellent 43 miles of assisted power, but what really sells the Cowboy 4 is its simplicity: no unnecessarily complicated frills, just pedals and power. Even the lights are already integrated and your phone docks to the handlebars for help with directions and happily charges there while you ride. JW LG OLED65G16LA TV £2,200 Picking a television is hard – there are just so many variables. LG’s superb G1 television will see you right on virtually any consideration, but it’s particularly good at gaming. You get an inky-black 65-inch OLED 4K screen and a lightning-quick 120Hz refresh rate with VRR (variable refresh rate), a key feature for getting smooth, clean, artefact-free pictures when playing. And if you don’t like gaming, just revel in the bright, vivid pictures the set can pump out with ease while watching Netflix. JW Elan Voyager folding all-mountain skis £1,260 These award-winning new Voyager skis, based on a design originally developed for the military, fold using a four-axis mechanism and are then reinforced with a carbon plate that swings into place. Amazingly, you end up with a ski with the same rigidity as “normal” skis. I’ve tried them and, on the snow, I defy you to notice the difference. The lux package includes skis, bindings and collapsable poles – all in a custom travel bag. JW Urbanista Los Angeles solar-powered headphones RRP £169 The Los Angeles over-ears convert all forms of light – outdoor and indoor – into energy. And they also include active noise-cancelling. This means wireless fans are freed from battery anxiety once and for all. An hour spent outside on a sunny day generates three hours of playtime. If it’s cloudy, 60 minutes gets you two more hours. They even charge in ambient indoor light. If this wasn’t enough, the Los Angeles boast a 50-hour battery life from the on-board 750 mAh (milliampere-hour) power pack. We’ve tested these - the solar tech works, they sound great and you even get a carrying case. JW Samuel Gibbs is consumer technology editor at the Guardian; Rhiannon Williams is technology correspondent for iNews; Cat Ellis is fitness and wellbeing editor at TechRadar; Jeremy White is executive editor at WiredThe comedian Munya Chawawa is all eyebrows and incredible ambition. “I love the idea of being indelible, of leaving a mark on the world,” he says. “I can’t process the idea of leaving it without having left something, you know?” He’s bundled in a multicoloured fleece in a quiet corner of a south London pub – softly spoken, respectful, a little intense. In person, his famously abundant eyebrows – which Chawawa describes in his Instagram bio as “erotic” – do not disappoint. Chawawa is best known for his satirical Twitter videos, which skewer trending news stories from Squid Game to Matt Hancock’s extramarital affair, and often feature recurring characters, including racist newsreader Barty Crease, culturally appropriating TV chef Jonny Oliver, and posh drill rapper Unknown P. (“How many times did I bunk off Latin,” he intones in one deathless rap, “to run a man down in Clapham.”) We are meeting to discuss his upcoming four-part YouTube Originals series, Race Around Britain. In it, Chawawa and (in the first episode) fellow comedian Yung Filly travel the UK in a VW camper van, speaking with the general public about the Black British experience. Chawawa pitched the show in the wake of the Black Lives Matter protests of June 2020. “It was tough,” says Chawawa, of that time. “It was really stifling creatively, because there was this enduring feeling of, ‘Wow, this is actually a dangerous world for us,’ you know?” The show draws on Chawawa’s lived experience of racism as a mixed-race man. In one affecting moment, Chawawa talks about his first day at school in the tiny village of Framingham Pigot, in Norfolk. His parents had moved there from Harare when he was 11 – Chawawa’s father is black Zimbabwean, his mother is white British. A classmate asked Chawawa whether he wore a loincloth. He was gobsmacked, and devastated. While Chawawa had been happy in Zimbabwe – “People are very warm,” he explains, “everyone wants you to do well” – in Norfolk, he was often lonely. “A lot of time in your own head,” Chawawa says, “thinking to yourself, ‘Am I ever going to have friends who are like me? What’s the world like out there? There must be more to life than this.’” Where Race Around Britain might have felt didactic in lesser hands, the show makes for genuinely hilarious viewing, mostly because of the natural charisma of Chawawa and Filly. A game of “microaggression bingo” in a Welsh community hall ends with the victor throwing up their arms and cheering “I’m not a racist!”; when vox-popping people on the streets of Cardiff, a member of the public tells Filly that a durag is a “black thing”, causing him to dissolve into laughter. Crucially, says Chawawa, Race Around Britain’s intended audience is people who are perhaps not au fait with terminology like unconscious bias and microaggressions, but are still open-minded and tolerant. “It’s pointless for me to try and convert people into believing that black people’s lives matter,” says Chawawa, “because you either already believe that; you’re on the fence but willing to learn; or you just straight deny it.” The show feels particularly necessary in an era of never-ending culture wars. “As somebody of colour,” says Chawawa, “I don’t know whether I will ever feel truly represented by the political situation here. That’s the honest truth. So instead of feeling depressed by that fact, I try to use it as a source of inspiration for my satire.” The gags in Race Around Britain have a serious message: Chawawa jokes about a “stop and search loyalty card” that rewards black men with free trips to Taser Quest as a way of illustrating the fact that black people are nine times more likely to be stopped and searched than white people, for example. For people who are willing to learn, Race Around Britain is an attempt to talk about race “in a non-accusatory way,” says Chawawa, “in a way that feels a bit warmer, a bit more welcoming”. But Chawawa has no desire to make committed racists see people of colour as human beings. “My approach to it is,” he says, firmly, “here’s the message, it’s in front of you. We can laugh through it, and if you want to take it away, you can.” Race Around Britain comes at the end of a phenomenally successful, if gruelling, 18 months for the 28-year-old. In a pandemic period where there was scarce else to do but browse online, Chawawa’s career has exploded. His Matt Hancock video felt like a major social media event, shared on WhatsApp groups by everyone from Conservative-voting mums to TikTokking teens. But although it feels as though Chawawa’s fame has come overnight, in truth he’s been grinding away behind the scenes for nearly a decade. “Anyone who says to me,” he says, “‘Oh, you really blew up during lockdown,’ I think to myself, I’ve been doing this for years.” He’d initially hoped to be a TV presenter, because he enjoyed public speaking at school. While studying psychology at the University of Sheffield, Chawawa would interview students on nights out, edit the videos until 6am, and upload them the following morning. In 2014, the late nights paid off: Chawawa won a vlogging competition for youth-focused music channel 4Music, and badgered executives for work experience until they gave him a job as a digital researcher. Chawawa climbed the ranks at 4Music, eventually becoming a producer. It was a high-pressure job which Chawawa credits with teaching him the skills he’d later put to use in his fast turnaround viral videos. “We were making a live show every day for four days a week,” he says. “If something happened before you were about to go live, you had to change the whole script… So I’m very used to having to do things at the last minute and quickly.” But Chawawa wanted to be on camera, not behind the scenes. He’d write jokes for the 4Music presenters to deliver. “I could see these jokes landing,” he remembers, “and I knew it was making good TV.” When he tried to get booked for presenting work, agents would tell him he didn’t have enough of a profile. “I’d go to these meetings,” he says, “and people would say, ‘We love your showreel, you seem like a nice enough guy, but you don’t have any followers. You’re a nobody.’” One agent told him that she’d consider signing him if he had 30,000 followers on social media. Chawawa could feel himself growing bitter. “Because of the nature of the industry,” he says, “and the struggles I was facing as a presenter, being turned away, being told I didn’t have enough of this or that, I started to be one of those people who was like, ‘It’s not fair!’ I thought to myself, I don’t want to be that guy. I don’t want to suck energy out of the room.” He read the self-help book The Secret by Rhonda Byrne, which taught him to “be grateful for the good things that happen and to look ahead to the things you’d like to happen”. Chawawa did anything he could to increase his social media following, so that he could get back in the room with the agent. Podcasting. Fashion blogging. (When I mention that I’ve seen his early #OutfitOfTheDay posts on Instagram – the hashtag is a staple of fashion bloggers – Chawawa covers his face. “Oh my god,” he cringes.) By now, in addition to his 4Music work, Chawawa had a Saturday morning radio show on Reprezent, a Brixton-based community radio station, and was also picking up the odd presenting gig. “I’d host some acoustic music event where no one could even hear me talking on the microphone,” he says, “but I’d have researched all the artists so I could interview them. None of this was paid, you get what I mean?” In August 2018, Chawawa was on a bus. He saw a now-notorious Jamie Oliver recipe for jerk rice trending. The recipe prompted a national discussion about cultural appropriation. Chawawa saw an opportunity. “I thought,” remembers Chawawa, “what would happen if you expanded out jerk rice? What would a Jamie Oliver Caribbean meal taste like?” He went home via Sainsbury’s, recorded a faux-Caribbean meal in character as “Jonny Oliver”, and posted it on Twitter. “We’re going to kick things off with the plantain,” says Chawawa in the video, rictus grin on his face, “or as we call it in the UK, banana.” He slams the banana in a microwave before mixing up a dish of baked beans and Uncle Ben’s rice. “There he is,” says Chawawa, gesturing to Uncle Ben, “the old bumbaclart.” The video went viral, and Chawawa was well on his way to 30,000 followers. “I started relentlessly making videos… And I just kept going and never stopped.” He sometimes thinks about all the people who told him “no” earlier in his career. “I remember every single one of those people,” Chawawa says, “and my drive is to correct them, to prove them wrong. I will never say it to their face, never need to see them again, but I know they’ll see me. That’s what I use to drive myself.” A flicker of defiance appears in his eyes momentarily, before he laughs and is all easy charm. “It’s like Arya Stark in Game of Thrones,” he says. “Isn’t it? Except I’m not brutally murdering anyone.” There is a refrain on Twitter, where Chawawa now has 183,000 followers: the devil works hard, but Munya works harder. His fans marvel at the speed with which Chawawa can turn around a slickly edited video within a few hours of a news story breaking. “I have a very active imagination,” he explains. “If I see something happening, already in my head I’ll be thinking of ideas.” Take the Hancock video, which featured Chawawa hip-thrusting to Shaggy’s It Wasn’t Me. (Sample lyrics: How could I forget I wasn’t wearing any PPE / Though she hasn’t had her vaccination she got a little prick from me.) Chawawa put out the song just four hours after the Sun broke the story. “I thought that video was late by the time I put it out,” Chawawa says, unbelievably. He had woken up that morning looking forward to a relaxed day: a few meetings, go to the gym. “I went to Instagram,” he says, “and saw there was a photo of Matt Hancock kissing Gina [Colangelo, his aide]. I thought to myself, it’s politics, people don’t really engage in politics, it’s fine, not everyone’s going to know about this.” Then he clicked on a news story about the affair online, and saw that within a half-hour it had received 1,000 comments. Already, social media users had begun impatiently tagging Chawawa in posts, demanding a video. “I checked my phone,” he says, “and people were saying, in capital letters, ‘WHERE IS MUNYA CHAWAWA, WAKE UP NOW.’” Chawawa wrote a sketch in which he spliced old Hancock interviews, to make it look like he was interviewing the beleaguered health secretary. This took an hour. Then he looked at Twitter, and realised that people were expecting him to write a song. “I had to abolish the entire sketch.” Chawawa speed-wrote It Was Me (Shaggy Parody), recorded the video in front of the green screen he keeps in his Forest Hill flat, and then ran to a production meeting that he couldn’t reschedule, while his collaborator Carlos Rico worked on the graphics and animations. He raced home and uploaded the video around 5pm. Twitter exploded. “I went out that evening,” he says, “and people were coming up to me going, ‘Mate, I love the Matt Hancock video.’ There were literally about 300 people who came up to me and said, ‘I just watched you right now, this is so crazy.’” Chawawa tries to savour these moments. An incorrigible workaholic, when a viral video is successful, he grants himself a night off. “Normally I’m always stressing that I need to put something out,” he says, “and thinking about what needs to be next. But when I do a sketch, it’s like this 24-hour invincibility thing where it’s like, cool, this is the perfect time to actually enjoy my life.” After so many years striving, success feels as good as he’d hoped. “I’ve lived it a million times in my head,” Chawawa says, “which is why I’m not overwhelmed by what’s happening. It’s just like, cool, finally. It’s just the way I imagined it.” But what is difficult to cope with is his punishing work schedule. In addition to his comedy videos and Race Around Britain, Chawawa is a co-host on Channel 4 sketch show Complaints Welcome, and has represented brands including Paco Rabanne and Adidas. (To his chagrin, Chawawa’s followers thought the Paco Rabanne ad was a spoof. “That was me trying to be sexy,” he sighs, “and everyone goes, ‘great joke Munya.’”) He regularly clocks 18-hour work days and estimates he’s had four days off in the last three months, including weekends. “I’ve discovered being a workaholic isn’t the greatest thing in the world,” he says, “in terms of prioritising the people who matter.” Chawawa lives with his girlfriend, who works in music management, but rarely sees his family as much as he would like. “Last year,” he says, “I was in Norwich, seeing my niece for the first time, and then my phone goes and I see they’ve announced tier 3.” Chawawa got a train back to London and stayed up all night, writing a satirical song about the restrictions. “You think,” he says, “I can just let this slide, people will forget after a few days, but then I think, this video can change my life, and that’s how I approach it.” Right now, Chawawa freely admits, his balance of work-leisure is definitely off. “Everyone says to you, ‘You’re going to go so far and you’ve got something special and you’re going to be amazing.’ But no one considers the sacrifice that involves…. That being said, there are many successful people who’ve learned to balance both, so they can see their families. I believe I’ll arrive at that point when the time is right.” But for now, Chawawa is continually in upward thrust. He’d love a late-night talkshow of his own, in the style of John Oliver or Trevor Noah. “That’s a great template for me,” he says. And – unexpectedly – he wants to try acting. “I would love to be in a Marvel film,” Chawawa says. I assume he wants to be a comic character – perhaps a mugging villain – but he swiftly corrects me. “No way!” he exclaims. “I’m trying to be one of the good guys… I want to be a superhero.” It’s an unexpected ambition from a wisecracking, drill-rapping comedian. But then again, he has already shown himself to be capable of achieving his goals. I bid goodbye to Chawawa, who pulls on his puffer jacket and heads out into the chill – even though it’s a Friday night, he has more work planned for this evening. The devil works hard, but for the foreseeable future, it seems, Munya will work harder. Race Around Britain launches on YouTube Originals on 6 December Stylist Jessica Swanson; stylist’s assistant Savannah Jones; photographer’s assistant Bertie Oakes; grooming by Lucy Thomas using Bobbi Brown; shot at the Lemonade FactoryI have a small toddler who is obsessed with his grandma. From the moment he wakes up he’s trying to FaceTime her, when we leave our house he pulls us in the direction of hers, if we ask him a question he answers with her name. When yesterday I told her about this, the high, ringing pitch of his affection, she said, “Bit creepy?” then settled back down with him beside the radiator to learn more about Meg and Mog’s eggs. One unexpected joy of having children has been watching both of them form deep and marvellous relationships with their two grandmothers, finding there in the cashmere warmth of their company not just comfort or chocolate, but a level of understanding often lacking in their parents. Which is why it didn’t surprise me to read that the first study to examine grandmothers’ brain function suggested they may be more emotionally connected to their grandchildren than to us, their own children. Could grandmother and grandchild be the only truly perfect relationship? The only one not intrinsically stained by over-exposure, duty or the water damage caused by previous relationships? The only one where nostalgia finds an appropriate home, one of few where affection can be noisily demanded, and the transactions of love and sugar do not leave bitter tastes? My partner and I moved closer to our families when we had a baby for what we thought were practical reasons, and while we have gratefully milked them for every drop of childcare they have in their creaking bodies, we had no idea the main benefit would not be their physical presence, but their emotional proximity. The anthropologist behind the grandmother study, Professor James Rilling, scanned women’s brains as they looked at photos of their grandchildren, noting “activation in areas of the brain associated with emotional empathy”. More so, in most cases, than in the brains of these children’s own fathers. “If their grandchild is smiling, they’re feeling the child’s joy. And if their grandchild is crying, they’re feeling the child’s pain.” Which is a relief for parents like me, who promise they will get to emotional empathy just as soon as the other things on our list, like feeding, hygiene, earning, standing for six whole minutes by the recycling bin contemplating plastics, are all ticked off. “The grandmother hypothesis”, which was developed by an evolutionary biologist in the 1950s, argues that the reason women live so long beyond menopause is in order to help raise their grandchildren. I can already picture the witherment on my mum’s face were I to suggest this to her, but still, it makes a certain kind of sense. If I was a post-menopausal woman, I too might feel a certain amount of irritation at the simplicity of this, the reduction of my existence to a kind of padded domestic prop. But the “raising” dispensed by a modern-day grandmother, whose life is so much larger than that of most grandmothers that came before, has a happy purity. It’s unsullied by the discipline and nagging served by a parent, and is anchored instead in attention, and food, and just thinking the kid is fabulous. My daughter has wanted a baby since she was a baby, a broodiness that saw her as a toddler changing the nappy of her nappies, and asking me earnestly aged four, if it was true that all the children she would ever have were already inside her. Well, yes, I said, paused on the kerb. While the existential bogglement of such a concept terrifies me, I look forward to grandmotherhood, despite all the karmic duty it will no doubt entail. I look forward to enjoying the correct amount of responsibility – weighed and packaged and bound by the hours of three and six. I look forward to being professionally adored, small children seeing me as a kind of wealthy goddess rather than moany oven. I look forward to offering an abundance of care, voluptuous and extra, to weep along with these small children at their many daily woes rather than, as I do currently, tut greyly and confiscate scissors. One privilege of having an “emotionally empathic” grandmother lies in evidence that shows a child has fewer emotional problems and better educational achievements if they have an engaged grandparent – every shared year between grandparents and grandchildren increases a grandchild’s likelihood of completing secondary education by, on average, one percentage point. Another privilege is the chance for a person to stand back from their formative relationship with their mother, the soul of which has inevitably seen many dark nights across the decades, and to watch the best version of that relationship replay its edited self upon a grandchild, all bitterness wrung out, all disagreements void. It is the only form of detox I can conscientiously recommend. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWisemanIt is a sad law of politics that just because a problem exists, it doesn’t mean a solution exists. In the Home Office, this law is more prevalent than anywhere else. The tragedy of 27 deaths in the English Channel last week illustrates horribly how true this is. Some of my colleagues on the Conservative backbenches agree with the section of the public that believes the government is not being, in some undefined way, “tough enough” on the issue. This is palpably unfair on the home secretary in particular, and the government as whole. They want a solution as much as anyone for political as well as normal decent humanitarian reasons. There is no single act that works in this instance, but there are a series of options. These divide into short-term measures which should be implemented immediately, and more long-term plans which will take months and in some cases years to come to fruition, but will be needed to give a sustainable hope that this crisis will not be permanent. For the immediate future, the only remedy lies on the beaches of northern France. The policing effort put in to stopping this activity, which is of course organised by some of the world’s nastiest criminal gangs preying on the most vulnerable people, may have been considerable, but it is not enough. For a start, the use of drones and other aerial surveillance would give the authorities a chance to know immediately where a particular operation was gathering, and therefore the ability to deploy police there in time. Whether this is done by French or British officers is a second-order issue. If the French police don’t have the resources, the UK can and will help out. Both countries already allow each other’s immigration officers to check passports on the other side of the Channel, so this is legally possible. Sovereignty should not be an issue here. What this would require is a greater willingness to act together than is currently available. The wider background of Anglo-French coldness, which is currently severe and getting worse, needs to be reversed, in the interests of both countries. The last couple of days have been a diplomatic disaster. Now is not the time for displays of wounded amour propre, in either language. Careless talk costs lives. For the longer term, the idea of adapting the Syrian scheme, where refugees came to Britain legally from the area to which they had originally fled, is a good one. There is no reason why this cannot be applied to other countries suffering turmoil and would provide the other side to the coin of new restrictions on illegal entry in the borders bill currently before parliament. It would demonstrate that the UK was not shirking its responsibilities as a global player and would therefore justify tighter rules in terms of refusing entry to those who were trying to break or ignore the existing laws of the country. This kind of strategy, which combines a realistic and compassionate approach around the world with greater protection of our own borders, will be needed. Most importantly it will save lives, but it will also lower the political temperature around immigration more generally. It will also be needed because of a fact that I almost hesitate to point out to more delicately minded Observer readers. This is that Britain – post-Brexit, Tory-voting Britain, Boris’s Britain – is a greatly attractive place to live. People who have reached France or other prosperous western democracies are still desperate to come to the UK. Because we live here too, we don’t want that desirability to change. So let’s have an asylum system that can cope. Damian Green is a former immigration minister and chair of the Conservatives’ One Nation Caucus and MP for Ashford, KentWhen is murder good for business? When it is made into a Hollywood movie, for one – and when that film stars Lady Gaga. House of Gucci, the Ridley Scott feature released last week to mixed reviews, has sent interest in the Gucci brand soaring. Searches for Gucci clothing were up 73% week on week, according to e-commerce aggregator Lovethesales.com on Friday, with a leap of 257% for bags and 75% for sliders. The figures suggest that the luxury brand stands only to gain from Hollywood’s telling of the story ofthe glamorous Patrizia Reggiani, who hired a hitman in 1995 to kill her ex-husband Maurizio Gucci, the former head of the fashion label. The payoff comes after a delicate dance between the brand’s owners and the film-makers. Officially, Gucci only provided MGM and Scott Free Productions with a selection of original items and props from the fashion house’s archive and allowed for the filming of a scene at its main store in Via Condotti, Rome. While Gucci did not formally endorse the film, it stars Salma Hayek, wife of François-Henri Pinault, the chairman and chief executive of Gucci’s parent, Kering, as well as Jared Leto, a brand ambassador and friend of Gucci’s creative director, Alessandro Michele. The brand also staged a recent catwalk show in Los Angeles – shutting down Hollywood Boulevard close to Grauman’s Chinese theatre – that paid tribute to Hollywood glamour across the decades. But now the movie is on release, Gucci has begun posting pictures of Gaga as Reggiani on social media. “It can go either way,” said Julie Zerbo of the industry analysis outlet the Fashion Law. “Versace wasn’t involved in Ryan Murphy’s American Crime Story about Gianni Versace, but it was pretty obvious from the outset that Gucci wouldn’t push back because Pinault’s wife is in the movie.” She added: “The movie leads from a fashion perspective, so Gucci is using it to inject their own narrative even if they weren’t as involved in the film as they could have been.” But this has not pleased Reggiani, the Milanese socialite who served 16 years in prison for arranging the murder and who said in an Observer interview in 2016 that she had “slept a lot” during her incarceration. “I took care of my plants. I looked after Bambi, my pet ferret,” she added. In an interview with Harper’s Bazaar, Sara Gay Forden, author of the book on which the film is based, noted: “Here was a woman who had lived in the heights of luxury, but she was very much alone – she was an outsider in that Milanese elite society. She felt some humanity in jail that maybe she hadn’t had in her former life.” Reggiani has made it clear that she was “rather annoyed” with Gaga – Stefani Germanotta – for playing the part “without having had the consideration and sensibility to come and meet me”. It was a question, she said, “of good sense and respect”. “They need me,” she continued in La Repubblica. “I still feel like a Gucci – in fact, the most Gucci of them all.” For her part, Gaga has said she “lived” as Reggiani for a year and a half, speaking with a thick Italian accent for nine months of that. “I never broke. I stayed with her,” Gaga said in November’s Vogue. “Nobody was going to tell me who Patrizia Gucci was. Not even Patrizia Gucci.” The film has had broadly positive reviews, with the Guardian calling it a “fantastically rackety, messy soap opera… rescued from pure silliness by Lady Gaga’s glorious performance”. New York artist and head-to-toe Gucci fan Tabboo! said: “I loved it!” But there are larger questions to answer about fashion and Hollywood, said Zerbo, who points out that California now generates more revenue for brands than New York. “Brands can benefit if they opt to engage, or even if they don’t, in increased awareness and desirability.” Any effort by the Gucci family to take legal action, though, is likely to be doomed. Last year the former stockbroker Jordan Belfort sued the production company behind The Wolf of Wall Street, claiming he would never have sold the rights to his memoir to the producer if he knew the film was allegedly funded with dirty money from a Malaysian government-owned company. In any case, added Zerbo, it is better to embrace notoriety than not. “I would argue that The Devil Wears Prada actually elevated Anna Wintour’s persona to a mass scale. So many people walked away from that film knowing who she is.” And several years later, Prada went public, adding billions of dollars to its valuation.Clementines transport me to my childhood and the promise of Christmas. They sing of December, whether they’re in a bowl in my kitchen or dropped into my children’s stockings, and I use them in all sorts – from cakes to sorbets, jellies to jams. Here, I bake them with a delicious salmon fillet alongside fennel that turns sweet and caramelised, and serve it with dollops of dill creme fraiche. It will make a wonderful, colourful and delicious centrepiece for your festive table. Baked salmon with citrus vodka, clementines, fennel and dill creme fraiche Prep 40 min Cook 30 min Serves 6 For the salmon 1kg whole salmon fillet, pinboned – sustainably sourced and ideally wild, when in season 4 tbsp olive oil 1-2 tsp dried chilli flakes 1 tsp crushed pink peppercorns Sea salt 1 small bunch dill 2 fennel bulbs with fronds 2 tbsp lemon juice For the clementine vodka glaze 100ml citrus or lemon verbena vodka (I’ve made one for Colwith Farm Distillery, but you can make your own: cut a stalk or two of lemon verbena or take some lemon or grapefruit peel, put in a glass jar, pour over the vodka and infuse for 1-2 weeks, testing every 2-3 days Juice and zest of 4 clementines or 2 oranges, plus 3 extra clementines, unpeeled and thinly sliced 6 tbsp runny honey 3 star anise 3 bay leaves For the dill creme fraiche 500g creme fraiche 4 tbsp finely chopped dill 1 tbsp lemon juice Salt and black pepper Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Lay the salmon skin side down on a baking tray lined with baking paper brushed with a little olive oil. Divide the salmon into six or eight by slicing down through the flesh, but not through the skin. Brush with more oil and season with the chilli flakes, dill, crushed pink peppercorns and sea salt. Trim the fennel, removing any tough outer layers, then cut into thin slices, fronds and all. Put in a bowl and toss with two tablespoons of olive oil, a squeeze of lemon and some sea salt, then arrange around the salmon ready to bake. Mix all the dill creme fraiche ingredients in a bowl with plenty of black pepper and sea salt – always taste and consider. Put the vodka, clementine zest, juice, honey, star anise and bay leaf in a pan and simmer until the liquid has reduced by half. Add the sliced clementines, cook for five minutes until softened, then lift out the fruit and set aside. Reduce the remaining sauce until glossy, for four to five minutes more, then pour it over the salmon fillet. Bake the fish for 10 minutes, then lay the candied clementine slices down the centre of the fillet and roast for another 10 minutes. Put the tray in the centre of the table and serve with the dill creme fraiche, festive red cabbage and all. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Fiona Beckett’s drinks match There’s a lot going on here flavour-wise, so you need a wine with the personality to carry it. Step forward New Zealand sauvignon blanc: the richly textured Waitrose No 1 Astrolabe Sauvignon Blanc 2020 (£11.99, 13.5%), from Awatere, with its lush, passion fruit and gooseberry fruit, would fit the bill perfectly. The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. Check ratings in your region: UK; Australia; US. Emily Scott is head chef at Emily Scott Food at Watergate Bay in Cornwall and her debut cookbook Sea &amp; Shore: Recipes and Stories from a Kitchen in Cornwall (Hardie Grant) is out now.A quilt stitched with coded messages by allied female prisoners of war and a lamp believed to have been used by Florence Nightingale are among the “objects of kindness” that are to go on display for the first time this week. Locked away in the archives of the Red Cross for decades, the rare artefacts bear witness to the kindness and resilience of women in wartime and have never been seen by the public. Now they will be exhibited by the Red Cross when the charity opens a museum at its headquarters in London on Wednesday. Mehzebin Adam, curator of the “Museum of Kindness” said: “Women played a really significant role in our history. Not just as nurses, but as leaders who influenced the beginning of the Red Cross, like Florence Nightingale, and as artists who were documenting war and their experiences.” The quilt on display is one of three handmade in Changi prison by women and children from Britain and its allies, who were imprisoned when the Japanese army invaded Singapore during the second world war. Separated from their male relatives, the women convinced their guards to let them make quilts for the wounded men in the camp’s hospital, ostensibly as a gift to the Red Cross and a way of passing the time. Using material that is thought to have come from Red Cross food sacks, the female internees then embroidered coded pictures on to the 66 squares of each quilt, incorporating secret, uplifting messages for their husbands and fathers into their designs and signing each picture with their names. “The women came up with this idea to stitch messages on the quilt, so they could pass messages to their male relatives, who were held separately,” said Adam. “They had to do all this in secret, because they weren’t allowed to communicate with the men.” Conditions in the prison camp were extremely harsh and all the internees suffered from overcrowding, malnutrition and disease. For many men, the messages and names contained in the quilts would have been the first news they got that loved ones were still alive. “Each square on the quilt has a very special story,” says Adam. For example, one embroiderer whose husband was imprisoned in the camp depicted a V, presumably for victory, and two smiling rabbits. “She had two daughters, so we think that the message was intended to let her husband know that her two daughters were well and with her.” Other squares contain chirpy, patriotic emblems like Scottish thistles and Welsh dragons, and subtle references to King George VI. But most importantly, “every square has a name or initial: that was the main objective, just to get their name on the quilt”. The other two quilts created by the female internees, dedicated to the Red Cross Societies of Australia and Japan, are famous and are held at the Australian War Memorial in Canberra. But the quilt made for the British society has never been displayed: “It was discovered in the 1960s, folded in a drawer in the archives among many other objects – it’s a mystery how it got to the UK.” A Turkish lantern believed to have been one of the lamps used by Florence Nightingale while she was caring for soldiers in the Crimean war will also be on display for the very first time. “Nightingale became known as the ‘Lady with the Lamp’ because even at night she would be constantly checking on her patients,” said Adam. “Her work was an inspiration for the founder of the Red Cross movement, Henry Dunant.” Nightingale went on to work with the Red Cross, as a member of the ladies’ committee, when the society was formed in 1870. The lamp was later discovered in the archive of a Red Cross office in Essex. Adam said: “We don’t know who left it there and how it got there.”At the Spectator magazine’s parliamentarian of the year awards, the swankiest shindig in the political calendar, one of the gongs went to Nadhim Zahawi. He received a big cheer from an audience heavily populated with Tory MPs and ministers when he used his acceptance speech to remark: “How did a boy from Iraq end up on these shores without a word of English at the age of 11 and become the secretary of state for education? This is the greatest country of the world, my friends.” On the same day, just a few hours earlier, at least 27 souls, among them a pregnant woman and several children, had also tried to make it to these shores only to die in the attempt. Less fortunate than Mr Zahawi, they and their dreams of making a better life in “the greatest country of the world” were drowned as they risked the treacherous crossing from the coast of northern France to that of southern England. We will never know if a future cabinet minister might have been among them. Even after that tragedy, more people subsequently crammed into fragile craft to attempt the perilous passage. No one would try navigating the Dover Straits, the world’s busiest shipping lane, in a small boat and in winter, if they thought they had any better options. There is a cognitive dissonance in the government’s thinking about refugees. An eagerness to celebrate immigrant success stories, like that of Mr Zahawi, is accompanied by a system of managing asylum seekers designed to place huge and often treacherous obstacles in the path of anyone hoping to replicate his story. The result is a regime that neither displays compassion towards those seeking refuge nor gives voters confidence that the government has migration under control. There are millions of displaced people on the borders of Europe. They are fleeing conflict, poverty and/or persecution, as the education secretary’s Kurdish parents did during the early years of Saddam Hussein’s tyrannical reign in Iraq. Viewed from Greece or Italy, which have seen much greater flows of migration, what Britain calls a “crisis” is a relatively modest challenge. The numbers making the risky passage across the Channel have dramatically increased, more than 1,000 coming ashore on one day earlier in November, but it is important to be clear why. Legal pathways into the UK have been closed off and ways of establishing safer routes, such as allowing asylum applications at UK embassies, are anathema to the government. Even where supposedly binding commitments to refugees have been made, these are being dishonoured. A resettlement scheme for Afghans fleeing the murderous Taliban was announced at the time of the retreat from Kabul. This was held out by the prime minister as a noble example of the UK standing by those Afghans to whom we had moral obligations. He told an emergency session of the Commons in August: “We will support those people in coming to this country… with a new and bespoke settlement scheme focusing on the most vulnerable.” Disgracefully, that scheme is still not operational more than three months after its creation was first trumpeted by Mr Johnson, forcing more desperate people to take life-threatening gambles. It is not so much the numbers of those trying to cross the Channel as the visibility of them that has turned this into a political crisis. People risking all to get to the UK, and being daily featured doing so on news bulletins, has made the issue highly salient. Even before the tragedy in the Channel and the rancorously recriminatory exchanges between London and Paris that have followed, Tory MPs were becoming alarmed by the volume of email and post they were receiving. For liberal humanitarian voters, the deaths in the Channel reinforce a conviction that the UK’s posture towards refugees is callous. For the voter who is mainly concerned that the government knows what it is doing, it is yet another reason to question the basic competence of this one. For those who see seaborne refugees as intruders to be repelled, a constituency at the heart of the Brexit vote that put Mr Johnson where he is today, this exposes the government to the charge that it is failing to “take back control” of the country’s borders. It is this latter group that most unnerves Number 10. Nigel Farage, who can never see an issue without wanting to make it more toxic, is threatening another comeback. Just because he’s already had more of them than Frank Sinatra doesn’t mean he won’t do it again. Tory strategists are shivered by the spectre of beer breath founding a new vehicle for his ego and carving away a chunk of the rightwing vote. The prime minister is, and has been for months, angrily exasperated by what he sees as Priti Patel’s failure to “grip” the issue. The home secretary, in turn, has spent her time blaming the French. They shouldn’t take it personally, because she also blames her own officials and legal advisers. Her efforts to shift culpability elsewhere are no longer working with her party. When the home secretary appeared before the Commons, the fiercest contributions by Conservative MPs were from some who were previously members of her fan club. One senior Tory remarks: “The trouble is all the political pressure on Boris is coming from hopelessly unrealistic headbangers on the right of my party saying, ‘Just send them back’. This is leading Boris and Priti in exactly the wrong direction because it will only increase French intransigence and make it even more difficult to solve.” If there were an easy remedy, it would have been adopted a long time ago, but it is the impulse of rightwing populists to claim that complex issues have simple solutions. Ms Patel has promoted the notion of adopting a “push-back” policy by ordering the coastguard and the navy to force boats back to the French side of the Channel. This is an instruction no captain is ever likely to obey and even less so now, for fear of breaking maritime laws and capsizing boats. As a rule, sailors don’t like drowning people. There have also been repeated suggestions that the processing of asylum seekers could be subcontracted to other countries far away. When it was recently spun that the government was in talks with Albania, that country’s foreign minister dismissed the claim as “totally fake”. France is the country Britain most needs to be talking to. Neither the plight of the refugees nor public confidence in the management of migration will be improved without cooperation. Unfortunately, it is one of the least well-kept secrets in diplomacy that Anglo-French relations are dreadful. Brexit-related disputes about fisheries and trade rules have been compounded by the UK’s crowing involvement in the American submarine deal with the Australians that left the French feeling shafted and humiliated. British ministers accuse Emmanuel Macron of ramping up nationalist rhetoric to please his domestic audience ahead of next year’s presidential election. There’s truth in that, but what were those same British ministers doing in the run-up to our last election? They are still at it now in an effort, as crude as it is counterproductive, to swerve their own responsibilities by bashing the French. The waters had barely closed over the dead souls in the Channel before Mr Johnson dispatched a three-page letter to Mr Macron that included a series of consciously provocative assertions and demands he knows the French will not accept. The publication of the letter on Twitter, before the French president had even seen it, confirmed that this was not a sincere attempt to find common ground with Paris, but frantic posturing to try to please the rightwing media and appease Tory backbenchers. “Things are often difficult with the French at the best of times,” observes one former Conservative cabinet minister. “Baiting the French when we need their help is just stupid.” Mr Macron retorted that serious leaders don’t communicate with each other about grave issues “by tweets and letters that we make public”. The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, disinvited Ms Patel from a meeting due to be held today involving him and counterparts from Germany, the Netherlands and Belgium, all countries essential to any effort to achieve better management of this crisis. Which points to a glaring and tragic irony. A Brexit sold with the slogan “take back control” has left the UK with a border that is now harder to control. Our country is even more dependent on collaboration with European neighbours who have much less incentive to be cooperative. There will be an empty chair where Britain should be sitting. Puerile point-scoring and phoney posturing have to stop before more people perish in the icy waters of the Channel. • Andrew Rawnsley is Chief Political Commentator of the ObserverJed Mercurio, one of Britain’s leading television writers and the creator of Line of Duty, will speak in London on Friday at the inaugural Sarah Hughes Lecture. But this time Mercurio is more likely to be asked about the challenges of representing the world of healthcare and hospitals on television than dramatising investigations into police corruption. Because Mercurio, a former medical practitioner, is also the creator of the witty and dark BBC hospital dramas Cardiac Arrest, about young medics, and, more recently, Bodies. For one night only the identity of the fabled “H” – the mystery at the heart of the BBC’s Line of Duty show – will be clear. It will stand for “Hughes”, the surname of the late journalist and arts critic in whose memory the event is being staged by the Royal Society of Medicine. Hughes, a mother and wife who died from breast cancer on Easter Monday 2021 at the age of 48, wrote regularly for the Observer and the Guardian, including writing movingly about her diagnosis and illness, and was an admirer of Mercurio’s work. And the admiration ran both ways. When Hughes died, he was among many in the entertainment industry to mourn the passing of an informed and gifted cheerleader and analyst. Screenwriter Sarah Phelps, the woman behind recent high-profile Agatha Christie adaptations, has also paid tribute to Hughes, saying that interviews conducted by the journalist were among the most enjoyable she has given. This time Victoria Macdonald, the health and social care editor of Channel 4 News, will be asking the questions. The live event, which begins at 7pm, will also be streamed and tickets for the virtual lecture are available until 2 December. Hughes was a history graduate of St Andrews University and was always intrigued by all facets of the human condition, in real life and in fiction.One of the positive experiences during two years of pandemic gloom has been the speed of scientific progress in understanding and treating Covid. Many effective vaccines were launched in less than a year and rapid large-scale trials found a cheap and effective drug, dexamethasone, that saved thousands of lives. The global scientific community has also carried out “genomic surveillance” – sequencing the genome of the virus to track how it evolves and spreads at an unprecedented level: the public genome database has more than 5.5m genomes. The great value of that genomic surveillance, underpinned by a commitment to rapid and open sharing of the data by all countries in near-real time, has been seen in the last few days as we’ve learned of the Covid variant called Omicron. The surveillance requires a remarkable amount of cooperation between scientists to build compatible laboratory protocols, software systems and databases. Many of these scientists are not directly paid for this work and do it in addition to their existing jobs. They are motivated by a belief that sharing data relevant to public health, especially in a pandemic, can help speed up scientific understanding, aid in decision-making and contribute to the next generation of medicines. This commitment to rapid data sharing has deep roots in genomics. At a 1996 summit in Bermuda, the leaders of the Human Genome Project established a set of principles to release a new DNA sequence to public databases within 24 hours. This approach departed from the established convention that experimental data only needed to be released when a study was published, months or years later. Sir John Sulston, founding director of the Wellcome Sanger Institute, said: “All of this [genome data] should be in the public domain... I think we need a public social welfare attitude to the use of this information.” That attitude now prevails around the world, as evidenced by the rapid sharing of more than 1m Sars-CoV-2 sequences by the Sanger Institute since March 2020. On 23 November, scientists in Botswana uploaded 99 Sars-CoV-2 genome sequences to this database. Like most submissions that day, nearly all the sequences were the dominant Delta variant. But three of them looked different from anything seen before. Later the same day, an independent team in South Africa uploaded seven nearly identical genomes. These teams noticed that the new variant contained an eye-watering number of mutations in the part of the virus’s genome that encodes the spike protein, which it uses to infect human cells. Most concerningly, nearly half of these mutations had previously been seen in the earlier variants of concern (Alpha, Beta, Gamma, Delta) or predicted in laboratory experiments to increase the virus’s ability to latch on to human cells. They notified health authorities of their concerns and began an immediate investigation into how widespread this new variant might be. While these scientists worked around the clock, the fact that they had shared the sequences with the world as part of their routine process, before they even knew what they were, meant that other scientists, thousands of miles away, could study them as well. Within just a few hours of the sequences being shared, a post was made on the pango designation forum, a corner of the internet where virus genome experts discuss new sequences and assign name that makes it easier to refer to specific parts of the Sars-CoV-2 family trees. The mutations in the new variant also alarmed the international scientists. It was quickly dubbed B.1.1.529 and prioritised for further study. Once additional evidence gathered by the local teams in South Africa had been presented, the World Health Organization (WHO) made it the fifth variant of concern, Omicron. Just 72 hours had passed since the original discovery. The scientists who sounded the alarm because they are committed to the moral imperative of rapid data sharing knew that in the midst of the pandemic it would have consequences. Tulio de Oliveira, one of the leaders of the South African genomics team, announcing the variant, tweeted: “The world should provide support to South Africa and Africa and not discriminate or isolate it! By protecting and supporting it, we will protect the world!” By the next day, dozens of countries, including the UK, had announced new travel restrictions on countries in southern Africa. Some restrictions may have been unavoidable to buy time to understand this new threat, but travel bans come with serious consequences for people and economies in affected countries. Previously, they have delayed, but not prevented, the spread of new variants. There is some chance in this situation that they may be more effective, precisely because of the excellent work done to share information so rapidly. Genomic surveillance in India when Delta appeared was less comprehensive and the seriousness of that new variant did not become apparent until weeks after it had been circulating widely, and exported around the world. While scientists around the world are scrambling to understand Omicron, and national governments are making response plans, we must also find ways to reward the critical early warning provided by South Africa. Less than 25% of South Africans are fully vaccinated, and while that may be due to complicated reasons involving both supply and demand, it is not for us in the rest of the world to determine what would be most helpful. Countries with an abundance of vaccine doses and other resources should offer whatever is asked for by countries now at the front edge of the confrontation with Omicron. The pandemic has emphasised that we are a single global community and our policy responses must reflect that reality. It would be a disaster if the global response to this heroically open science sent the message that the reward for such bravery is isolation. • Jeffrey Barrett is leading the Covid-19 genomics initiative at the Wellcome Sanger InstituteThere is a strikingly topsy-turvy, Saturnalian feel to recent qualifying matches for the 2022 football World Cup. Saudi Arabia (population 35 million) beat China (population 1.4 billion). Canada lead the US in their group. Four-time winners Italy failed to defeat lowly Northern Ireland. Pursuing an unbeaten run full of political symbolism, unfancied Iran are also over the moon after subjugating the neighbourhood, as is their habit. Iraq, Syria, Lebanon and the UAE all succumbed to the soar‑away “Persian Leopards”. Little, it seems, can stop Iran reaching the World Cup finals in Qatar a year from now. Yet wait. It’s time, perhaps, for a geo-strategic VAR check. There’s a big potential snag with this particular football field of dreams: military conflict in the Gulf. A shooting war with Israel and the US would definitely upset Iran’s chances. It could wreck the whole World Cup. War would, of course, have many infinitely more serious consequences than disruption of a football competition. Yet this dread prospect is drawing closer as a diplomatic showdown looms in Vienna. Iran’s new hardline leadership do not regard last-gasp talks on reviving the moribund 2015 nuclear deal, which resume in Austria’s capital on Monday, as a negotiation. For them, it’s a forum for correcting past injustices. They insist that the US admit Donald Trump was wrong to renege on the deal, immediately lift all sanctions and pledge never to break its promises again. While most can agree Trump’s decision was incredibly stupid, Iran’s other demands are beyond President Joe Biden’s power to deliver. Israel, expressing scant faith in the talks, is meanwhile making military threats. Its rightwing prime minister, Naftali Bennett, claimed last week that the Tehran regime was “at the most advanced stage of its nuclear programme”. Bennett’s remarks appeared aimed at Biden as much as at Iran. “In any event, even if there is a return to the [2015] deal, Israel is of course not a party to the deal and is not obligated by the deal,” he said. In other words, Israel may defy the US and go it alone. “It is possible there will be disputes with the best of our friends,” Bennett added. While denying intent to build a bomb, Iranians point out Israel already has a formidable, undeclared nuclear arsenal of its own, which is not subject to UN inspections. This piece of hypocrisy is too often forgotten in the west. Conveniently ignored, too, is the fact the US is spending $1.5tn on modernising its nuclear weapons. Other parties to the Iran deal – the UK, France, Russia and China – are also upgrading or expanding nukes. This hardly sets a good non-proliferation example. In Biden’s White House, early optimism that Iran could be peacefully persuaded to halt its reportedly accelerating advance towards nuclear weapons capabilities has been replaced by gloom about the Vienna outcome. “There are a cascading set of consequences for all of this coming undone,” a former senior official told NBC News. “I just don’t see how this comes to a happy conclusion.” In an apparent bid to placate Israel and pressure Iran, the White House has let it be known it will consider alternatives, including military action, should Vienna fail. A so-called Plan B reportedly includes options for additional sanctions, including on Iran’s lucrative oil sales to China; covert operations; and air and missile strikes, jointly or in support of Israeli forces. Yet in an unusual check to Israeli security officials, Biden’s advisers are simultaneously briefing that Israel’s assassinations of Iranian nuclear scientists and sabotage of nuclear facilities are counter-productive. Instead of deterring the regime, such attacks, never officially admitted, are said to have had the opposite effect, just as Trump’s “maximum pressure” campaign only increased Tehran’s defiance. The US is also privately warning that the relocation of nuclear facilities underground and improved Iranian ground-to-air and cyber defences mean military strikes may prove ineffective. All of which strongly points to Biden adopting another, less confrontational Plan B option: an interim deal that would slow Iran’s nuclear activities and allow more extensive UN inspections, in return for limited sanctions relief. Even a temporary pact would be a relief for worried European governments and Arab allies, including Saudi Arabia, that have been tentatively rebuilding bridges to Tehran. For Biden, a stop-gap deal, however unsatisfactory, could defuse, for now, a regional crisis that might otherwise suck in the US, roil his domestic and foreign agendas, and further inflate global energy prices. Viennese fudge is perhaps the best the west can hope for. Rabid hardliners in Tehran who believe Iran can weather continuing sanctions, and argue a new agreement is not necessary, will resist a compromise. Their dangerous stupidity is a match for Trump’s. But much the same holds true for Israeli hawks who believe conflict with Iran is both inevitable and necessary for the country’s future security. In truth, this conflict, dubbed the “shadow war”, is already being fought with rising intensity. Israel has conducted hundreds of unacknowledged air strikes on Iranian or Iran-linked targets, mostly but not solely in Syria, in recent years. Another attack near Homs reportedly killed two civilians last week. Iran runs its own arm’s-length operations in the Gulf and elsewhere, using proxies such as Iraqi Shia militias. US officials effectively blamed Israel for provoking an armed drone strike on an American base in southern Syria last month that they said was Iran’s retaliation for Israeli strikes. This sparring could quickly escalate into something far worse. As diplomacy nears the final whistle, restraining Israel may be as big a challenge for Biden as containing Iran. Yet if the World Cup qualifiers are any guide, Israel should tread carefully. It was knocked out this month.Fifty years ago next month – on 16 December 1971 – long before Black Lives Matter, taking the knee and the Windrush scandal, a group of black activists made headlines after a ruling at the Old Bailey, the court that hears only the most serious of cases. Dubbed the “Mangrove Nine”, seven men and two women had been on trial there for weeks, arrested during a protest that started outside a Caribbean restaurant called the Mangrove on All Saints Road, in the heart of Notting Hill, west London. After 55 days, the nine were finally acquitted of the most egregious of the charges brought against them – incitement to riot. It was a magnificent victory in a case thought by many to have been politically motivated. Two of the defendants, Darcus Howe and Altheia Jones-Lecointe, decided to represent themselves (another, Rhodan Gordon, sacked his lawyer five days in to the trial and did the same) and the judge surprised and dismayed the establishment of the day by referring to “racial hatred on both sides” in his summing up. A landmark case, then, mostly forgotten about outside west London, until film-maker Steve McQueen made his film about it, Mangrove, for his 2020 Small Axe series of dramas about key events in black British lives. Nowadays, the Mangrove Nine are no longer just local heroes; they are covered in the national curriculum and have come to wider attention in a new age of black activism and protest. As Jamaican poet and activist Linton Kwesi Johnson remarks in recent BBC documentary Black Power: A British Story of Resistance: “I think the youngsters of the BLM movement need to apprise themselves of what has gone before, so that they can draw some lessons from the battles we have fought and won.” It’s fair to say that Yinka Inniss Charles draws lessons from that time, as does Jamila Bolton-Gordon. Both women grew up in Notting Hill (as did I – Yinka has long been a family friend). Like a lot of people from that area, they are fiercely proud of their roots, and are active in campaigning and protesting against ongoing injustice and inequality. Their fathers, Elton Anthony Carlisle Inniss and Rhodan Gordon, were both members of the Mangrove Nine, and the women’s friendship and outlook on life have been shaped by their dads’ experiences. The march their fathers went on back in August 1970, when they were arrested, sought to draw attention to the repeated and aggressive raids on the Mangrove restaurant; raids carried out for no other reason than, according to one person interviewed in Black Power, “policing the Mangrove out of business”. Johnson says: “It was clear to the black youth of my generation that the Metropolitan police had declared war on us.” The area has, over the years, been a hostile and sometimes violent environment for black people. Yinka remembers something of the effect on her father of living there. He was a mostly “mellow, chilled” man, but in later life he would sometimes be triggered, “angry and upset, caught up in unhappy memories, reliving the trauma he suffered as a young man on the streets of west London”. He came to this country from Trinidad as a teenager. Like a lot of West Indian families, his parents believed he would get a better education here. Jamila’s father, Rhodan Gordon, came from Grenada in 1960 when he was 22, and would make quite an impact on his new home. “He spent a number of years finding himself, doing different things, hands in different pies, then later on he got more political,” Jamila says. Both women are understandably proud of their fathers. For the children of the Mangrove Nine, the events of that time have a long tail. They are wary of the media (unhappy about some of the coverage of the Mangrove Nine and the Grenfell tragedy, which happened in the same area and involved friends, family, people they know); but today they want to recall their fathers, share some of their memories, as a recognition of the importance of black British history. * * * Yinka lives in south London now, with her children. She did a degree in law and works as a benefits adviser. She was born a couple of months after the protest in 1970, and her earliest memory of her father is from when she was about two or three and the family lived off Ladbroke Grove. “It’s of these white leather boots that he bought for me. There’s a picture – I’ve got a little afro and I’m wearing them.” Her father was born in 1947 and came from a wealthy family in Morvant, Trinidad. “There were lawyers and judges in the family. They sent the oldest of each group of kids over to London to go to school. Later he met my mum [who is from Cork in southern Ireland] at one of the clubs they used to go to.” (These included the Rio, owned by Frank Crichlow, who would later open the Mangrove.) “He was a musician and very much into African culture. That’s why I got the [Nigerian] name Yinka.” On the day of the protest, Yinka says that her father was beaten up on the way to a police station, “in the van and then again in a cell – that happened regularly to young black guys. They wanted them to feel they couldn’t have a life, and for my dad it was even worse because he had mixed-race kids as well. “The police didn’t like it if you were with a white woman. They used to terrorise my mum as well, calling her a ‘nigger lover’, all of that. They used to trail down the road after her as she pushed her pram… as children, we suffered too.” There was, though, more safety in crowds, and the close-knit community stuck together. “Everyone was kind of friends. Going to the same clubs. My dad had been beaten up by the police before Mangrove – that was normal, and although they [the protesters] came together for the Mangrove protest, they had been coming together already, because they had had enough of young black boys being abused by police. They all used to hang around at Metro [a youth club on Lancaster Road]. They were protecting each other from the police. Trying to find a way to get away from them. Young black men who had come over to London as teenagers.” Yinka’s parents split up eventually and in the late 70s her father returned to Trinidad. By then her stepfather was on the scene, and: “I really stopped seeing my dad for a number of years. I think he left because he had just had enough. He and the others continued to be harassed after the court case – you don’t fight and win a case in the Old Bailey and just walk away, and nothing ever happens to you again.” As Yinka was growing up, she always asked her mum about him. “She told me he was one of the Mangrove Nine; she also said he was a session musician, a percussionist, and that made me want to be a musician too.” She had some success as a rapper and singer in the 80s and 90s, including a hit with Love City Groove in 1995. She re-established contact with her father when she was about 16. “I got to go and see him in Trinidad a few times. He was a bit broken by all the things that had happened. He never came back. He talked about it, but I think he just felt hurt and frustrated by what had happened here. He died too young, after a fall in 2010.” Jamila Bolton-Gordon is currently doing a master’s in environment management, having worked in property management, and lives with her children in Fulham. She was born in 1973, two years after the trial ended. “My mum met my dad as a teenager, she came here in the 60s from Jamaica. My dad came from Grenada in 1960, when he was 22. By then, he already had a political point of view that had been awoken in him in Grenada. Mum would see him talking in Hyde Park, at Speakers’ Corner,” she says. “Dad quickly became a community activist, specialising in law, immigration, housing and education. He developed charitable and entrepreneurial businesses.” Back-a-Yard was a Caribbean restaurant in Portobello Road; later, he opened the Black People’s Information Centre – an advice centre that provided much of the Mangrove Nine’s legal support (the family lived upstairs). “The legacy he left for the area is the black youth hostel and housing association, Westway Housing Ltd, that he helped to found.” He was a stickler for education, she recalls. “Definitely; we had a black [history] library in the office.” Jamila didn’t have a conventional upbringing, she says, “much to my mum’s frustration. She would have liked a more ordered life. But he just wasn’t into that. He wasn’t a conventional partner. He prioritised his work.” Her parents split up when Jamila was three, though she carried on seeing her dad throughout his life, until he died in 2018. “We were devastated. It was unexpected in that he’d recovered from cancer, but it returned.” An early memory of Rhodan dates back to 1976, to the riot that kicked off at the end of that year’s Notting Hill carnival – the annual street celebration of West Indian culture in the area. “I was on my dad’s shoulders and I remember feeling the tension – from laughing and joking and music and everything else and standing outside the BPIC, and then feeling, you know, the discussions changing, feeling the heightened concern. I remember us walking down Portobello Road towards the bridge and then seeing this kind of anger of people coming towards us and my dad swivelling around, and then we saw the police coming. “Somebody threw something and my dad ran back with us, into the house, shouting something to my mum. I remember hearing all these pellets and things hitting the window and doors, windows smashing, and my mum and the other women saying: ‘We’ve got to get the children out of here.’” Yinka says she continued to live her dad’s experience in that area as she grew up. “The police were always around. That was standard.” It was because, she says, her stepfather “used to be in All Saints Road with Frank [Crichlow] a lot in the 70s and early 80s and they [the police] were watching people all the time, and if you had a nice car, they’d stop you. He managed a couple of clubs and also experienced police injustice first hand.” She says it was normal in the late 70s and early 80s to see the police harassing black people in the street. “Arresting people for nothing. We got used to it. Living in Ladbroke Grove, particularly when I was little, I just remember having mixed emotions, because it could be an exciting and uplifting place as well. But if you had a black father, he was going to be harassed and abused by the police. Yes, there were some bad things going on in the area, but people were also trying to run legitimate businesses that were being targeted 24/7. You weren’t allowed to do business like a white person and just be left alone.” * * * Yinka doesn’t think of herself as an activist, but… “If that’s what you want to call it… I have led a few marches, because if I see an injustice that needs to be shouted about, I shout.” She was involved from the outset in the local campaign to help the victims of the Grenfell fire, putting together a support group with and for Grenfell mothers, called We Can Cry. Last year she helped organise a protest to support a young black man and his family, a barman who in February of 2020 was attacked in a pub in Portobello Road by a group of white men. “The march was called Justice for El, his mother is a friend of mine. There were big white guys taunting him, punching him. The pub didn’t do much. They left him to get home on his own. A young 20-something boy out of university whose family had already been through the trauma of Grenfell.” She says the brewery company got quite a surprise when the local community turned out in force for the protest. “I just thought our parents would be spinning in their grave if we hadn’t done something,” she says. “We didn’t realise it was going to be such a big protest. We had the whole of Ladbroke Grove outside the pub, and it ended up in the papers.” Yinka and Jamila are impressive, motivated women. They are in the process of setting up a charity to mentor young people who live in the area. “We want people who are successful and from Ladbroke Grove originally to come back and get involved in mentoring.” They would like to write books about their fathers and are keen to collect and archive local stories and experiences. They do a podcast together called The Next Generation of the Mangrove 9 (available on YouTube) and “we’re also trying to set up a museum to honour the Mangrove Nine and other high achievers from Notting Hill”. They are also on something of a quest – to get to the bottom of unresolved issues and missing pieces of the Mangrove Nine story. “We’ve been researching,” says Yinka. “Trying to get more information about our parents from official channels.” One thing that rankles, something they feel has been overlooked, is that four of the defendants, including their fathers, were found guilty of some, albeit lesser, charges and given – unfairly as they saw it – suspended sentences, which hung over their heads afterwards. Both women would like to see their dads’ names cleared one day. Jamila says that watching the Steve McQueen film energised them. A few caveats aside, she found the film very powerful. “Talking about it, reading about it is one thing, but to see it visually is quite another. It kind of solidified all the different stories we had heard. It was very emotional. It brought up emotions that I didn’t even know I had, if I’m honest. That I had buried… My dad was very much ‘you keep going’, ‘you keep charging on’, and I suppose that that passion in our parents was instilled in us. It helped create the characters that we are today.” Yinka agrees: “It took Steve McQueen and 50 years for them to be recognised as heroes. They were kind of heroes to the community [already], but no one really understood the long-term significance of what they achieved.”In celebration of the sixth plenum of the 19th central committee earlier this month, the Chinese Communist party published yet another history of its own glorious achievements. Many pages were devoted to the wise, indeed infallible leadership of the present incumbent, Xi Jinping. Chairman Xi sets considerable store by both territorial integrity and, as he might put it, the righting of past wrongs. In that catalogue, the unequal treaty by which Britain acquired what was seen in the 19th century as an unpromisingly barren rock just off the south coast of China loomed large. The unappealing rock, lacking in almost every natural resource beyond a deep and safe harbour, was to grow into one of the world’s most dynamic and prosperous societies. That Hong Kong flourished as much as it did under British colonial rule was in no small measure thanks to China: proximity, of course, allowed Hong Kong to play its critical role as intermediary between China and the world of global trading, finance and investment. But proximity also allowed Hong Kong to benefit from the talent and energy of the millions of people who fled China, beginning in 1949, when the CCP’s victory in China’s civil war triggered the exodus of some 100,000 people a day. When, in 1950, numbers reached 3 million, the Hong Kong government reluctantly closed the border. The refugee flow continued through the catastrophe of the Great Leap Forward in the late 50s and of the Cultural Revolution in the 60s, despite the best efforts of Beijing to persuade its citizens that life was better in the People’s Republic. That particular CCP contribution to Hong Kong’s success is unlikely to figure in the party’s official histories, but it did figure, as Michael Sheridan relates in his compendious new history of this unique colony, in the formation of Deng Xiaoping’s strategy to revive China’s desperate fortunes after 30 years of Maoist revolution. In a telling episode, Sheridan details the first visit of Chinese officials to Hong Kong in 1977, from then poverty-stricken China. What they learned there, which included the startling contrast between Hong Kong’s US$19.6bn in trade and the US$14.8bn for all of China, informed Deng’s policy of opening to the world, beginning with the first “special economic zone” in Shenzhen, just over the border. The lure of Hong Kong for China’s impoverished citizens also made a deep impression on Xi Zhongxun, then party secretary of Guangdong province, which borders Hong Kong. In 1978, on a tour of inspection that took him to the border area, he came face to face with a startling phenomenon: the fields on the Chinese side were neglected as people tried desperately to cross a border that was also a poverty line. Rather than punish the would-be fugitives, he concluded, the party needed to attend to their poverty. By the time his son, Xi, achieved supreme power in China in 2012, the party could claim, with justice, to have addressed that problem. The contrast then between a Hong Kong formally returned to China but still enjoying relative autonomy under the terms of the agreement negotiated between Margaret Thatcher and Deng was less the difference in wealth and, rather, the political, personal and cultural freedoms that Hong Kong enjoyed. Its young people wanted more. Xi’s response to that has been played out in full view over the past two years. Hong Kong’s story is full of drama, politics and personalities and Sheridan tells it well, drawing from a wide variety of Chinese and British sources. There are lessons for today in his account of the negotiations between the UK and China on Hong Kong’s future: a strategic approach on the Chinese side facing warring factions on the British side. The last governor, Chris Patten, tried to lock in a wider franchise before the 1997 handover. Hong Kong’s business elite was hostile, as indeed, as Sheridan describes, was Percy Cradock, former ambassador to Beijng and later Margaret Thatcher’s national security adviser. Cradock had written what he called Cradock’s first law of diplomacy, which said that “it is not the other side you need to worry about, but your own”. He became the embodiment of his aphorism in 1993, when he privately briefed the Chinese side on the British negotiating position in order to undermine Patten. Deng transformed the material fortunes of the PRC, but China’s new middle-class aspirations for a more open society became a casualty of Xi’s formula of a firmer party grip on this complex society. An intense, grievance-fuelled nationalism is the party’s preferred narrative for a new era of strategic confrontation. In Hong Kong, that struggle did take place, as Sheridan puts it, over “political power, wealth, identity, data, freedom and conformity”. It was enacted on the streets of Hong Kong over the best part of a decade, as China’s leaders sought a de facto revision of the promise of the joint agreement and Hong Kong’s citizens pushed for its full enactment. One consequence of China’s actions in Hong Kong, as well as its repression in Xinjiang and its hostility to closer scrutiny of the origins of the global pandemic, is that polling returns show unprecedented levels of mistrust and disapproval of China in liberal democracies. What, then, counts as success for Xi’s diplomacy and what lessons can we find in Elizabeth C Economy’s new book on China’s global posture and intentions? Economy is a veteran China watcher and had been engaged in constructive dialogue and cooperation with China for decades. Today, however, as she details, new battle lines have been drawn and they are not reassuring: China has leveraged the pandemic to advance its own interests through vaccine diplomacy and strategic exploitation of its near monopoly of essential medical supplies. While Xi’s repressive policies at home have triggered coordinated international economic sanctions and the failure of a key economic agreement with the EU, China’s largest trading partner, the country seems ready to bear the cost. China increasingly uses the coercive power of its economic power to impose censorship in other countries of views of its history and politics that do not chime with the party’s own accounts. At home, this is called “guiding public opinion”. Abroad, it is a bold attempt at discourse control, the effort to impose a single narrative on the world about China’s politics, personalities and the exercise of its power and to reshape global institutions to fit that narrative and buttress China’s influence. Economy details China’s efforts to place its candidates in key international positions, a process that involves unabashed lobbying, threats to block export contracts or promises of debt cancellation to win votes. China’s efforts to reshape multilateral institutions are broad and systematic and have been assisted by the neglect or hostility of recent US administrations to the UN and all its works. Instead of a US-dominated world order, Economy argues that China now sees a resurgent nation spreading its values, trade and technologies through its “belt and road initiative”; the dominant power in an Asia from which the US has been forced, in the near future, to retreat. She does not argue that success is inevitable, seeing the competition between the US and China as one of the norms that should underpin the prosperous and peaceful world that both powers desire. Today, it is not hard to find people in Hong Kong who will argue that stability and prosperity have been restored by the draconian imposition of the national security law, assigning no worth to what has been lost. The wider global challenge, as Economy frames it, is not dissimilar. One lesson from both these books is that without a consistent and sometimes costly commitment to the values that liberal democracies proclaim, the game will not go well. Isabel Hilton is founder and senior adviser at chinadialogue.net • The Gate to China: A New History of the People’s Republic and Hong Kong by Michael Sheridan is published by William Collins (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply • The World According to China by Elizabeth C Economy is published by Polity Books (£25). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyFrom his hideaway in Bosnia-Herzegovina, to where he dramatically fled on the eve of his conviction for fraud three years ago, Zdravko Mamić, once the most powerful figure in Croatian football, turned to his Facebook account last Thursday to rub salt in some wounds. “Netflix: let Narcos go, come here,” he wrote in reference to the hit TV show about the wholesale corruption of Mexico and Colombia by narcotic gangs. “For the last weeks and months I have been quietly working on judicial reform, and today you can see another one in a series of results of what we started together.” Mamić, a former executive director of Dinamo Zagreb and vice-president of the Croatian Football Federation, had been referring to the breaking news of the arrest of judge Zvonko Vekić and close friend Nataša Sekulić, an accountant, on charges of money laundering. Vekić had been one of three judges in the eastern Croatian city of Osijek who Mamić had accused of taking a total of €370,000 in bribes back in March. Vekić was alleged to have accepted Mamić’s money, and even a pair of Louis Vuitton shoes during a New Year break in Dubai, in return for dropping a range of fraud and tax-evasion charges against him and his brother, Zoran, a former Croatia international and star manager of the country’s most successful club, Dinamo Zagreb, relating to the embezzlement of club funds through unlawful cuts of transfer fees. Vekić denies the allegations, including accepting the shoes, and claims he was in Dubai to see his brother-in-law. Sekulić, to whom Mamić claims he handed thousands of euros for shopping trips, is yet to comment. Vekić had been arrested a few months earlier on suspicion of accepting bribes, but this time, following a hearing on Friday, the judge and Sekulić were held in Zagreb county jail for fear that they might meddle with witnesses. But Mamić, apparently full of indignant rage, was apparently not content with that. And what followed has shed a piercing light on the apparently rife and steadily worsening levels of corruption in Croatian society, which studies suggest are breaking the back of the country’s morale. On Friday dressed in a smart jacket and open neck shirt, Mamić called in the cameras of the Croatian network Dnevnik Nova TV. “Croatia’s biggest cancer is judges,” Mamić claimed. “I’m the only one who has the courage to talk about it in all this trouble. Of course I have another 50 judges to whom I gave money, not for myself but for some other services.” Mamić’s allegations are yet to be corroborated and the former football boss has not yet shown any interest in helping investigators. The claims also follow the dismissal this week of his appeal, in absentia, by the constitutional court of his six-and-a-half year jail sentence by the country’s supreme court for his role in his celebrity-littered case of fraud. Mamić’s case first broke six years ago when he was arrested on charges of stealing millions of euros from the club he ran and dominated. He was subsequently found guilty by the county court in Osijek in June 2018, despite his apparent best efforts to pay his way out. The court found he had been making illegal personal profits on player transfers from Dinamo Zagreb, including the transfer of superstar footballer Luka Modrić who was unlawfully paid 50% of the €21m transfer fee paid by Tottenham Hotspur, only to forward all but €1.9m of the money to Mamić and his family. Modrić later led his country to a World Cup final in 2018, won four Champions League titles with Real Madrid and is the only footballer other than Cristiano Ronaldo or Lionel Messi to be named best player in the world in more than a decade. Marin Deskovic, a reporter for the Jutarnji list newspaper, who has covered Croatian crime and corruption for 20 years, said there had to be some scepticism about the strength of Mamić’s latest claims but added that his known close relationships with senior members of the judiciary made them worryingly plausible. “Of course it is shocking,” he said. Croatia joined the EU on 1 July 2013 to great fanfare and with hope of a new chapter in the troubled country’s history, but evidence suggests there has been a freefall in ethical standards as the pressure to live up to Brussels’ criteria for membership fell away. Last year Kolinda Grabar-Kitarović, the outgoing president of Croatia, said corruption was so embedded in her country that at school children who cheated in tests were celebrated as “heroes”. A recent Eurobarometer survey found that a majority of Croatians felt affected by corruption in their daily lives (59%). The country has the largest proportion out of all EU member states of respondents (16%) personally exposed to it. Tado Juric, an assistant professor at the Catholic University of Croatia in Zagreb, said his research suggested that emigration was compounding the problem. “We compared corruption and migration trends from 2012 to 2020 and Croatia’s ranking in the global corruption index, and found that corruption was more pronounced when the number of people leaving the country was higher,” he said. “Common sense says that if people who are not involved in corruption networks emigrate and those who stay are involved in such networks, corruption activities will be even easier to carry out and more frequent. If critics leave, the better and easier for those who are criticised.” Juric added that “so-called ‘elite corruption’” was “deeply rooted in Croatian politics and had become “a parallel system that undermines the economy and the society”. “Corruption has done more harm to the Croatian national identity, the sense of unity and solidarity and Croatian culture in general than it has done to the economy, which is undoubtedly great,” he said. Most Croats will no doubt hope that they do not need to rely on the vengeance of a football boss to clear away the worst of the problem – but perhaps Mamić has made a start.As Covid restrictions continue, many families with relatives abroad will be prevented from giving presents in person again this Christmas and, instead, have to send them through the post. As this is Britain’s first post-Brexit Christmas, the rules for sending items to the EU have changed, and you now need to state the value of what you are sending. Then you can look for the best-priced option – and also make sure the goods are not prohibited from the post. Posting to the EU If you are sending something from England, Scotland and Wales you need to fill out and attach a customs declaration form to your package. Anyone posting from Northern Ireland does not. These forms are for local customs authorities in the country to which you are posting the item to make sure the goods are allowed in and to calculate if there are duties and taxes to be paid. They explain what is in the package – a gift, document or a returned item, for example – as well as an exact description of what it is and the quantity, weight and value. Different forms are needed depending on whether the item is valued at over or under £270. Taxes, duties and a clearance fee may be due and depend on the value of what is being sent. Gifts from Britain valued at less than €45 (£38) are exempt from VAT or other charges. Customs charges for each country vary and are set by the authorities there. For example, VAT in Austria and Bulgaria is 20%, while in Greece it is 24% and Hungary 27%. Postage costs There are numerous companies to choose from when posting abroad, from Royal Mail to many courier companies, all with varying prices. How much it costs depends on weight and size of your parcel, its destination and how quickly you want it to arrive. The MoneySavingExpert website says the weight of the package is the most important factor. For items of less than 1kg, using Royal Mail usually works out the cheapest, it says, and heavier packages typically get cheaper quotes from courier firms such as Hermes, UPS, TNT and DPD. For example, the cheapest option for sending an 800g package to France with Royal Mail is £9.50 while a courier (Hermes in this case) is £13.16, according to the ParcelHero comparison site. But if you send a 4kg package to France from the UK, the price is £19.72 via DPD, much less than the £32.88 quoted by Parcelforce Worldwide, which is part of Royal Mail. There are a number of comparison sites where you can enter the weight and dimensions of your item and where it is going, which will them prompt prices from some of the main courier firms. ParcelHero, My Parcel Delivery and Worldwide Parcel Services all compare couriers. MoneySavingExpert also highlights the fact that if you are buying a gift from an online retailer, it is almost always cheaper to get the company to send it directly to the recipient, rather than you getting the item and sending it on. It can even be free, as going over a certain threshold, such as £50, often prompts free delivery. For example, sending a present of a Pictionary board game through House of Fraser to Ireland will cost an additional £5.83 in shipping costs. But if you buy the game and do it yourself, according to quotes from ParcelHero, the cheapest option is £12.64. What cannot be sent? It is common sense that some items will be banned or restricted from the post – drugs, guns and fake currency are all unsurprisingly on the list from the Post Office. The lists are supposed to prevent customers sending hazardous, illegal or fragile substances, or lodging large claims for lost valuables. Couriers reserve the right to refuse to carry such items or, if they discover the contents of a parcel are illegal or unsafe, to destroy them. However, there are some less likely items. Aerosols, such as deodorant, cannot be sent in international mail, nor can lottery tickets, flowers, fresh fruit and vegetables. Some items can be sent within the UK, such as small bottles of gin and nail varnish, but not abroad. Observer readers have been baffled in the past to find goods such as confectionery, designer shoes or photos banned by some courier companies. The Post Office tells customers that everyday items such as aerosols and perfumes are considered dangerous under travel legislation, and says it is up to the consumer to check whether or not an item is prohibited, or restricted. Getting it there in one piece Citizens Advice last week called for the communications regulator, Ofcom, to issue fines to parcel companies which negligently failed to deliver packages in the UK. The call came after the charity announced a league table of all of such companies. It found none of the leading delivery firms rated highly in terms of customer service, with significant problems in getting problems resolved. “While this should be a wake-up call for firms to strive to deliver a five-star service for consumers, we have serious reservations about how far they will improve if left to their own devices,” says Citizens Advice chief executive Dame Clare Moriarty. “Our findings show it’s time for Ofcom to come forward and introduce tougher rules across the board.” The charity advised consumers to check the reviews of companies to find out how they dealt with complaints and refunds. Discounts site Wethrift advises people sending abroad to use secure packaging, including bubble wrap and heavy cardboard boxes, as they will be passing through, at the very least, conveyor belts in two transport depots.You could think of the prolific Canadian songwriter Julie Doiron as a kind of unsung godmother to Courtney Barnett or the recent crop of North American indie singer-songwriters. She has gone by many band names; occasionally she will put out a record under her own – sometimes in French or Spanish. Some of her noisier work is billed as Julie and the Wrong Guys; in 2019 she collaborated with Mount Eerie on a quiet, devastated album about him gaining and losing love after a previous partner’s death. As comfortable getting messy in her teenage Sub Pop band Eric’s Trip as she is authoring this more hushed material, her latest record finds Doiron at a laid-back mid-point, fronting a band who can skew elegant or scruffy – witness the Neil Young-derived guitar solo on The Letters We Sent. Telling of new beginnings and lost love, the breeze in her voice and her easy-going melodies act as a smokescreen: these are often direct takes on pain. “How can we keep loving when we know every night is just a fight?” Doiron sings on the country-tinged How Can We?. In Darkness to Light, her smoky register pairs with very well-appointed pedal steel to describe her lucky escape from an unhappy place.Foraging and wild pizza, Dorset If you’re looking for a sustainable, eco-friendly foodie gift, this coastal foraging experience with Fore Adventure will hit the spot. Set against the beautiful backdrop of Studland Bay, the half-day course begins with exploring the beach for seaweeds, sea vegetables, cockles and crabs, before using the ingredients to create a “wild pizza” cooked in a woodfaired oven. Stay just a stone’s throw away at the Pig on the Beach, a gorgeous yellow-stone country house with wonderful beach views and chic, chintz-free bedrooms (doubles from £215, thepighotel.com). Half-day foraging and wild pizza-making course, £50pp, foreadventure.co.uk Wine tasting tour, Kent English sparkling wine is becoming a serious challenger to French champagne, and Gusbourne produces world-class white and rosé bubbles, alongside pinot noir and chardonnay. The estate offers a range of tour-and-taste experiences; for the ultimate Christmas treat splash out on the estate tour, which includes welcome drinks, an extended vineyard tour and the chance to taste some rare-release and limited-edition wines, before an indulgent three-course lunch. Stay at the Woolpack, a delightful 16th-century inn in the picturesque village of Warehorne (doubles from £120, woolpackwarehorne.co.uk). Estate tour, £95pp, gusbourne.com Blend your own gin, Cambridge Gin has become something of a national obsession in recent years, and the Gin Laboratory at the Cambridge Distillery offers the chance to taste, blend or simply learn about gin. The hour-long Make It class explores distillates and botanicals, enabling visitors to blend their own gin, while Mix It is an exploration of the best gin cocktails (mixology boffins should book the two-hour Molecular Class). Close by, the Varsity Hotel makes a stylish base, and the rooftop bar and restaurant, Six, offers more than 30 gins (double rooms from £178, thevarsityhotels.co.uk). Courses £30pp, cambridgedistillery.co.uk Learn baking skills, Abergavenny Famous for its annual food festival and surrounded by specialist producers, Abergavenny is a gastronomist’s dream. The Abergavenny Baker offers courses in everything from Italian and Nordic breads to Christmas and coeliac-friendly loaves, with gift vouchers available if you’re not sure what course to choose. The Angel in Abergavenny (doubles from £175; angelabergavenny.com) is famous for its gargantuan afternoon tea and lies just across the road from the Angel Bakery, home to the best breads and cakes in town. A day’s baking course, £160, abergavennybaker.co.uk Pork pies, piccalilli, Derbyshire Fans of traditional British foods will love this four-hour course at Hartington’s of Bakewell, focusing on making the perfect pork pie, from hot-water-crust pastry to herbs and flavourings. After a ploughman’s lunch, the second half focuses on making traditional piccalilli. The course takes place in a converted mill just outside Bakewell, which has its own world-famous treat, the bakewell pudding (never a tart!) Pop into the Bakewell Pudding Shop (bakewellpuddingshop.co.uk) and stay at the H Boutique Hotel (doubles from £140, thehboutiquehotel.com). Classes from £145pp, hartingtons.com Seafood Safari, Ullapool There’s no better place for seafood than the west coast of Scotland, and this day-long safari includes a visit to an oyster farm, lunch at a seafood shack and a tour of Ullapool’s smokehouses, as well as time on a fishing boat and dinner at the Salt Kitchen, with glorious views across to the Summer Isles. Make a weekend of it with a stay at the Ceilidh Place – a unique mix of art gallery, bookshop, hotel and bunkhouse, with a winter weekend offer of two-night breaks for £300 per room with dinner and breakfast (theceilidhplace.com). Ultimate seafood safari, £249pp, mountaintoursscotland.com Cheese-making day, London Wildes offers a range of half- and full-day courses, giving an insight into the ingredients and techniques needed to produce showing how to make a perfect cheese. The popular Morning in the Dairy course goes through every step of making cheese, from adding the cultures and rennet to breaking the curds and whey., and the price includes a 300g cheese to mature at home. Stay in hip Stoke Newington, a short hop from the Tottenham Dairy, in the buzzy Rose and Crown pub (doubles from £144, roseandcrownn16.co.uk). Morning in the Dairy, £45pp, wildescheese.co.uk Fish and cook, East Sussex Plan a jaunt to the seaside with a weekend built around a fishing and cooking trip on the English Channel. Brighton Lure Boat fishing trips are suitable for everyone from complete beginners to experienced fishermen, with the chance to catch mackerel, bass, plaice or cod, and cook it at a local restaurant. Stay with the fishy theme with dinner at Riddle and Finns (riddleandfinns.co.uk), one of Brighton’s best seafood restaurants, and a night at the Malmaison in the marina, perfect for blustery walks by the water (doubles from £89, malmaison.com). Silver Bass package, £230 for up to four, brightonlureboat.co.uk Chocolate masterclass, York York has been the UK’s chocolate-making capital for over a century, and a weekend in the city – dipping into chocolateries and tasting or creating chocolatey treats is a great gift for fans of the cocoa bean. York’s Cocoa House is the place to start, with three-hour chocolate masterclass, covering everything from tempering chocolate to making ganache, caramels and fondant. Afterwards, dip into Monk Bar Chocolatier (monkbar.com), which offers 60 different varieties of handmade chocolates, and stay at the Lamb and Lion, a charming pub with 12 sleek rooms, some with views of the Minster (doubles from £109, lambandlionyork.com). Chocolate Masterclass £55pp, yorkcocoahouse.co.uk Smoking and curing, Bath For some foodies, the ideal gift is a new technique rather than recipes, and this day-long course at the Vale House Kitchen is just one of a range including foraging, butchery, game and fishing courses. Learn how to hot- and cold-smoke meat and fish, curing and brining, and how to produce pancetta, braesola and chorizo. Keep to the country feel with a stay at the charming Carpenters Arms in nearby Stanton Wick, renowned for its locally sourced food (doubles from £130, the-carpenters-arms.co.uk). Smoking and Curing Masterclass, 13 February, £195, valehousekitchen.co.ukThe Lubaina Himid retrospective at Tate Modern ought to be momentous. It is certainly overdue – a full-dress museum show for this 67-year-old artist, the first black woman to win the Turner prize, a visionary of evergreen inventiveness and humour, and a much-admired champion of her fellow artists. Himid’s work is as open-armed as her ideas of what art might achieve in this world. Given a whole floor of the Blavatnik building, she has conceived of this event as a kind of promenade theatre in which viewers participate. Which ought to yield a sure-fire hit. Born in Zanzibar to a white English mother and a black African father, the infant Himid was brought to London immediately after his premature death. Her work is constantly circling back to that lost island, making connections between past and present; it has motion as an abiding characteristic. And she studied theatre design at Wimbledon School of Art. The traces remain in Himid’s painted tableaux, in the drama of her political satires and the sheer force of her renowned cut-out figures, waiting to confront you in spectacular lifesize pageants. The stage appears perfectly set at Tate Modern. Embroidered banners raise questions outside a dizzying magenta entrance – questions continued in vaudeville script across the show’s walls. Why are you looking? How do you spell change? What is the purpose of monuments? There are walk-through installations, a bus shelter complete with bike racks, painted wooden carts like props from a medieval mystery cycle and – most radically for an art show – a continuous soundtrack, shifting from torch song to classical music and spoken word. And yet the show has odd slumps and bewildering intermissions; it is even, at times, uninvolving. True, Himid is always on the move through her scenes and themes. Architecture: what would the world be like if women designed buildings (paintings of women talking and thinking in purposeful groups, with alternately estranging or lyrical backdrops, but precious few buildings). Monuments: an installation of overturned jelly moulds painted with African textiles on a tabletop landscape. The colour blue: the sound of slowly intoned free associations accompanying a frieze of painted patterns that runs exhaustively through the various shades and hues without rising much above decoration. The blue of the sea itself washes through Himid’s art from first to last, sometimes as a distant strip of water, or viewed through a high window to disorientate the scene (are we below the water line?). Sometimes it is the dark and perilous tide beneath a boat. In one painting, it threatens to pour straight into an otherwise safe-looking room. An array of upended spars, painted in marine blues, with cowrie shells at the base, leans in undulating ripples along a wall. A wave of bowsprits, of oars, or high masts – it speaks of migration across the oceans, a tragic history of crossings. Its title is piquant: Old Boat/New Money. But the poignant poetry is undermined by a crass soundtrack of waves. Turn around and there is A Fashionable Marriage, arguably Himid’s best-known parade of cut-outs, sending up the sex-art-cash-greed of the Thatcherite 1980s. Or so it perhaps once seemed. The Hogarthian figures come across now as peculiarly ineffectual, with their bulbous, stockinged calves and their giant penises; and the pastiche of Picasso’s Gertrude Stein on the wall above has never felt provocative in any way. At least not compared to the wonderful parody of Picasso’s monumental bathers thundering along a beach, reprised by Himid as two black women dressed in airmail envelopes surging along a bedsheet, for a canvas. This remains a far sharper skit. A Fashionable Marriage is so presented that you can go backstage and see the plywood and cardboard that holds it all up. But so what? These figures were meant to be viewed as 2D objects, flat as stage sets, in the first place. This arrangement adds nothing; indeed the piece is tidied into a corner. A series of new paintings centres on the making of objects. Written instructions are lettered in eye-popping colours beneath images of tools – Allow for Short Breaks beneath a primitive picture of a saw; Keep Moving Parts Lubricated beneath a quintet of pencils. The juxtaposition of word and image feels as if it is telling, mordant possibly even significant – yet the promise of meaning fades fast, after the first optical pleasure. And it feels the same with her latest double portraits of black youths in fabulous clothes. One man accosts another, who simply looks away; two men stand idle. A man in lime-green trousers points at the hand of another in a tight yellow jacket. Himid’s way of painting uplifts: superbly graphic heads and hands, frieze-like compositions against blocks of soaring cobalt, luscious brushwork, gorgeous colour contrasts. But these men are dandies in more than just their dapper boots and patterned satin. What are they doing (in both senses) in these paintings? The titles, taken from recipe books, seem intended to distract and deflect. But one of these men is wearing a white mask, of which nothing at all is made, either by the picture or the exhibition. Indeed, where are Himid’s satires on race, or any of her 100 lifesize figures representing enslaved black people employed in 18th-century European courts? We only hear a recitation of their names. It feels as if her political art has been rationed. The great Le Rodeur paintings are here, with their deathless mythologies of departure and arrival, so graphic in their facture, so enigmatic in their legends of voyage and loss. But even these paintings are distanced behind official cordons. Everything feels deactivated, neutralised. But towards the end, it is as if Himid herself has given in. If she really agreed to make a bus stop/smoking shelter that the visitor cannot enter, in order to contemplate the question Do You Want An Easy Life, written in faux graffiti, then her own vision has gone awry. Or she has acquiesced to Tate Modern’s curatorial constraints. • Lubaina Himid is at Tate Modern, London until 3 July 2022Edinburgh. The air is grey and thick with drizzle. From my knees down, beyond the protection of my waterproof coat, I am wet through. My trainers squirt water from their mesh uppers when I walk. If you love a city when it’s this wet, you know you really love it. I am in the queue for Mary’s Milk Bar because everyone has told me I need to visit. It is almost opposite Petit Paris, a tiny French bistro and one of those discoveries you almost never find in cities unless someone tells you about it. Last night we feasted on mushroom soup, boeuf bourguignon and crême brûlée. I don’t like queues for fashionable places, but the promise of fried bananas in butter ice-cream and lovely chocolate cements me to the pavement. Only one customer is allowed inside at a time and when my turn comes I find myself panicking at the choices (a syndrome I recognise from my own time working in the family ice-cream shop) and go for hazelnut, my ice-cream-maker father’s favourite, which is some of the best I’ve had. Then the chocolate bars. I supermarket-sweep up a handful, sweetly wrapped in paper and tied with Aquafresh-striped string: dark chocolate salt and vinegar, milk chocolate bread and honey, dark cinnamon pretzel, and milk bergamot and lemon, at £4.50 (min 70g) each. All are highly flavoured and lovely for eating back at the best B&amp;B that we have ever stayed in, while I contemplate my move up north. Follow Annalisa on Twitter @AnnalisaBThe government is preparing to drop controversial plans that would force poorer pensioners to pay more for their social care, in order to avert a possible Commons defeat that would further damage Boris Johnson’s authority, the Observer has been told. Senior figures and officials in the House of Lords are understood to have been reassured by the health minister Lord Kamall that the legislation will not return to the Lords in its current form after its committee stage early next year. One former government minister also said he had been told by a senior official in the NHS hierarchy that the plans would be returned to something more like the original proposals made several years ago by the economist Andrew Dilnot. In the Commons on Monday night, the government narrowly won a vote to change its social care plans in England in a way that would hit poorer people, because means-tested contributions from councils to their care costs would not count towards a new £86,000 cap on payments for each individual. Although the government won, 19 Tory MPs voted against it and 68 abstained or had leave of absence. Many Tory MPs in red wall seats were outraged that Johnson appeared to be reneging on his promise that no one would be forced to sell their home to pay the costs of care. It is understood that senior figures in the Department of Health and Social Care have described the plans as a “dog’s dinner”, and expressed fear that, without changes, the government could even be defeated at later stages of the legislation. Jeremy Hunt, chair of the Commons health select committee, abstained in the vote and suggested that the government would have to move. “I was conflicted. I actually ended up abstaining because it is a big disappointment that they changed the way the cap is calculated,” he said, making clear that he expected the government to look again at the plans. Several Tory peers, including the former health secretary Andrew Lansley and ex-pensions minister Ros Altmann, have raised objections. The change, if pushed through, would mean homeowners in the poorest areas of England would face losing a three-times greater share of their housing wealth to pay for social care than people in the most affluent areas, according to Guardian analysis. A former minister said: “It is clear that ministers realise after this week’s events that they are defending the indefensible and will have to change tack.” He said ministers will probably be wanting to prepare the ground for a U-turn gradually so that, when it comes, it is not seen as a surprise. A Department of Health and Social Care spokesperson said: “This is categorically incorrect. Our reforms mean that, for the first time in history, people will be protected against unlimited and catastrophic costs when paying for care. “We are introducing a significant increase in state support to help people with their social care costs, ensuring they have greater certainty over what they need to pay and receive higher quality care.”The Tories would be stripped of their majority and unable to form a government if opposition parties cooperated in fewer than a quarter of England’s parliamentary seats, according to a major new analysis. The study by Best for Britain, which campaigns for a more internationalist government, found that if Labour, the Liberal Democrats and Greens could agree to field one unity candidate in each of only 154 English battleground seats, the Conservatives would end up with just 254 English MPs, seven fewer than Labour, which would have 261 English MPs. The Liberal Democrats would win 16 English seats and the Green party one. The figures emerged from the same kind of polling technique – multilevel regression and post-stratification (MRP) – that correctly predicted the election of Donald Trump as US president in 2016, and the surprise win for Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour party in Canterbury in 2017. The MRP method involves using a large poll (in this case Best for Britain surveyed 12,816 people across the country) and adding vast amounts of other information, from censuses and Official for National Statistics data, to predict how people in different areas, across social divides and income and age groups, would vote. If the opposition parties were to field single unity candidates, the MRP-polling exercise found, the Tories would be left 40 seats short of a majority even if they succeeded in holding on to their 20 Scottish and Welsh seats and gained the backing of the DUP, which currently has eight seats in the House of Commons. Among the high-profile Tory casualties would be Jacob Rees-Mogg in North East Somerset: he would lose narrowly, with the seat flipping to Labour, the analysis found. The same fate would befall Iain Duncan Smith, who would also be ousted by Labour in Chingford and Woodford Green, while deputy prime minister Dominic Raab would lose to the Liberal Democrats in Esher and Walton. Boris Johnson would also be run close by Labour in Uxbridge and South Ruislip, with his victory margin being trimmed to 3% by Labour, from 15% in 2019. While advocates of such alliances insist they are the only way centre-left parties can dislodge the Tories, opposition party leaders have always been loth to entertain anything more than very informal agreements, such as scaling back operations in unwinnable seats. They fear standing back would be seen as a sign of weakness and lack of national ambition. Labour opponents of so-called progressive alliances interpret the party’s own rule as saying it must under its constitution stand candidates in all parliamentary seats, in either general elections or byelections, except in exceptional circumstances. But this is disputed by advocates of co-operation who say no such rule exists. Last week, Lib Dem leader Ed Davey sounded a more positive note about cooperation. He told the Observer that his party would target only one of two forthcoming byelections in Conservative-held seats. While rejecting formal “deals or arrangements”, he suggested his party would not be putting significant resources into the London seat of Old Bexley and Sidcup, where voters go to the polls on Thursday, and Labour is the main challenger. He said the Lib Dems would instead concentrate on next month’s byelection in North Shropshire, the safe Tory seat vacated by Owen Paterson following his official rebuke over lobbying. Naomi Smith, chief executive of Best for Britain, said parties on the left should abandon their reluctance to work together: “In 2017 and 2019, parties on the right chose not to fight each other in key marginals, and will likely to do so again. This polling shows that opposition parties must do the same as … there is no other route to power. Refusal by Labour and the Lib Dem leadership to cooperate, form government and deliver change is failing the people and communities these parties seek to represent. “In 1997, Labour’s NEC and the Lib Dem higher-ups chose not to stand against the anti-sleaze candidate Martin Bell who beat the Conservative MP embroiled in scandal. Sleaze and corruption are back with a vengeance and opposition party cooperation should be too. “As the saying goes, you can’t fatten a calf on market day and work to coordinate this strategy needs to begin now.” Best for Britain argues such cooperation would only be necessary for one general election if a new government then introduced voting reform.Brexit isn’t working. We were sold a false prospectus. Businesses, especially small and medium-size ones, are reeling. They are absorbing unwanted costs; paying hidden tariffs; suffering hitherto avoidable checks on exports; moving factories, depots and offices to within the EU; shedding workers and haemorrhaging orders. Children’s school trips to and from Europe have collapsed. It takes months to get a visa. British science remains outside the EU’s Horizon programme, the biggest international science programme in the world. So it goes on. As importantly, centuries of British statecraft, aimed at building alliances in Europe with whatever constellation of countries best suited our interests, has been shattered. Britain’s leaders, from Pitt and Palmerston to Churchill, all understood the vital need to engage with Europe. Now, Ireland’s taoiseach, Micheál Martin, or France’s president, Emmanuel Macron, are vastly strengthened, securely knowing they have the entire EU behind them. Whether attempting to solve the cross-Channel migrant crisis or trying to join Horizon, bellicose jingoism is not only crass – it has no hope of achieving the results we want. Britain is suddenly diminished even if our Brexit leaders have yet to realise how little Britain has become. These realities can’t be disguised for much longer. The Brexit minister, David Frost, felt the need at last week’s one-day Margaret Thatcher conference on trade to argue that success, clearly elusive, would need Britain to overcome “the forces of entropy, of laziness, of vested interest”, his blather signifying desperation and beleaguerment. The “vested interests” are no more than businesses bewildered by rising costs and diminished opportunity. The Spectator’s editor, Fraser Nelson, who had earlier chaired a debate between Vince Cable and veteran Brexiter Daniel Hannan, admitted in a Telegraph column entitled “Was I right to support Brexit?” that he found himself challenging Hannan more than Cable. Where were the sunlit uplands we were promised? From Global Britain to unleashed freedom to “liberalise, innovate and grow” the Brexit project was sinking. Even Keir Starmer at last felt emboldened at the CBI conference to begin to exploit such fertile ground; Labour had a plan to make Brexit work, which the government evidently hadn’t, he argued. It is tiptoeing round the edges. The heart of the problem is that the government has become so entrenched on all matters European, and consequently so absolutist about sovereignty, that it has trapped itself into successive self-defeating positions. In an important assessment of the EU-UK Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) – the vaunted “deal” – Cambridge academics Catherine Barnard and Emilija Leinarte observe that as far as trade in goods is concerned (the agreement is so 19th century it virtually ignores services), the TCA is essentially no more than minimalist World Trade Organization (WTO) terms, even organised into WTO chapter headings. Aside from the Northern Ireland protocol, it has no traces of the single market, nor any of the potential infringements of “sovereignty” that adjudicating it might entail. Thus all the problems. Of course there are troublesome, expensive sanitary checks on exports from live shellfish to crisps with cheese flavouring as there are for any exporter outside the EU’s single market. Lord Frost is plainly in ignorance, but officials have floated proposals for British-only regulation and safety certification of industries as various as chemicals and construction. But the industries argue it is economically stupid: for example, the chemical industry asks why pay for any distinct British registration and certification for dangerous chemicals when it already pays for the EU gold standard under which it will produce anyway? Why not simply accept EU certification? Britain’s financial services industry is increasingly concerned. The TCA offers no provisions for banks to sell their services within the EU; last week, the EU signalled it wants any bank business in Europe to be backed by appropriate capital, essentially ending cross-selling from London. Bankers are not stampeding out of Britain, but the numbers are growing steadily. London’s financial markets currently equal New York’s in their depth and liquidity; every bank that moves part of its business to the EU weakens that depth. Cumulatively it adds up. In the first six months of this year, exports to the EU were down 13.1%, imports down 24.8%, according to Channel 4’s Dispatches. Our children and young people are losers too: no chance to study in the Erasmus programme or work in the EU’s hospitality and leisure industries. Equally, the 45,000 EU au pairs or some 750,000 EU schoolchildren who used to come to Britain every year are disappearing, deterred by onerous passport and immigration rules. The Home Office told FT reporter Peter Foster in response to his EU school trip report that it welcomed cultural exchanges with “other nations”, so neuralgic about Europe that it could not utter “EU”. After the US’s brutal unilateral exit from Afghanistan, it is obvious that the UK needs to have a European dimension for our defence; it’s the same story on cybersecurity or international crime. Everything is palsied by the fetishisation of sovereignty, the prickly posturing it induces and the absurd proposition that Australia and Mexico are as near and as important to us as France and Germany. Britain has to engage with the continent of which it is part. It is to find practical ways of doing just that in the here and now – fixing a broken Brexit – that an independent commission on UK-EU relations is launching tomorrow. (Full declaration: I am a member.) The prosperity and even the security of our country are menaced; there needs to be a coming together around feasible plans for better deals on mobility, on product safety and standards, on trade in services, on security and much else. What must not happen is for us to dig deeper into the hole we are already in. • Will Hutton is an Observer columnist‘Red!’ my son shouts, stuffing a large, wet leaf into my hand as if he’s trying to teach me something. It is, I must concede, extremely red and a fine specimen at that: firm, flat and bigger than his head. We’re collecting leaves for his nursery because… well I don’t know why. My best bet is they use them to make art, or dump them all on a table and talk about them. Maybe they load the leaves into an open brazier in the middle of the room. ‘Gather round, kids,’ they say, beckoning the waifs toward the heat with fingerless gloves, before improvising a spit so they can roast a squirrel over it around lunch time. Whatever they do with the leaves, he takes to these endeavours with the glee of a dedicated naturalist, deriving the same joy from rummaging through piles of autumnal detritus that others might do from sports or cocaine. And it’s a chance to school me on leaves, a subject about which he clearly feels I’m ignorant. Certainly, I’ve never picked a leaf he’s chosen to bring in. ‘This one’s nice,’ I say, proffering one I’d describe as perfect. ‘See?’ I continue, now desperate for his approval, ‘It’s yellow!’ At this he flashes a patient, pitying smile, the kind a teacher might give a pupil who’s started avidly eating the pencil he’s just been handed, before resuming the search for a yellow leaf less pathetic and embarrassing than my own. ‘Still,’ I say to my wife, mildly wounded, ‘nice to get the last out of autumn.’ The words have barely left my mouth before I realise what I’ve done. ‘Don’t start this,’ she says, since she does not consider November to be autumn at all. She is from Dublin, and subscribes to the Gaelic calendar, by which autumn comprises August, September and October, whereas my Northern Irish schooling taught me the meteorological calendar, with autumn as September, October and November. My wife and I have argued about many things during the blissful 14 years we’ve spent together. But none has recurred with such frequency and vehemence as her stubborn insistence that the calendar she was taught as a child makes sense. The idea that autumn begins in August is, itself, so singularly demented that no further argument should be necessary, but consider the knock-on effects; imagine, if you can bear it, the sanity-warping prospect that my wife, and millions of Irish people, consider February to be springtime, and May summer, and you might begin to understand just how rancorous this disagreement can get. We’re just about to launch into things when the boy comes bounding over, with a giant yellow leaf. Perhaps he is trying to defuse the tension of a row that could yet end our marriage some day, but it’s more likely he’s trying, one last time, to teach me something, and with a degree of patience I’d do well to remember. Did Ye Hear Mammy Died? by Séamas O’Reilly is out now (Little, Brown, £16.99). Buy a copy from guardianbookshop at £14.78 Follow Séamas on Twitter @shockproofbeatsRory Kinnear, 43, known for his original and discerning performances, from Shakespeare’s Iago to Bill Tanner in the Bond films, is about to star at the Donmar Warehouse in Force Majeure, an adaptation by Tim Price of Ruben Östlund’s chiller of a film about a man who, in what he believes to be a crisis – an avalanche at a ski resort – runs away from his wife and children. It’s a story of desolation, absurdity and unnerving moral ambiguity. Let’s get down to the big question first: can you ski and how on earth is that going to work on stage? We went to Hemel Hempstead’s Snow Centre – up to “the Hemelayas”, and our instructor told us: “If you’ve skied before, you won’t have forgotten.” I’d been skiing when I was 10. I hated it and was shouted at by the skiing instructor. My sister was better at it than me and I vowed I’d never, ever do it again. I’d stuck to that – until two weeks ago. As to the staging, the question is how to create something as visually vivid as the film and accentuate its focus within the smaller confines of the Donmar. Do you see Tomas, the husband/father you play, as a coward or motivated by excusable survival instinct? We’re aiming to maintain an even finer balance than the film does. The audience must judge. There is a version in which Tomas does not believe he did what he did. We’ve had trauma specialists talk to us about the narratives people create to protect themselves. Everyone makes choices they have to explain, and many place themselves at the centre of their story. Yet this is a shared story – the portrait of an imperilled marriage. Do you think it an unreasonable expectation for people to try to stay together for ever? I am civilly partnered [to the actor Pandora Colin]. Having had happily married parents, I assumed that would be my path. But it’s only when you meet the person for whom the decision [to marry] is taken that the ambition crystallises. I think it needs to remain an ambition. Tomas and Ebba see it as accepted fact that their marriage will continue rather than an ambition in need of nurturing. Have you ever been in a situation in which survival instinct kicked in? I was filming in Namibia in the desert. I managed to wipe some toxic cactus residue into my eye. I went into anaphylactic shock and my body began to shut down. I realised I was in danger but my tone, as I was driven away at top speed, became incredibly measured, monotone and clear-sighted – my way of trying not to be swamped by panic. Speaking of survival makes me think of its opposite. I was moved by articles you’ve written about your disabled sister Karina, who died of coronavirus last year. It made me wonder how having a family member who endures so much shapes your perspective growing up. You cannot negate the impact of what is thrown at you at a young age. But it has only been in the 18 months since Karina’s death that I’m beginning to recognise its impact. I’ve spoken to others with disabled siblings no longer with them, and for nearly all of them it has had a positive impact in terms of their perspective on the world. Karina’s life and her presence and laughter and her view of society … I was able to adopt these into my own life – they’re all I’ve known. Was it wrong of the NHS to keep your family away when she was dying of Covid? Has it left you with a sense of being cheated, of incompleteness? We have to afford ourselves leeway in revisiting a time when things were so unknown. It wasn’t that the hospital refused to let us in, but that they could not guarantee our safety [from Covid]. Obviously my mum, faced with the prospect of losing one child, was keen to protect [the rest of] us. Your father, Roy Kinnear, a brilliant actor, died when you were 10 after falling from a horse on a film. How well do you remember him? In terms of trauma, Dad dying had the greatest impact on my life. The foundation he gave me was of purest love, entertainment and support. I remember him well – driving to Roehampton to fill the car up, going to the bank, and I remember how, each Saturday, the two of us would set up a little cafe and pretend to be Italian chefs and cook what was basically bacon and eggs. When playing Bill Tanner in the Bond films, have you ever wished for the action man role yourself? Luckily, I’m not an action guy – it’s not why I wanted to become an actor. I’ve been on set during fun stunts but usually cower in the corner. I’ve seen the physical regime required to maintain your health within a role like that … So what did make you want to become an actor? Going to the National Theatre as a child. Seeing my dad and Anthony Hopkins, Michael Gambon, Ian Charleston … my only ambitions lay in the theatre. We all have careers/paths untaken … what’s yours? As a child I wanted to be a butcher. I remember our butcher had a missing digit … an alluring sign of someone committed to their art! Acting seems to be in your genes. How would you feel if your kids [11-year-old Riley and seven-year-old Hope] wanted to act? I was lucky having actor parents because I could see it was a doable job. A lot of people have the hurdle of seeing acting as a fiction or dream. While I’d want my children to understand the pitfalls, I could never say: don’t do it. I love being an actor, and the excitement of not knowing what you’re going to be doing six months into the future. Obviously, that impacts on people’s lives, but everyone understands that it’s what you’ve chosen to do and it brings the greatest imaginable happiness professionally. Force Majeure is at the Donmar Warehouse, London, from 10 December to 5 February 2022The Beatles: Get Back (Disney+) The Princes and the Press (BBC Two) | iPlayer Dispatches: Escape from the Taliban (Channel 4) | All 4 The Wheel of Time (Amazon Prime) The Beatles: Get Back, the three-part documentary series from Disney+ directed by Peter Jackson (The Lord of the Rings), is upon us. At almost eight hours it’s a completist superfan marathon: a remake-slash-companion piece (and rebuke?) to Michael Lindsay-Hogg’s 1970 documentary Let It Be. Jackson’s view – that the “downer”, pre-Beatles-split vibe of Lindsay-Hogg’s film was overplayed – was sanctioned by surviving Beatles Paul McCartney and Ringo Starr, while widows Yoko Ono and Olivia Harrison co-produce. Get Back involved the repurposing of 60 hours of footage, and more than 150 hours of audio, from rehearsal sessions, including at Twickenham film studios, for the Let It Be album and other projects. What emerges is a bravura deep dive into music culture history. The visuals are extraordinary: Jackson uses the same restorative technology as in his 2018 first world war documentary They Shall Not Grow Old, though here, with Let It Be already in (rather muddy) colour, he sharpens it all up, including the existing hues. Thus McCartney, Starr, John Lennon and George Harrison are regenerated in their yucky-beard-phase pomp, while others, some sadly deceased (Linda McCartney, Maureen Starkey, producer George Martin, keyboardist Billy Preston et al), sweep into view like extras with, well, extra. It’s a distinct upgrade on Let It Be, which is currently unavailable to buy, but in my recollection is so murky it might have been filmed through Harrison’s pantaloons from his Hare Krishna period. As well as the bond between them, Get Back captures the Fab Four’s high-level musicianship: all that intensity, jamming and song-building joy is included here with renditions of Let It Be, Don’t Let Me Down, Johnny B Goode, Get Back, Blue Suede Shoes, smatterings of Something and Gimme Some Truth and many more. While it’s supposed to be about “positivity”, the series also delivers on band politics and aggro. McCartney snipes at Harrison. Harrison walks out. Lennon mimics McCartney. Ringo slumps on his drum stool. Everyone bar Lennon despairs of Yoko’s omnipresence in the studio. It’s actually a hoot how she permanently installs herself next to Lennon like a sleek, grinning cat, occasionally caterwauling into a mic like she’s been electrocuted. I wonder, not for the first time, whether her trolling of the Beatles was her greatest ever performance art piece. If anything, Get Back includes more Beatles beef, but at this length it’s diluted, whereas in Let It Be it dominates. In fact, that length is Get Back’s self-indulgent flaw. As just one example, while the fabled 1969 rooftop performance at Apple HQ in Savile Row looks and sounds amazing, the extra footage comprises primarily filler of the crowd and the police. In this respect, Jackson’s documentary is too much of a reverential fan piece – Lindsay-Hogg at least reached for a point of view. Get Back works best as an evocative time capsule. Yeah, yeah and, indeed, yeah. In the first of his intriguing two-part BBC Two documentary The Princes and the Press, BBC media editor Amol Rajan ponders the relationship between the royal family and the British media. A link that might be described as symbiotic so long as “symbiotic” can mean one party savagely biting into the other’s neck as if in a nature documentary while simultaneously harassing their entire social circle and hacking into their phone. British journalism has little to be proud of in this opener, with tales abounding of illegal practices in the pursuit of headlines. With his assorted royal correspondents, Rajan focuses on the Cambridges, William and Catherine, and the Sussexes, Harry and Meghan, observing how both brothers were deeply affected by the death of their mother, Diana. Now Prince William is trying to work with the media, while Prince Harry, as we know, escaped to the US to rid himself of unlovely hacks, unless of course they’re called Oprah and have a well-appointed garden. A former newspaper journalist himself, Rajan is alert to how even the praise directed at Markle could be subtly denigrating, giving a “xenophobic whiff to her portrayal”. The royals and their households aren’t let off the hook either: “A nest of vipers”, purrs one interviewee with relish. The harrowing Channel 4 documentary Escape from the Taliban, directed and produced by Sue Turton, opens with footage of explosions in the night sky of Kabul, which are sometimes fireworks, other times gunfire, celebrating the Taliban recently taking back Kabul, and the US and British forces evacuating. From there we followed the desperate attempts of female rights activist Zoya Faizi to get her family out of Kabul. Elsewhere, we saw Taliban fighters whose definition of observance seems to include checking messages on social media. Other Taliban members wandered around abandoned US military sites, some playfully sitting on helicopter blades. Footage was also shown of senior Taliban figures acknowledging for the first time that they were behind local suicide bomb attacks. This is a short documentary but it packs a powerful humanist punch. Faizi’s small daughter looks up from colouring on the floor to say simply: “When the Taliban comes, we can’t go to nursery.” Let’s deal only briefly with the eight-part Amazon Prime fantasy epic The Wheel of Time, based on the Robert Jordan books and reputed to cost $10m an episode, because Jeff Bezos wanted his own Game of Thrones (and what Jeff wants, Jeff gets, OK!). “The world is broken,” intones Rosamund Pike (Moiraine), swishing about in a cape in the opener, and it goes downhill from there: a yarn full of Middle-earth-looking villages, magick with a k and girls with powers to “talk to the wind”. At some point I lost consciousness and Bezos appeared to me in a vision to cackle, evilly, that taxation was for little people. I awoke to find Moiraine sending light-ropes into the sky to vanquish beasts called Trollocs, and rambling about escaping to the White Tower. Friends, be careful: cosplay is catching and there’s no known antidote. Just room for an observation that only about 10% of the new I’m a Celebrity… Get Me Out of Here! cast (David Ginola? Richard Madeley?) are recognisable as “famous” to the general public, and now even Madeley has departed after succumbing to illness (now, now, there’ll be no wild accusations that the upright Mr Madeley was trying to escape from camp). Maybe it’s time to start feeding the celebrities to the bugs? What else I’m watching An Audience With … Adele (ITV) The singer at the London Palladium, with a celebrity audience, performing new album, 30, and other hits. Adele is in fine voice and humour, and even a doting, bopping celebrity audience is acceptable when it includes Stormzy and Bryan Cranston. Selling Sunset (Netflix) A brand new series of the hugely popular, winningly preposterous US reality show about glamorous LA estate agents at the Oppenheim Group – Christine! Chrishell! Mary! – selling high-end properties to an elite so wealthy that one split-level infinity pool just won’t be enough. Showtrial (BBC One) Tonight sees the final episode of this five-part thriller focusing on a murdered student, and the former friend, or friends, who may have killed her. The plot may have hit a few bumps, but the script is pithy, and the performances are dynamite, particularly from Céline Buckens and Tracy Ifeachor.Nadine Dorries was embroiled in a row with fellow Tory MP Caroline Nokes this weekend after the culture secretary dismissed her allegations of inappropriate touching against the prime minister’s father. Dorries said she had known Stanley Johnson for 15 years and described him as a gentleman. She rejected Nokes’s claim that he had “smacked her on the backside” at the Conservative party conference in 2003. “I don’t believe it happened,” she said in an interview with the Daily Mail. “It never happened to me. Perhaps there is something wrong with me.” Nokes, chair of the Commons Women and Equalities Committee, said she was disappointed at the comments and hoped they did not deter others from reporting sexual harassment. She told the Press Association: “I am very sorry the secretary of state has used her considerable influence and power in the media to denounce me in this way. I very much hope her attitude does not deter other women from being brave enough to report their experiences of public sexual harassment.” A source close to the culture secretary tried to defuse her comments. “Nadine knows she should have been clearer in her answer. Having known Stanley for so long she found it hard to believe he had been inappropriate,” they said. “But she is crystal clear that those who experience sexual harassment should always be able to speak up and always be heard. She was not looking to denounce Caroline and regrets if that is how her comment has been received.” The government said in its response to a consultation on sexual harassment in the workplace in July that there was “a real, worrying problem with sexual harassment at work, as well as in other settings”. It said more women were “empowered to share their experiences”. Nokes, the MP for Romsey and Southampton North, claimed in an interview with Sky News earlier that month that Stanley Johnson had smacked her bottom and said, “Oh, Romsey, you’ve got a lovely seat.” Johnson, 81, has said he has no recollection of the alleged incident. Nokes has said there has been a mixed reaction after she spoke out. She said there had been “amazing support” from constituents and women around Westminster, but she had “been sent to Coventry by some”. Ailbhe Rea, a political correspondent for the New Statesman, claimed after the MP’s interview that Mr Johnson had groped her and “leered” at her at a Conservative party conference in 2019. She wrote in the magazine: “I didn’t want Nokes to be alone in calling out something I knew hadn’t only happened to her.” Jess Phillips, the shadow minister for domestic violence and safeguarding, who appeared on the Sky News discussion where Nokes first detailed the allegation, said it was a “common mistake” for people to think individuals they like cannot perpetrate sexual harassment or violence. “It’s the thing that silences victims. It reminds them to shut up about their experiences,” she said. “I’ve got to say I expected better from Nadine. I’m not surprised, though – it’s the most common response, to disbelieve. I’m not entirely sure why she thinks Caroline would lie. Where’s the benefit?” Labour has called on the Conservative party to investigate the allegations against Johnson, but it has not said whether a probe will be launched.The assault was already under way when, having hastily collected her youngest child from a neighbour, Baraa Hamamda, 24, ran home to find her three-year-old son, Mohammed, lying in a small pool of blood and apparently lifeless on the bare floor where she had left him asleep. “I thought that’s it, he’s dead,” she says. “He won’t come back.” Mohammed wasn’t dead, though he wouldn’t regain consciousness for more than 11 hours, having been struck on the head by a stone thrown through a window by an Israeli settler, one of dozens who had invaded the isolated village of Al Mufakara, in the West Bank’s rocky, arid south Hebron hills. At about 1.30pm, settlers from the two outposts, Havat Maon and Avigayil – illegal even under Israeli law – which the Palestinian village sits uneasily between, advanced on the flock of a Palestinian shepherd from neighbouring Rakiz, throwing stones and stabbing sheep, killing six of them. More than a dozen of Al Mufakara’s 120 residents retaliated with stones in an attempt to repel the settlers. But the settlers, several armed, rapidly entered the village and, as women barricaded themselves and their children in their homes, left a trail of smashed windows, an overturned car, shattered windscreens, punctured water tanks, slashed tyres, vandalised solar panels – and six injured Palestinians, including Mohammed. At first a few troops apparently tried to separate the sides – an IDF video shows them restraining one settler. But Mahmoud Hamamda, Mohammed’s grandfather, says that when reinforcements arrived they focused on dispersing the Palestinians defending the village, about half of whom now retreated into the valley below. “They were beside the settlers, shooting teargas and stun grenades and rubber bullets at the Palestinians,” he says. “If Israel went by the law, none of these settlers would be here … and yet Israeli soldiers come with M16s and confront people like this who have no weapons.” Which raises the question of what Israel is doing to curb what increasingly looks like rural settlers’ systematic use of violence. The incursion into Al Mufakara, which Israel’s liberal daily Haaretz called a “pogrom”, is the highest-profile event in a recent rise in settler violence. Israeli human rights organisations claim it is increasingly being used as a strategy to try to clear many of the 300,000 Palestinian residents in the rural 60% of the occupied West Bank designated as Area C in the Oslo accords. Arguably the settlers were trying by force what Israel has long attempted by bureaucratic means. Unlike most settlers, Palestinian residents of villages like Mufakara are refused permits to build clinics and schools or pave their hair-raisingly rough access roads. Denied access to utilities, they can pay five times more for water than Israelis. Many homes have been served military demolition orders. This is compounded by the tens of thousands of acres of “state land” allocated to settlers on pastures used by Palestinians for generations. The Israeli human rights agency B’Tselem claimed this month that the state has “harnessed settler violence to promote its policy of taking over Palestinian land for Jewish use”. While Naftali Bennett, who in June replaced Benjamin Netanyahu as prime minister, is a rightwing nationalist, he was obliged to include Labour and Meretz (the most leftwing Jewish party) as well as – for the first time – an Arab party, the Islamic-inclined Ra’am, in his coalition. The core political bargain Bennett struck with his left-of-centre partners was that he would not implement his own dream of annexing de jure key parts of the West Bank; in return the government would focus on policies within Israel itself: no annexation but no end to occupation. Bennett wholly shares the settler leaders’ expansionist view that Israel stretches to the river Jordan and has promised to continue growing existing settlements. While foreign minister Yair Lapid immediately tweeted condemnation of the Al Mufakara rampage as “terror” and “not the Jewish way”, Bennett did not. Backbench Meretz Knesset members such as lawyer Gaby Lasky have been forthright on the government’s need to order the military to use its clear legal powers against militant settlers’ deployment of violence as a “strategic tool”, including the riot control methods the army regularly deploys against Palestinians. She points out that the Fourth Geneva Convention – the one violated by all settlements in territory seized by Israel in 1967 – specifically requires, in article 27, that subjects of an occupying power “shall be protected … against all acts of violence or threats thereof”. While settlers answer to Israel’s civilian courts and Palestinians to military ones, “legally [the army] can disperse [the settlers]; they can arrest someone until the police come”. Instead, she says, there has been “impunity for the violent settlers”. After rising diplomatic concern – including in Washington – defence minister Benny Gantz let it be known he had summoned the top brass from the military, police and intelligence on 18 November with a view to toughening enforcement against what he called “hate crimes” in the West Bank, including new guidelines against troops “standing by” during settler attacks on Palestinians. Those present included Israel Defence Forces (IDF) Central Command head Yehuda Fuchs, who, on a rare visit to Al Mufakara after the settler invasion, promised that the “army’s duty is to protect all the residents”. But Avner Gvaryahu, a former special operations sergeant in the northern West Bank and executive director of the anti-occupation veterans’ group Breaking the Silence, is deeply sceptical. “Words mean nothing,” he says. “Only actions matter. So far, settler violence has been ravaging on and Gantz has done nothing.” He doubts that, even if more police are deployed in the field, “there will be any fundamental change” because the occupation, the settlements and the outposts “are all part of a system of violence. In this reality, we have a duty to protect Palestinians, yet we know that most soldiers are not told they have the authority and are simply not given the orders to enforce the law on settlers.” There was certainly scant evidence during this year’s olive harvest – after the attack on Al Mufakara – that the change of government had modified settler behaviour. In the village of Turmus Aya, farmer Mumtaz al Salmah, 42, described how on 23 October three Palestinian family groups fled from about 20 masked and stone-throwing settlers, who then upended bags of picked olives, set one car on fire and slashed the tyres of others. Al Salmah, the last to withdraw, says he was clubbed in the back of the head and neck and that troops who arrived used teargas and stun grenades to push back villagers who had turned out to support the families, to stop them throwing stones. “I’m scared to take women and children out to pick olives now,” he says. “They [the settlers] attack us on our own land and in front of our own children and I can’t do anything.” Soldiers too have been attacked by extremist settlers. But there are cultural factors aligning many of them with settlers. Experts estimated in 2016 that between a third and half of army cadets espoused religious Zionism, the credo of the more ideological settlers – compared with 10% of the population as a whole. Saying that religious Zionism is “dominant” up to senior officer level, the Israel Centre for Public Affairs’ Yehuda Shaul, another leading anti-occupation campaigner, adds that settlers often enjoy “symbiotic” contact with locally based IDF units. Drawing on his own experience as a conscript in Hebron, he says of the settlers: “Sunday they’re in my barracks using the shooting range because they’re part of my reserve units, on Saturday they hosted me for cholent [the traditional Sabbath stew]; on Tuesday their leader joined the [IDF] meeting on intelligence and operations; on Wednesday I did a tour with them of the Tomb of the Patriarch and on Thursday you want me to arrest them. Are you nuts?” The presence of Jewish Israeli civilians can afford Palestinians farmers some protection. On a Friday this month, at the northern West Bank village of Burin, London-born professor of Jewish theology Michael Marmur, who chairs Rabbis for Human Rights, was on a ladder picking olives with the Qaduz family below the notoriously extreme – and illegal – outpost of Givat Ronen. In Burin the previous month, troops did not prevent settlers repeatedly stoning a home occupied by three women and a small boy, and only when a larger army force finally arrived after 40 minutes, did the settlers finally leave, while torching 100 olive trees. Describing the “hilltop youth” settlers at the cutting edge of the battle for Area C as “under-stimulated and over-motivated”, Marmur quotes the biblical injunction not to “look away”, and declares it “a moral imperative to stand up against daily breaches of human rights”. Farmer Jamal Qaduz, 48, showed his gratitude to his Israeli visitors not only with generous portions of arrayes (meat-filled pitta) but by saying as he climbed towards his as yet unharvested olive trees closer to Givat Ronen: “Next week we will need many more volunteers, I am afraid to go higher without them.” Qaduz lodged a police complaint about the previous week’s incident, albeit with little hope. According to the Israeli human rights agency Yesh Din, more than 80% of such complaints do not lead to a criminal investigation and only 9% between 2015 and 2019 resulted in an indictment. No guns were fired by settlers at Burin. But events took a darker turn in the south Hebron hills village of Khalat al-Daba on 10 November. Settlers, told by a military civil administration officer to dismantle a tent they had erected, ostensibly to provide shade for their sheep but close to a Palestinian farm building, remained in the area, moving their flock into olive trees cultivated by the villagers. Itai Feitelson arrived with other activists – Palestinian and Israeli – shortly after 8pm, following reports that the settlers had started throwing stones, breaking the leg of a 64-year-old Palestinian. Feitelson, 26, is one of a new generation of Israeli activists who spend considerable periods in the south Hebron hills, learning Arabic and supporting Palestinian farmers. From what he describes as a “mainstream Israeli home”, Feitelson did his three years military service in northern Israel, choosing the “middle way” of an intelligence posting that would not enmesh him in the occupation, but gradually decided to become more engaged. He says: “I don’t like being shot at but I like picking olives, I like going with the shepherds, I like being in the villages. You don’t have a lot of victories. Sometimes you can de-escalate a situation or prevent an arrest; or you feel a protest is being suppressed less severely because there are Israelis here.” That night in Khalat al-Daba, however, Feitelson could only witness events rapidly unfolding in the darkness. They accelerated dramatically when, at what seemed the moment of maximum tension, the soldiers suddenly “get in their jeeps and leave”. There was an ominous lull, followed by “massive stone throwing from both sides” until, just seven minutes after the army left, the “settlers started shooting like crazy” –apparently from pistols – wounding two Palestinians and hitting vehicles, including a Palestinian ambulance. It then took 40 minutes until the reappearance – at the urging of the villagers – of the army, who ordered the Palestinians back into the village, and eventually escorted the settlers back to the – illegal – outpost of Mitzpe Yair. “I’ve seen settlers shooting,” says Feitelson, “but never for 40 minutes. The craziest thing from my understanding … is that the army left. It was so obvious the situation was going to escalate.” This month’s B’Tselem report focused primarily on a new kind of “unauthorised” outpost – 40 “farms” across the West Bank gradually seizing pasture and vital water sources from Palestinians. This, says Yehuda Shaul, “will drive the final nail into the coffin of the Palestinian herding communities”. Violence, argues Shaul, is “existential for the farms … a necessary step” towards the goal of “displacing Palestinian herding communities”. On 7 November, men from one such farm, owned by the settler Issachar Mann, advanced on the village of al-Tha’ala and succeeded in watering their sheep at a cistern long used – and maintained – by Palestinian shepherds. Such cisterns are crucial for the Palestinian herding economy because the villagers depend on them to water their sheep. A Palestinian activist, Basil Adraa, arrived in time to film chaotic scenes as soldiers pushed the Palestinians back into the village while allowing the settlers’ sheep to reach the cistern. The military say the cistern is “permitted to both parties”. The Palestinians understandably see it as entirely theirs. In a telling exchange, an officer demands Adraa’s name. Adraa replies in Hebrew: “Why don’t you tell the masked settlers to identify themselves?” “Don’t worry,” the officer replies, “I know them very well.” The al-Tha’ala incident came while in nearby Susiya, Hamdan Mohammed was describing a bizarre scene the previous day when settlers broke into the village playground, generating images of grinning grown men and teenage boys on seesaws and swings while IDF soldiers stood around preventing the Palestinians from entering. It was the sabbath, prompting Hamdan to say: “They do not respect their own religion.” Well over a millennium ago Jews and Muslims inhabited the area at times. Palestinian Susiya is earmarked for demolition, deemed illegal in Israeli law, though no more so than 150 far more recent “unauthorised” Jewish settlement outposts, including the one of Givat Ha Degel, from which some of the playground invaders had come. In international law the Palestinian part of the village is entirely legal, which is why the EU and the US have long argued against its demolition. Israeli Susiya, of which Givat Ha Degel is an outpost, is the largest settlement in the area. But although some of its 1,500 residents joined the playground break-in, prominent Susiya settler Nadav Abrahamov says it was a “mistake”. He says there was “no violence”, but that settlers in the area had “got really angry” to see a new playground in an area under demolition orders, and then – that very morning – Israeli activists had arrived to film recently built houses in Givat Ha Degel. Nevertheless, says Abrahamov, the episode “was a stupid incident. It shouldn’t happen.” He further insists that the storming of Al Mufakara was the action of “a minority of a minority” – while acknowledging he does not know “exactly what happened”. Any solution, Abrahamov says, requires the removal of the Israeli activists, whom he repeatedly describes as “anarchists”, and who, he insists, are the “ones creating the tension”. He says that “without them we [the settlers and the Palestinians clinging on in their Susiya] can find a way of living together”. He says Susiya settlement leaders stopped residents repeating the playground break-in the following sabbath, in effect striking a bargain with the army in which the latter would bar “anarchists” from the area. The military indeed established temporary checkpoints that Saturday, stopping cars with Israeli registration plates reaching the south Hebron hills – including, for more than two hours, the Observer’s. Yet despite the Susiya settlers’ assertion that free of “anarchists” they could cohabit with a Palestinian Susiya they would prefer didn’t exist, there remains an unbridgeable gulf between their view and that of the international community about who has and hasn’t the rights to inhabit the south Hebron hills – and the rest of Area C. The designation as Area C, indispensable to the future Palestinian state that foreign governments insist they want, was supposed to be temporary, pending a final peace agreement. Instead the settlers are now waiting for its full annexation into Israel. “We are an integral part of Israel but not [yet] the state of Israel,” laments another Susiya settler, Shmaya Berkowitz. Nor does the notion that settler violence is confined to an ultra-extremist fringe sit easily with the charge of agencies such as Yesh Din, supported by growing evidence, that it is “part of a calculated strategy for dispossessing Palestinians of their land”. Or that of Yehuda Shaul, a committed supporter of a two-state agreement with the Palestinians, that “settler violence is not a story of 50 lunatics out on the edge of the movement … but an essential step in the evolution of the settlement project”. The IDF said last week that it was “committed to the wellbeing of all residents in the area and acts to prevent violence within its area of responsibility”. Referring to the settlers, it added: “Any claim that the IDF supports or permits violence by residents in the area is false.” Back in Al Mufakara, Baraa Hamamda says her children were traumatised by that September afternoon; they have become preoccupied by windows, knowing they are made of glass that can be broken by a stone. “They say ‘how do windows help us? We don’t need windows.’”In Unterleuten, a bestselling novel by the German novelist Juli Zeh, the inhabitants of a village outside Berlin are shocked to find out that a plot of land on their doorstep has been earmarked for a gigantic wind farm. One of the characters, a birdwatcher called Gerhard Fliess, knows what to do: he calls an old friend at the local environment ministry to remind him that the countryside around Unterleuten is the habitat of an endangered species of sandpiper. Surely that will halt the bulldozers. His friend at the ministry has different ideas, however. “So what,” he comments wryly, “that’s the future.” Green policy made in Germany no longer just means protecting nesting wading birds, but unleashing business to build, build, build. Zeh’s village saga, published in 2016 but recently turned into a television drama, could make for prophetic reading as Germany enters the post-Merkel era under a new government. Viewed from outside the country, the three parties that are likely to fill the government benches from the second week of December make an odd match, even by the centrist standards of German coalition politics. While the Social Democratic party (SPD) of future chancellor Olaf Scholz has showcased its ideological flexibility by acting as junior partner to Merkel’s conservatives for three out of her four terms, the two smaller parties enter government with agendas that seem almost diametrically opposed: a Green party that vows to protect the environment from Germany’s dirty industry, and a Free Democratic party (FDP) that wants to liberate industry from burdensome regulation. “The three parties clearly agree that they want to see more progress but they are not necessarily pointing in the same direction,” said Wolfgang Merkel, a political scientist at Humboldt University in Berlin. “What is certain is that there will be collisions of interest along the way.” With its leader, Christian Lindner, installed at the finance ministry, the debt-averse FDP will have a de-facto veto over the two centre-left parties’ spending plans. Conflicting agendas mean Germany’s next government already looks hamstrung in areas like tax reform, where the SPD and Greens want to increase rates and the FDP wants to slash them. As a result, they will feel pressure to unleash a flurry of activity in those areas where their ideas of change overlap. The three parties want to liberalise archaic citizenship laws, streamline immigration, improve gay and transgender rights, lower the voting age to 16 and legalise the recreational use of cannabis. Lit up by this “traffic light” government, Germany may at last live up to the liberal billing that was often associated with Merkel’s name abroad, but less so at home. In other areas, it may simply mean cutting red tape to speed up structural changes without having to reach too deeply into the state’s coffers. The 173-page coalition agreement published on Wednesday contains variations of the term “unbureaucratic” or “de-bureaucratising” on every third page, vowing to “remove all hurdles and barriers” to ensure renewables account for 80% of the country’s gross electricity demand by 2030. In the hands of the liberal FDP, the justice ministry will see it as its job to ease this process. Wind farms are to be built on at least 2% of each of the 16 German states’ lands – and sandpiper habitats will have to drop down the priority list to ensure that can happen. Both the Greens and the FDP have been in government before: the ecological party acted as junior partner to Gerhard Schröder’s Social Democrats from 1998 to 2005, and the liberals shared power with Merkel’s Christian Democrats from 2009 to 2013. But the outlook of both parties has changed considerably since then, and they will use the next four years to show how. The Green party has not only doubled its membership but also moved on from its pacifist roots on foreign policy. The new foreign minister, Annalena Baerbock, has already signalled a more confrontational course with China and Russia. The coalition agreement calls on Brussels to take a tougher stance in its rule-of-law battles with states like Poland and Hungary, and backs the procurement of armed drones for the military. The FDP, meanwhile, has pushed its libertarian tendencies to the fringes of the party. “They have moved on from being a neo-liberal party focused purely on the economy to again talk more about civil liberties and digitisation,” said Andrea Römmele, a professor of political communication at the Hertie School in Berlin. “They started playing that role during the corona crisis, and it went down well.” Gone are the days of Genscherism, when the FDP envisioned Germany acting as a bridge between east and west. Last month, the liberal party called on German universities to cut their ties to the Confucius Institute, the academic network seen as an instrument for Beijing’s soft power. The mission statements of the two smaller parties, who will have more seats in the Bundestag between them than the SPD, don’t sound too dissimilar on paper: to catch up on missed opportunities of the last decade and make Germany future-proof. The Greens define sustainability ecologically, the FDP in economic terms. “The stories we want to tell are complementary,” said Karl-Heinz Paqué, the chair of the Friedrich Naumann Foundation for Freedom, an FDP-affiliated thinktank. In finance minister Lindner and Green co-leader Robert Habeck, the new vice chancellor and climate-economy super-minister, they also have two politicians with rhetorical talent and an appetite for power to give a voice to these narratives. For Scholz, the risk is that he will be reduced as chancellor to the role of the moderator while the two activist politicians to his left and right set the country’s agenda. “The Greens and FDP are often portrayed as antagonists but there are plenty of similarities,” said Andreas Busch, a professor of political science at the University of Göttingen. “They are the ‘well off’ in German party politics, parties whose voters are highly educated and economically well-to-do.” It will likely fall on the centre-left to protect the rest of the country from the knock-on effects of the creative class’s campaign of creative destruction. “The days in which a German chancellor sets the direction of travel and the government follows have been gone for some time,” said Wolfgang Merkel. “But that’s not to say that Scholz cannot copy the trick that Merkel played: to take the credit for their best ideas, and convert that into strong support for his party.” To do so, Scholz will also have to fashion a public persona that sounds different to his predecessor. That much was apparent when the parties presented their deal on Wednesday: Lindner held forth freely and at length, while Habeck cut off SPD co-leader Saska Esken to tell her she had to wait her turn. Scholz, meanwhile, read out a scripted speech with a Merkel-esque, monotone delivery.Trainers might still be the footwear de rigueur when it comes to everyday wear but, with the party season approaching, a more dressed-up alternative is gracing fashionable feet. And if you’re someone from a certain generation you might have worn these before – because it’s the platform, that disco classic, that is back. Platforms have been spotted on celebrities including Dua Lipa, Lady Gaga, Olivia Rodrigo and Beyoncé and they are increasingly a gender-neutral shoe. Following Marc Jacobs and Sam Smith, Tom Daley wore platforms on the red carpet last week. There are several new brands making platforms for the modern era. Lady Gaga and Dua Lipa both wear D’Accori while Nodaleto is a favourite of fashion editors, and Naked Wolfe has been endorsed by Kourtney Kardashian. Terry de Havilland, the British brand founded in the 70s, has enjoyed a new spell of success – particularly after Sarah-Jessica Parker wore the Lena Non-Stop Disco platform on the set of Sex and the City follow-up And Just Like That. “The platform heel is a big part of our brand,” says sales and marketing director Josh Spurling. “Our bestsellers over the last year have been the Zia and the new Lena Non-Stop Disco, both platform block heels.” On the high street, designs by River Island, Asos and Kurt Geiger are popular. “Platforms are bigger and better than ever, and look to be key for spring/summer 2022,” says Rebecca Farrar-Hockley, chief creative officer of Kurt Geiger. “Our Vegan Franky heels amalgamate a towering block heel and platform with a hot pink satin upper for extra impact. These are party shoes with punch.” Fashion writer Naomi Pike is a platform fan. “There’s a retro allure to them that has always kind of captivated me,” she says. Pike says she likes the stomp they have compared with other more “ladylike” high heels. “There’s definitely a bit of an attitude to them,” she says. “I carry that into the other areas of my personal style.” Attitude, retro appeal and – crucially – comfort add up to make platforms the party shoe for 2021. “The great thing about a platform is you can have the high-heel height whilst still having a shoe that is stable and, most importantly, comfortable,” says Spurling. They also fit into both a return of disco style – as endorsed by Lady Gaga in the run-up to The House of Gucci – and Gen Z’s favourite, the Y2K era. Platforms were worn by Victoria Beckham and Jennifer Aniston in the noughties. In fact, platform shoes date back thousands of years – statues of fashionable Greek women from around 600 BC wear versions. Vertiginous chopine – up to a metre high – were a status symbol for socialites in 15th-century Venice, while wooden koma geta were worn by prostitutes in Japan from the 17th century onwards. Platforms took off in mainstream fashion in the 30s – with designers including Salvatore Ferragamo and Roger Vivier making the shoes. They returned in the 70s, worn by the likes of Sister Sledge and Bianca Jagger. The shoes were genderless then, too – David Bowie, George Clinton and Marc Bolan wore platforms. Forty-odd years on, expect to see trainers retired after dark, and platforms become the choice across dancefloors and at parties once again. “If there were ever perfect shoes for a dancefloor,” says Spurling “these are them.”In The Adventure of the Copper Beeches, Sherlock Holmes says: “Data! Data! Data! I can’t make bricks without clay.” Recent claims of massive benefits from wearing masks and using ivermectin against Covid-19 depended on mainly low-quality clay. Meta-analysis is a technique for pooling the results from many studies, but it cannot make silk purses out of sows’ ears. A recent British Medical Journal review looked at six, fairly porcine, studies concerning mask-wearing and estimated an impressive 53% reduction in risk. But the single randomised controlled trial estimated the smallest effect: a reduction of about 18% (-23% to 46%) in Sars-CoV-2 infections. The “heaviest” studies, an analysis of US states and a survey of about 8,000 Chinese adults in early 2020, observed rather than experimented and its editorial highlights the risks of confounding variables influencing both wearing masks and infections and the impossibility of disentangling the effects of measures fluctuating simultaneously. Indeed, this review found an identical 53% reduction from handwashing. Physical models and laboratory testing suggest masks would be expected to have some effect, and to be fair, it is challenging to imagine rigorous randomised trials of the effects of mask-wearing or any other behaviour. But these are considered both feasible and essential for evaluating medical treatments and so in principle it should be easier to evaluate ivermectin, a cheap, anti-parasitic drug, heavily promoted as an overlooked treatment for Covid-19. One meta-analysis originally found ivermectin reduced Covid-19 mortality by about 56%, a huge effect. But then a preprint server withdrew the largest study and there have been further concerns over major errors and fraud in some ivermectin analyses. After removing studies with a high risk of bias, the estimated effect dissipated: the estimated decreased mortality was about 10% but with a wide uncertainty interval (- 42% to 43%), so no firm conclusions can be drawn. Huge effort has been expended on scrutinising ivermectin research, even leading to the intriguing observation the drug appears to work in countries with a high prevalence of roundworm, whereas what is needed are the kind of good-quality studies that finally laid the claims about hydroxychloroquine to rest. Fortunately, these are now under way for ivermectin. • David Spiegelhalter is chair of the Winton Centre for Risk and Evidence Communication at Cambridge. Anthony Masters is statistical ambassador for the Royal Statistical Society • This article was amended on 28 November 2021 to include reference to “physical models and laboratory testing” with regard to mask-wearing.Steve Max has no memories of playing Simon Says as a kid. He probably did – the centuries-old command game is beloved by adults who need children to be quiet (and put their hands on their head) for a little while – but Max only recalls playing Duck, Duck Goose and kickball at summer camp. No matter. At the ripe old age of 59, Max now plays Simon Says at least two or three times a week. Max is one of a handful of professional Simon Says callers across the globe. He leads the game after First Holy Communion ceremonies, in the middle of corporate all-staff meetings, and even during America’s National Basketball Association (NBA) games. “If you think about it, there’s really only one rule: only do it if my command is preceded by ‘Simon Says’,” Max says over the phone from New York, “And yet people are just terrible.” Earlier this year, as summer ended and the leaves began to turn brown, a South Korean drama dominated television sets and became Netflix’s most-watched series to date. Over 142m households sat down to watch Squid Game in just one month, following characters as they competed in murderous children’s games for a chance to win £28m. From tug of war to marbles, the show shone light on games that many of us haven’t thought about for decades. But while the dystopian, life-or-death competition was purely fictional, in reality, a small number of dedicated individuals do play children’s games for money. “People are truly envious of what I do for a living,” says Max, who has been playing Simon Says professionally since the 1990s. Often, he has to show people pictures on his phone to prove that this really is his job – initially, most people think he’s teasing them when they ask. It all began in 1982, when he was a waiter at Grossinger’s hotel in the Catskills Mountains and would watch activities director Lou Goldstein lead guests in the game. “It was just remarkable,” Max says, “There was so much laughter.” Max had been experimenting with entertainment since he was a teenager – performing magic and balancing acts for Boy Scouts and church groups. “I started incorporating Simon Says into my show – and what I found was my audiences liked it much more than my magic and juggling.” In 2003, Max contacted the New York Knicks after watching a pitiful half-time performance during a basketball game – he now plays Simon Says to as many as 20,000 people in arenas. He’s mastered a series of “sneaky moves” to catch players out – the faster you go, the easier it is to fool people, and you can also touch one body part while asking people to touch another. A move to Zoom during the pandemic has made some of Max’s tricks harder to pull off – he can’t really issue any below-the-waist instructions, and lagging video has slowed the game down. But it’s when he visits summer camps and plays with teenage counsellors who’ve been watching his act since they themselves were kids that he has to get the sneakiest. “I say something like, ‘Simon Says don’t smile’, and they’ll just burst out laughing. They just can’t control themselves, you know?” Of course, the real money is where the real money always is – in the corporate world. Max has kicked off conferences for a number of companies, “waking everyone up before they start their four-hour session in a ballroom somewhere watching a slideshow.” It’s not all fun and games: many bosses like the unexpectedly serious message of the game. “With the advent of mobile phones and all the electronic distractions that we have in the world, you have to stay focused,” Max explains, “And another one of the points I say is how important it is to be a good listener and let people finish before you respond. If you anticipate and move early, you’re gonna make a mistake.” Not every professional children’s game player can apply such serious messages to their work, but that doesn’t mean they don’t take their work seriously. “Winning that third competition was probably the best feeling I’ve had in my life,” says Greg Ball, 25, captain of the Marrero Gang, a UK-based team of seven who won the international World Chase Tag championship in 2016, 2017, and 2018. Whether you called it tig, tag, or it, you undoubtedly played the game as a child. Yet Hertfordshire-based Ball now plays at least twice a week in order to train for the annual competition that has been broadcast on Channel 4 since 2019. Contestants pursue each other around a quad filled with obstacles and have to tag each other with their hands (feet don’t count). Ball grew up in South Africa, where everyone played rugby – meaning that as “a very skinny and small kid”, he was constantly getting hurt. “I prefer the idea of running away from people than trying to tackle them,” he laughs. As well as competing in World Chase Tag, he also works as a sales rep for the competition, securing sponsorships. “I think there was a massive doubt when I said I actually want to do tag for the rest of my life and make a career out of it. There was obviously laughter here and there,” Ball says. But three wins and a strong online audience (the competition’s official YouTube channel has accumulated 115m views) mean Ball’s work is increasingly taken more seriously. And much like Max, Ball has perfected his tactics. “Herding, like how a shepherd herds sheep, is when we herd opponents into areas of the court where it’s easiest to tag them,” Ball explains. “Reverse herding” is when you herd the target somewhere it’s harder for them to catch you. “Duking” is when you bluff about going one way before swapping to the other. And as captain, Ball always makes sure his team are “physically and psychologically ready” to play. “I think my life completely changed on that third victory,” Ball says, explaining it “instilled so much hope that I can actually do something with my life besides just working a meaningless nine-to-five job.” Yet the prize winnings themselves, regrettably, weren’t life-changing – just a trophy the first year, £1,000 the next, and then £1,500 split between the team in the third year. “The hope is that within the next five years, we’ll start to see a lot more money flooding into the sport, which means that athletes can take it a bit more seriously,” Ball says. “In the same way something like UFC [Ultimate Fighting Championship] has developed over the past 50 years, I honestly reckon in the next 50 years, World Chase Tag will be on a similar playing field with some of the big key sports.” The same can’t be said for the World Conker Championships. “I’m there to win, right? Most people are there to have fun. But there’s no doubt about it – I am turning up to win,” says Jasmine Tetley, 28, an environmental scientist from Nottingham and the defending champion of the World Conker Championships for the past two years running. Amazingly, Tetley never played conkers as a child – but since 2018 she’s taken part in the 56-year-old competition, in which hundreds of contestants swing to smash each other’s horse chestnut seeds. “About five years ago, I said, ‘I want to become a world champion. It doesn’t matter what it’s in.’ So that’s what I set out to do,” Tetley says. While other players don fancy dress and silly wigs, she wears athleisure. “It’s just doing all the things that other sports people do: it’s thinking about hydration, food, making sure you’re warm, you’ve got layers, but you’re not restricted.” Tetley has devised a set of tactics using maths and statistics and notes: “You need to play to your wind condition.” But alas, there’s no prize money, meaning she might have chosen the wrong sport – in 2006, the champion of the USA Rock Paper Scissors League took home $50,000. Still, Tetley enjoys the trophy and crown, which she wore during the last competition, prompting children to ask for her autograph. When asked how it feels to have mastered a children’s game, she laughs: “I don’t think it’s a children’s game, because I never played it when I was young.” The organisers of these kinds of events concur that they’re more than just child’s play. Giorgio Moratti is the founder of the Hide and Seek World Championship, which he launched in 2010 in his home town of Bergamo, Italy. The game, he says, has a strong underlying philosophy, “It’s really important not to forget to live and to have fun.” Here’s how it works, roughly. On Friday, teams are welcomed to the arena with concerts and food – there are no sign posts for the former, and people have to “seek” them out by following the sound. On Saturday, the games begin. There’s normally around 400 players split into 80 teams (Moratti says in 2018 there were players from every continent in the world). There are a bunch of short 10-minute games to help eliminate losers, and then a final in which 20 teams compete on the Sunday. A lot of the winning teams are mixed gender – Moratti says men might be stronger and faster, but women have “amazing ideas for hiding spots”. Take one year, for example, when a woman brought a camera with her to the event. “There is a lot of television and press, so she just took a camera and pretended to take photos… That’s really intelligent,” Moratti says. She won that round. “The prize is the glory, of course,” Moratti says when asked what exactly the winners get. “You’re winning a game that has been played worldwide since the dawn of time, so that’s not really a small thing.” Winners also receive a medal engraved with a golden fig leaf, reminiscent of those that Adam and Eve used to “hide” their naked bodies. There have been no repeat winners, so theoretically anyone stands a chance. “They have to be a bit crazy as well… That’s really one of the skills required to participate.” Whether it’s Simon Says, tag, conkers, or hide and seek, the champions of children’s games all believe in the power of fun. Steve Max, the professional Simon, recalls asking a room of veterans to stick their right hand in the air – one man got confused and stuck up his left. “So he put up his left hand by mistake. But he didn’t have a hand. He had lost it in the service,” Max says – he decided to let the man stay in the game and everyone cheered. “I consider myself very lucky and very fortunate that I’m able to do this for my career,” he says. “How does it feel to spend my life playing a children’s game? Simon Says: It’s bloody excellent!”Hondurans head to the polls on Sunday in the first general election since US federal prosecutors laid out detailed evidence of intimate ties between drug smugglers and the Honduran state. The country’s past three presidents, as well as local mayors, legislators, police and military commanders have been linked to drug trafficking in what US prosecutors have described as a narco-state. One brother of the current president, Juan Orlando Hernández, is serving a life sentence in the US on trafficking charges, while Hernández himself has been accused of seeking to “shove the drugs right up the noses of the gringos”. Sunday’s election is seen by many as a referendum on the corruption that has allegedly permitted drug traffickers to infiltrate the government all the way to the top. “We’ve been discredited as a country of corrupt politicians, drug traffickers and thieves – and it’s true,” said Cristóbal Ferrera, 70, after a day of hawking gum, mints and loose cigarettes in Tegucigalpa’s central park. “For my children, for my grandchildren and for my country, may these corrupt people leave now, we do not want to continue suffering,” said Ferrera. Hernández, who was named as an unindicted co-conspirator in his brother’s case and two others, might soon do just that. Protected until now by a US justice department policy of not charging sitting presidents, it is widely believed that he could be indicted by US prosecutors the day after he leaves office in January. Hernández has vehemently denied all the accusations and has recently dedicated significant time and resources to an attempt to clear his name, including the publication of a book about his political career that he said sets the record straight. Whether or not he is extradited to the US to face the charges could be decided by the outcome of the election. The next congress will have the opportunity to reshape a troubled justice system by electing a new supreme court, attorney general and state auditors, all of whom will serve for terms that extend beyond a single election cycle. “It’s not just about the presidency, it’s also about who will control congress and what their links are to corruption and drug trafficking,” said Eric Olson, a Central America expert for the Seattle International Foundation. Nasry Asfura, 63, the mayor of the capital, Tegucigalpa, and presidential candidate for the conservative National party is believed by many to be Hernández’s hand-picked successor – and potential protector. Asfura has tried hard to overcome that perception, often saying that he is “nobody’s errand boy”. But a refusal to address the issue of Hernández’s potential extradition when pressed by the media hasn’t helped, nor has a ticket full of politicians accused of drug trafficking and corruption who are seeking re-election. Asfura is in a tight race with the leading opposition candidate, Xiomara Castro, 62, whose husband, Manuel “Mel” Zelaya was president from 2006 until 2009 when he was ousted in a military-backed coup. Like Hernández, Zelaya has been accused of accepting millions of dollars in bribes from drug traffickers, which he denies. Castro has never been personally accused of corruption, while Asfura was accused of misappropriating roughly $1m in a case that was shelved by a judge before it could go to trial. Hernández’s two terms as president have been plagued by scandals, not the least of which the fact that he employed a dubious court ruling to ignore a constitutional prohibition against re-election and then won a second term in a 2017 vote that was marred by allegations of fraud. Combined with the corruption and drug trafficking allegations, Hernández has come to embody the worst of Honduran politics in the eyes of many. “Just hearing his name makes it feel like the ground is caving in,” said Ferrera, who hopes Castro will bring change and restore the reputation of Honduras. “What we want is to hear other countries say that we have improved.”Little did Summer Wolff know that a tip-off 13 years ago would change her life for ever. The American wine importer – and already long-term Italophile – was running gourmet tours of Tuscany with her business partner when they heard about an “impressive young winemaker” who was breathing new life into indigenous varieties and natural production in Monferrato, east of Turin. Wasting no time in beating it up there, they arrived through the forest in the throes of the mid-autumn mist at dusk. “There was this romantic, other-worldliness about it that was so different to the Italy I knew,” Wolff recalls. “I was immediately enchanted.” After entering the courtyard (“I was just in love with everything about it”), then the house (“The first words out of my mouth were, ‘Oh my God, I would love to have a kitchen like this’”), she headed down to the cellars, where she clapped eyes on her now-husband, Fabrizio Iuli. “I don’t believe in love at first sight, but as soon as we started getting our noses into the glasses of wine and tasting from the barrels and the tanks – as us wine dorks do – there was this weird energy and attraction,” she says. “So, I like to say I fell in love with the wine and then Fabrizio, but if you go back a step further, I fell in love with the house, then the wine, then Fabrizio!” That was in 2008 and by the following spring the pair were living together in the small village that had been home to Iuli’s family for five generations, but whose population had slowly shrunk to just 70 over the decades. It’s a common occurrence in lots of Italy’s rural towns: in Monferrato’s case, the opening of the Fiat factory in nearby Turin in the late 1960s and several debilitating seasons of hailstorms drove the farmers and their families to pastures new. Since Wolff and her husband have lived there together, they have made it a labour of love to regenerate this corner of the world through their already established, but rapidly growing business, Cascina Iuli. One of the most exciting organic wineries in Italy, it specialises in local barbera, nebbiolo and grignolino grapes as well as two recent additions to the Italian registry of grape varieties: the once-abandoned slarina and the white wine grape baratuciat. With two young children – Ettore, five, and Gioacchino, seven – now running around, it is – needless to say – a round-the-clock operation. We’re speaking over Zoom one evening in late September when the annual grape harvest is in full swing and to help them out, the couple work with the nonprofit World Wide Opportunities on Organic Farms (Wwoof) to host people, affectionately known as Wwoofers, to work the land. “It’s a great way to get people into organic farming and learn about the old systems,” says Wolff who, when we chat, has a house full. The pay-off is full board, so while Iuli is out in the fields with the seasonal crew, Wolff is hosting no fewer than seven different nationalities around her dinner table at any one time for breakfast, lunch and dinner (as well as continuing to run her own international import business and the Village Forest School she founded with a friend last year whose classroom is a yurt on the land). This spontaneous, rich-mix melting pot is reflected in the interior of the family’s five-bedroom, five-bathroom home. “Having the space to respect Piedmont and Italy is really important to me, but so is bringing in a bit of the rest of the world through pieces that each have their own story,” she explains. Trips to Sweden, Finland and Morocco have heavily influenced the set-up and colour scheme, with textiles the couple picked up on their wine travels complementing original tie-dye-effect terracotta-tiled rooms with original ceilings left alone above. The papier-mâché figurines that stand in the fireplace were rescued from the street by a friend in Milan. “He said they were perfect for us… Slowly but surely we’re starting to look like them,” Wolff laughs. Built in the 1600s, the cascina has played home to many different families and its walls show its age with up to four centuries of different renderings. “There’s a big part of me that really wants to strip it right back,” Wolff says. “People pay so much to get that look, but it’s actually just what happens naturally over the years.” Elsewhere, sink backsplashes are a collage of original 200-year-old hand-painted tiles from Japan, England, India and Piedmont, found by local interiors “guru and miracle worker” Paolo Virano. “When people sell their houses, they sell him their floor tiles and the old ones that have been saved are still cheaper than the ones from the companies making replicas. It was exactly what I wanted,” she says. History is something that fascinates Wolff: “I’m always someone who is more interested in the past than the future. I love to know what people have done before me, rather than what is to come.” The main space of the house proves her point. The kitchen, which sits beneath the hay loft where Fabrizio’s grandfather would stay up late drinking wine and playing cards in secret with his pals (and where they still store their wine), spreads out into a huge open-plan room where a dining table built by Fabrizio and his father out of old wine barrels stands proudly – “Everything changes, but that’s the one piece I’m not allowed to touch,” Wolff says. Above it hangs a mobile light installation by the artist Giovanni Tamburelli, featuring suspended metal fish. “Once upon a time in central Italy they would hang a fish over the table and scrape it so a bit of salt and flavour would go into their polenta,” she says. Wolff, 44, has a clear appreciation of the richness of resourceful living. Asparagus is only eaten in April when it grows, cherries are only available in June, and “there’s no central heating, so in the winter it’s really cold in our house and in the summer it’s really warm!” she says. Most importantly: “Nobody punches a clock.” As modern-day life in rural Italy still goes, the family’s lifestyle is dictated to by the seasons rather than Monday-to-Friday 9-to-5. “Sometimes you work all hours and all weekend on the land, but then you take time out elsewhere,” says Wolff. “It’s a different, slower way of life.” It’s an existence that Wolff humbly acknowledges is, for many, the idea of “the dream”, but anyone who has ever pursued such a thing knows it’s only ever hard won. “I’ve never lived in the UK, but in New York at least there’s a guilt sensation if you take a lunch break – if you even take a lunch break. Life is about work, not about life.” In Monferrato there’s no escaping the life all around her. We happen to be chatting during one of her favourite times of year. “The cellar is beneath us, so when you walk out of the bedroom you can smell the grapes fermenting downstairs and it’s gorgeous,” she says. “It’s the two-week window when the whole house smells like wine.” It’s a glorious full circle to what brought her here in the first place. “When I wake up in the morning, I look out on the sun bouncing off the vineyards in front of me – if you were to show me a picture I could tell you what time of year it is by the light.” Cascina Iuli, iuli.it • The headline of this article was amended on 28 November 2021. Monferrato is in the Piedmont region of Italy, not Tuscany as an earlier version said.You’d have to be chronically deficient in empathy not to feel sorry for Australian TV reporter Matt Doran. I suspect he’s currently discovering quite how many people on the internet suffer from that condition. He’s the guy who screwed up the Australian media’s big interview with Adele by admitting he hadn’t listened to her new album. As a result, Sony will not release the interview footage and the big exclusive deal that Doran’s employer, Channel Seven, struck with Adele’s team, at a reported cost of A$1m (more than £500,000), is ruined. The mistake he made, he has subsequently confessed, was failing to notice an email giving him pre-release access to the album, which at the time of the interview was not yet generally available. But was that really the big mistake? I accept that, ideally, he’d have checked his email and had a listen, but I don’t think that omission made his situation hopeless. He’d done most of the interview, without mentioning the album, and it had seemingly gone fine. But then Adele understandably asked: “What do you think of my album?” This was the moment of truth. But it should have been the moment of lying. He should have said: “I thought it was great.” That’s what he’d have said if he’d listened to it. Whether he’d loved it or hated it or not known what to make of it, he would have said it was great. He’s sitting there with Adele. He’s been selected to do his country’s only interview with Adele about her album. There is no space for him to say it’s not great. There’s probably no space for him to think it’s not great. He is a contracted staff member of Team Adele’s New Album Is Great. Listening to it is not going to meaningfully inform his answer to the question. Also, it is impossible to conceive of a lie less likely to be exposed than him telling Adele that he’d enjoyed listening to her album. She is totally going to believe him. I’m sure she’s afflicted with a reasonable amount of creative self-doubt, but she wouldn’t be a big star if she didn’t also reckon she’s pretty good at music. Tell her that her album is great and she will believe you have listened to it. She’s not going to go: “Ha ha! Got you! You can’t have listened to it because, if you had, you’d know that it’s shit!” “But what if there were follow-up questions?” you may be thinking. OK, fair point, but what if there weren’t? Adele’s on a tight schedule – she’ll have another interview coming up two minutes later. There’s a high chance he wouldn’t get found out and, if he did, he’d still be no worse off than he is now. Also, and here’s the clincher, he had heard one song from it, Easy on Me. So he can say that’s his favourite! He’s got something to talk about! He’d be fine! I wonder if there wasn’t a slight petulance in his honesty, not directed at Adele but at her surrounding team and the self-important heightened security that executives love to introduce to creative launches. Not having noticed the email giving him access, he might have assumed that he wasn’t allowed to listen to it yet. This is his chance to shop all those haughty suits to Adele herself. “This is the ridiculous situation they’ve put us in, Adele. You and me. They come between us. I just think it should be about the music.” But is not listening to the album better or worse than listening to it in the wrong order? It was announced last week that, in response to a request from Adele, Spotify will no longer give a “shuffle” option when people are listening to albums. This will make it harder for them to listen to the songs in a different sequence from the one intended by an album’s creators. “Our art tells a story and our stories should be listened to as we intended,” she said. I found this both intimidating and exhilarating. Intimidating because I’m a musical philistine and have never listened to an album properly. I sometimes have music on but always while doing other things at the same time. Christmas carols while decorating a Christmas tree or… actually that’s basically it. I’ve never sat down and listened to a whole album all the way through, as if I’m watching a film but with no pictures or talking. I think my eyes and mind would wander. Is having a sandwich or reading a book or chatting better or worse than shuffling the track order? Exhilarating because, as someone who is involved in the making of TV shows, it had never occurred to me that there was anything you could do about how your stuff gets consumed. I have sat in my living room with small groups of close friends watching programmes I’ve invited them round to see in which I’m almost constantly on screen and, even under those circumstances where you’d think I’d created an overwhelming social pressure for people to focus on the show, still they chat away and miss important bits and pop into other rooms for snacks, while I silently seethe and resist the impulse to rewind and point out highlights. Of course, I’m failing to make allowances for the stultifying nature of my own oeuvre, but I’d still say it partly shows that, however great the effort and detailed work that goes into making a TV show, viewers generally only keep half an eye on the screen. It’s only the telly. If they then miss a key moment, they’ll blame the programme for not making sense. I always assumed it went with the territory of a popular art form that it’s the art’s job to grab people’s attention rather than the consumer’s job to concentrate. But Adele hasn’t admitted defeat on this and why should she? She literally wants a proper hearing. It’s inspiring to see how much she cares about the detail of her fans’ experience when the world is at her feet. In career terms, she is in a position of enormous power and, in this era of fear, dishonesty, anger and incompetence, it’s refreshing to see power used for good.Once, not that long ago, Kubra and Arzu were healthy young Turkish mothers, looking forward to raising their children. Today, sadly, this is no longer all these charismatic, determined women have in common. They are now both among the many damaged survivors of violent attacks at the hands of husbands who believed it was their right to inflict potentially lethal injury on their wives. This autumn, the two mothers are the impressive stars of Dying to Divorce, a British-made documentary, out last week, that has just been selected to represent Britain at the Oscars as the official entry in the Best International Feature Film category. The film is a startling, sensitively made exposé of the murderous misogyny and dangerous politics behind an epidemic of femicide in Turkey, a country where an astonishing one in three women is subjected to some form of domestic violence. Dying to Divorce was released to coincide with “16 Days of Activism”, the United Nations campaign against gender violence, and it was made over five long years of care and commitment by director Chloe Fairweather and her friend and producer, Sinead Kirwan. The pair, who met at university in Bristol, joined together to make the documentary after Fairweather met Arzu when she was filming another project in Turkey. Since then, she and Kirwan have conquered a series of challenges, including repeated battles for funds and lengthy delays imposed by a glacial Turkish legal system. “There were lots of times I felt it was not going to be possible to finish the film,” admitted Fairweather, “but that was the good thing about having Sinead there. If one of us was down, the other was offering encouragement. I’m so pleased it’s been chosen as an Academy Award contender by Bafta, partly because, although it is such an important story, it would have been very risky for it to be made inside Turkey by film-makers there.” At the heart of Fairweather’s documentary is the work of Ipek Bozkurt, the campaigning Turkish lawyer and activist who has guided both Kubra and Arzu, along with many others, through the painful aftermath of appalling injuries, helping them courageously press charges against their husbands. Bozkurt is in Britain this weekend for the premiere, and she told the Observer she remains determined to fight back against prejudices in the Turkish criminal justice system, working alongside her comrades on the anti-femicide platform she has established with other Turkish lawyers as a support for survivors and victims’ families across the country. “It is amazing how quickly things have changed in Turkey,” Bozkurt said. “There is nothing over-dramatic in the way Chloe tells these stories. There is real restraint, but the injuries speak for themselves.” Kubra had been working for Bloomberg News in London as a television presenter when she met her husband Neptun, who was then working as a producer. At first, her relatives in Turkey, where they returned to live, celebrated the match. Then, two days after the birth of her daughter, her husband viciously hit the back of her head four times during an argument. She suffered a serious haemorrhage which initially left her unable to speak or walk. Her husband claimed her debilitating brain damage was the result of the Caesarian section operation his wife had recently undergone, and nothing to do with the evident trauma to her skull. Deprived permanently of controlled movement and, perhaps most cruelly, of the easy articulacy that had marked her out in her career, it has taken years for Kubra to win the right to see her own daughter again and longer still to get a semblance of justice in the courts. Even now, although her husband has been convicted of the attack, he has not served time in prison. “The unfairness, and the contrast, between the way Kubra’s life was before, and how she is now, and what she has to do to be able to testify in person in court is extraordinary,” said Bozkurt. Arzu’s story is possibly still more shocking. It is certainly revealing of the cultural environment that gives Turkish husbands what Bozkurt calls “effective impunity” for whatever violence they see fit to mete out to their wives. At 14, Arzu was married off by her father to a farmer 10 years her senior. She had children before tensions in the relationship became his excuse for a terrible crime. When Arzu asked for a divorce, he fired seven shotgun shells at close range into her legs and arms. Although, as Fairweather’s film recounts, she begged him not to shoot her arms so that she could still look after their children, he ignored her. Speaking from a prison telephone as he awaits trial, her husband explains he sees his actions as the inevitable consequence of his wife’s behaviour. For Bozkurt, “the personal is political”, and in Turkey the link is pretty direct. The film shows her campaigning against legal changes introduced by Turkey’s autocratic president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and features recent news footage of a political rally in which traditional Turkish cultural ideals about the sanctity of mothers are used to imply that all women should stay at home. The film has already been praised at European film festivals, receiving multiple nominations and prizes. But in Istanbul, where a prestigious film festival is staged every year, the Turkish programmers decided the film was too provocative to screen, said Bozkurt. But there is hope, she maintained. And it lies not only in the way Fairweather’s film is now highlighting the issue but also in the reactions of an unexpected group of women: Turkey’s traditional, or “scarved”, women. Bozkurt believes many are now also becoming disillusioned by the restrictions placed on their lives and the low status imposed by the current regime. Dying to Divorce is now in cinemas and the UK’s official Oscars entry for ‘Best International Feature Film’ Academy AwardArchaeologists always hope for a mosaic. Roman-British sites have yielded some remarkable treasures, from writing tablets at Vindolanda near Hadrian’s Wall to curse tablets at Bath, but there is something magical about seeing tesserae – the little coloured tiles of a mosaic – emerge from beneath the soil. And few have been more remarkable than those recently found in Rutland, which depict scenes from the latter part of Homer’s Iliad. There may be debates about the skill of the mosaicist but the scenes have sequential movement and energy that we might more commonly associate with a comic strip. The first shows the duel between Achilles – the greatest Greek warrior of the war of Troy – and Hector, his Trojan counterpart. They fight on chariots: the golden-haired, highly muscled Achilles on the left, the smaller, tunic-wearing Hector on the right. Achilles is naked, cementing his status as the most heroic figure. Hector is literally smaller (even his horses look a little smaller). He is putting up a brave fight, but we’re in no doubt who is the alpha male. And the next scene proves it. Fire damage to the mosaics doesn’t prevent us seeing Hector lying dead on the ground. This is book 22 of the Iliad: the brief duel between unevenly matched opponents, which does nothing to slake Achilles’ thirst for revenge on the man who has killed his beloved companion Patroclus. Achilles ties Hector’s feet to the back of his chariot and drags his corpse around the walls of the city he has fought to defend. The final scene takes us to book 24, when Priam – the father of Hector and king of Troy – ransoms back the body of his son with treasure, though the weighing of the treasure is closer to a scene in a lost play of Aeschylus than the Homeric version. Aeschylus referred to his tragedies as slices from the banquet of Homer, and we should surely see these mosaics in a similar light. They take their inspiration from this poem, continuing a tradition which was already more than 1,000 years old when the mosaics were created. The Iliad is not just a poem to be read or heard. It’s one to be taken and held up to the light to see what hides in its shadows. It is filled with stories, some told in the briefest asides, some placed centre stage. The cast of characters is huge, and their lives extend beyond the poem: we think of it (rightly) as the great narrative poem of the Trojan war. But it is set in barely two months, in the 10th and final year of the conflict. So not only has the poem provided inspiration to those who want to retell it for well over 2,500 years. It also provides a starting point for those who want to tell stories about the buildup to the war, or its aftermath. All the tragedians whose work survives to us did this – Euripides, Sophocles and Aeschylus wrote extraordinary plays about the consequences of the war. The Rutland mosaics give us a wonderful insight into how far this poem – and plays based upon it – travelled in the ancient world: across a continent and a millennium. Did the owner of the Roman villa know the Iliad, did he even know Greek? Could he have quoted famous lines, and did he understand it? Or was it just a way to demonstrate his wealth and culture to his neighbours? Perhaps it wouldn’t matter if he didn’t understand it, so long as he could afford mosaics that depicted it. These mosaics are also a performance: look what I can afford. Roman Britain was a relatively peaceful province by the third and fourth centuries AD. And yet the mosaics show one of the cruellest moments in literary conflict: an old man trying to buy his son’s body from his killer. Priam was often remembered in the context of a Greek proverb: call no man happy till he’s dead. Life can always turn on you, in other words. Even a king of great wealth can lose it all and die in misery. So perhaps the villa owner wanted to remember to live in the moment as much as to celebrate one of the great poems of antiquity. Natalie Haynes’s books include Pandora’s Jar and A Thousand ShipsThe world has gone to hell in a handbasket. Climate change is wreaking havoc: there are fish in the hedgerows, the sea walls have burst. A far-right group called Albion is winning converts to a racist and misogynist agenda. Oh, and the traditional country house play looks more doolally than ever. All these derangements are intertwined in Manor, the clodhopping creation of the Buffini sister act – Moira (writer) and Fiona (director). Everything is expressed twice over: said and shown. Lez Brotherston’s cartoon cut-out design screams that life is askew: stained-glass windows lean at acute angles; a rickety wooden staircase seems to have collided with a stag. Clouds glower: “overwhelming sky,” someone points out. Buffini (M), who subtly suggested so much about a changing England in her screenplay for The Dig, here underlines every scrap of significance. Names clamour for resonance: a girl called Isis apparently has rejuvenating powers, while Nancy Carroll, coasting on her pinched vowels and ability to drip elegance, plays a woman born to the hunt called Diana. Speeches are utterly explicit, laying out attitudes as if serving them up on platters. The plot is part parody – stormy night, unexpected visitors, sinister stranger, sudden death, gay vicar. For this to work as a comic motor it needs to be helter-skelter hocus-pocus, but the pace is glacial. Shaun Evans has a good insinuating touch as the evil leader; Michele Austin is calmly authoritative as an NHS worker and force for good – but everyone is trapped in a draughty old pile. The Drifters Girl declares itself a superior jukebox musical from its pink neon beginning when an actual jukebox is lit up on stage as if it were a sacred relic. Jonathan Church’s sleek production goes on to show how incisive the genre can be. Exuberant, of course: on a preview night there was much shoulder rolling and bellowing to Saturday Night at the Movies among the (aaargh largely unmasked) audience. Yet the story of Faye Treadwell – the woman who made the Drifters into a brand, though being sneered at for being “a bird” and abused for being black – lands decisively, on light feet. An all-black cast play their own abusers: in England the band were asked to pay for hotel rooms before they occupied them. Adam J Bernard and Matt Henry shine. Fay Fullerton’s costumes are spot on: from the ivory sheen of Beverley Knight’s pillbox hat and waisted coat to the shine of the Drifters’ ultra-blue suits. Vitally, Knight puts the songs over as if she were building something – her own path – from them, not merely expressing herself. There’s plenty of edge, but scarcely a sob in her voice. All the better for being less torch and more flame. I was delighted to hear that SpitLip’s Operation Mincemeat, tiny but terrific when first staged two years ago, has been having such a successful run at Southwark Playhouse that it will return next year. The news coincided with the London triumph of another unlikely musical spoof: Isobel McArthur’s Pride and Prejudice* (*sort of), which was first staged at the Tron in Glasgow in 2018. McArthur leads a top-notch, top-knotted cast (Tori Burgess, Christina Gordon, Hannah Jarrett-Scott, Meghan Tyler), who give their own glint to Jane Austen: honouring her wit and adding their own – along with pineapple hedgehogs, karaoke and class consciousness. The untold labour that supports the households is acknowledged as the five women, wearing workaday petticoats and Marigolds, squeeze themselves out of the cupboard under the stairs. They transform themselves from Austen’s anonymous servants into the Bennet family and their suitors by slipping on posh frocks or military jackets. And singing: Bésame Mucho, Will You Still Love Me Tomorrow? Lizzie croons You’re So Vain to Darcy. When Lady Catherine de Bourgh sways on like a walking flowerbed, head to toe in red frills and flounces, she inevitably commands to be serenaded with a song by her young relative Chris. The patriarchy is breezily brushed aside: Mr Bennet is represented by an empty armchair, an open newspaper and an occasional puff of smoke. Crackles of resentment explode into the opening: oh the joy in the audience when the daughters swear at their maddening Mama. Ana Inés Jabares-Pita’s beautiful design goes to the core of things: a sweeping staircase; a chandelier; a crucial vase; hidden spaces; the secret life of a novel given breath. Star ratings (out of five) Manor ★ The Drifters Girl ★★★ Pride and Prejudice* (*sort of) ★★★★ Manor is at the Lyttelton, National Theatre, London, until 1 January 2022 The Drifters Girl is at the Garrick, London, until 26 March 2022 Pride and Prejudice* (*sort of) is at the Criterion, London, until 17 April 2022It’s time to treat yourself a little better and take a gentle approach to feeling good. At Follonica on the Tuscan coast, there is a train workers’ canteen at the end of the line. I’ve no idea how we found it, but my brother and I became obsessed with it a decade ago. Lunch was cheap and good, and over the years we became friendly with the proprietors. You were supposed to pay with credits from your job, but we were able to pay with cash. For a €5 supplement, you could have something similar to the langoustine pasta here. It always struck me as the most festive of dishes. I’ve included two soups, each redolent of a chalet supper, and a pasta drunk with red wine and chestnuts. These are the heartiest of winter dishes that will see you through to Christmas. Pici in red wine If you struggle to find radicchio use a couple of heads of chicory instead. Serves 4 chestnuts 200g, in their shell red onion 1 garlic 1 clove olive oil 3 tbsp bay leaves 3, fresh, cut in half radicchio 200g valpolicella ½ bottle, or another red wine pici or thick spaghetti/linguine 400g butter a little parmesan a handful, grated Heat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Score and roast the chestnuts for 10 minutes. They can also be microwaved for 3 minutes, but please do make sure you score them properly first. They needn’t be completely cooked, just peel-able. Peel. Slice both the onion and garlic very thinly. Place them in an open, low-sided pan, large enough to eventually accommodate the pasta, with the olive oil and a pinch of salt. Set over a medium heat. Cook carefully until completely soft. I’m fine with you adding a splash of water at some point should you feel the need and they threaten to catch. Add the bay and crumble the chestnuts in, too. Finely chop the radicchio and stir it in. Allow it to wilt and lose some of its brightness and bitterness. After a couple of minutes, add all the wine and turn the heat up. Simmer for 12 minutes. Drop the pasta into a large saucepan of well-salted boiling water and cook for 3 minutes less than the time stated on the packet. Drain, reserving plenty of the cooking water. Allow the pasta to finish cooking in the sauce over a low heat. It will take on the colour of the wine. Add the cooking water when necessary, ¼ of a cup at a time – terminating the cooking off the heat with freshly ground black pepper, a generous knob of butter and a handful of grated cheese. Caserecce with langoustines It is important to use the same pan throughout as it will become charged with flavour during the initial stage. Fresh whole langoustines are a proper treat, but you can substitute with frozen. If they aren’t whole, just the tails, that’s fine as long as they still have the shell on. I have tried this with homemade gnocchi too, and it was stratospheric. Serves 4 garlic 2 cloves, thinly sliced chilli 1, dried olive oil 3 tbsp langoustines 20, whole parsley a small bunch white wine 1 glass tinned plum tomatoes 400g, drained and then chopped caserecce 400g In an open, low-sided pan with a lid, large enough to eventually accommodate the cooked pasta, fry the garlic and whole chilli in the olive oil. After a minute, add the langoustines and a pinch of salt. Fry for another minute of two, turning every so often. They will smell wonderful. Now chop and add most of the parsley with the wine, and cover. Steam for 5 minutes, then turn the heat down, uncover and remove the langoustines to a plate. Add the tomatoes to the pan and simmer for 20 minutes. During this time, peel most of the langoustines, leaving a few whole for dramatic effect. Be careful as the shells are sharp. You can squeeze any juice left in the heads into the sauce. Cook the pasta in plenty of salted boiling water. Drain, reserving some cooking water, then add to the sauce with the langoustines and remaining parsley. Turn everything in the sauce, thoroughly, on a low heat, using splashes of the cooking water to loosen if necessary. Squash and fontina soup Part soup, part fondue, this unites some of my favourite winter flavours and textures. Fontina isn’t a necessity; emmental, for example, would be just as good. Serves 4 winter squash 1, about 2kg olive oil 1 tbsp garlic 4 cloves, whole but peeled thyme ½ bunch bread 2 thick slices milk 750ml nutmeg fontina 500g Heat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Peel the squash, cut in half, remove the seeds and chop into pieces. Toss in olive oil with the garlic cloves, thyme branches, salt and pepper. Roast for about 30 minutes, or until cooked, but not blackened. Tear the bread into pieces and bake with a little olive oil for 8 minutes until crisp and golden. Heat your serving bowls. Bring the milk to the boil with a grating of nutmeg. Cut the fontina into small cubes. Arrange with the bread in the bowls. Whisk the roasted squash into the hot milk until smooth(ish). Check the seasoning and pour over the cheese, which should quickly melt. Zuppa di crauti I buy sauerkraut rather than make my own. Given that you can also use tinned or jarred beans, this is a failsafe store-cupboard winter supper. If you have extra time, and like the meditative process of soaking and then cooking dried pulses, I have given you the option below. It will reward you with superior flavour. Serves 4 dried borlotti beans 250g (or 400g drained, tinned or jarred borlotti beans) fresh bay leaves 2 sage 2 sprigs garlic 3 peeled cloves, 2 whole and 1 chopped olive oil 4-5 tbsp onion 1, diced pancetta 100g slice, diced sauerkraut 360g Soak the dried beans overnight in cold water. The next day, bring them to the boil in plenty of fresh water with the bay, sage, and 2 garlic cloves. After 20 minutes, add a few tablespoons of olive oil. If the beans need topping up with water, do so, just so they’re barely covered. In another 20 minutes or so, the beans should be ready – they’ll be thick and soft. Season. Meanwhile, heat another 2 tbsp of oil in a heavy saucepan and cook the onion, pancetta and chopped garlic clove over a medium heat. When soft, add the sauerkraut and top up with cold water. Simmer for 15 minutes, then add the beans. Simmer together for a few minutes before putting a lid on the pot and allowing to sit for 5 minutes for the flavours to get acquainted. Serve. Joe Trivelli is head chef at the River Cafe, London The Observer aims to publish recipes for seafood rated as sustainable by the Marine Conservation Society’s Good Fish GuidePeople preparing to send Christmas parcels to family and friends in Europe face being caught out by post-Brexit red tape and charges that threaten to take some of the joy out of gift-giving. A warning has also been sounded that some of those who have sent gifts to the EU this year have encountered problems ranging from delays and unexpected charges to items going missing. This will be the first time most people have encountered rules that came in this year relating to VAT and customs charges applying to items being posted to the EU. The consumer organisation Which? told the Observer that its research indicates the vast majority of people know little or nothing about the new rules. “The changes brought about by Brexit have created a greater burden of customs paperwork for consumers and couriers alike,” said Adam French, Which? consumer rights expert. “You now have to attach customs declaration forms to anything you send, very clearly describing what it is and where it has originated from.” As part of the raft of Brexit changes that came in on 1 January this year, the EU now treats postal items from the UK as it did non-EU items before. Further changes relating to VAT took effect on 1 July this year. As a result, customs forms are now mandatory for all gifts and goods sent to a country outside the UK, except when sending items from Northern Ireland to the EU. In some cases, the recipient may have to pay customs or VAT charges and a handling fee before they can claim the parcel. While general items imported to the EU with a value of €22 (£18) or less are now no longer exempt from VAT, the good news for UK consumers – and for those receiving presents from them – is that gifts under €45 (£38) that are being sent to Europe remain free of VAT or charges. According to the parcel firm DPD, a gift is an item given by one individual to another where no payment is exchanged. Goods bought from a website such as Amazon or eBay and marked as a gift would not be classified as a gift under the new regulations, it added. The Post Office said people needed to make sure the “gift” box was ticked in the contents section of the customs form. It added: “For gifts over €45, any charges will be collected from the recipient on delivery as normal.” With so many new regulations in place, it is perhaps not surprising that when Which? recently surveyed some of its members, it found that half (51%) of those quizzed who were planning to send a gift to someone in the EU said they did not know anything at all about the new rules, and almost as many again (48%) felt they knew only a little. “Incredibly, only one respondent to our survey told us they feel confident in their knowledge of the new rules,” said the organisation. Worryingly, Which? found that of the 7% of its members who had sent a gift to the EU since January, 34% had experienced delays, 30% were hit by unexpected charges and 8% said their gift went missing. In early September, Joanna Harry sent six packages from her home in South Wales to her property in Andalusia in southern Spain. She booked the delivery with Parcelforce using the broker website ParcelHero. One package was returned to her a week after posting, but the remaining five were, at the time of writing, being held at Spanish customs. “I have telephoned customs numerous times, but I’ve been hung up on due to language barriers, and most of my emails – both in Spanish and English – are getting no response,” she said. “ParcelHero also avoided responsibility, saying I needed to speak to Parcelforce.” She added: “I paid more than £100 for this so-called service. My boxes contained some items of sentimental value and I’ve been failed by couriers I trusted.” A ParcelHero spokesperson told Which?: “Our customer services team is working to return all the parcels to the UK.” It has subsequently given Harry £25 credit. A Parcelforce Worldwide spokesperson told the consumer organisation: “We are currently experiencing delays to some items being delivered in Spain. Items are leaving the UK on time but are subject to some delay when being processed through Spanish customs.” The Spanish postal service ADT Postales advises that the delivery of shipments containing goods from the UK, apart from Northern Ireland, will need to be presented to Spanish customs for clearance. ADT Postales confirmed that Harry’s five remaining parcels were now in the process of being returned to her UK address.“I love the fact that we have so many African players … until the Africa Cup of Nations starts. Then it’s: ‘Oh my God!’” Jürgen Klopp is not the only Premier League manager who will have Afcon on his mind over the coming weeks. With the delayed 33rd edition of the continental showpiece due to begin in Cameroon on 9 January, planning for the absence of up to 40 players from Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang to Wilfried Zaha during one of the most intense periods of the domestic season will present a major headache for several. Much to the annoyance of Klopp and European club managers, the tournament was switched back to its usual mid-season slot after the 2019 Cup of Nations in Egypt was held for the first time during the European summer, because June and July are part of the rainy season in Cameroon. After a year’s delay owing to the pandemic it will kick off with the hosts taking on Burkina Faso in Yaoundé. Leeds, Norwich, Newcastle and Tottenham are the only Premier League clubs who will not be affected, with the rest potentially without key players for up to six Premier League matches and two in the FA Cup. With Liverpool in line to be missing Mohamed Salah, Sadio Mané and Naby Keïta for a run of fixtures that includes trips to Chelsea and Arsenal, no wonder Klopp was so opposed to the switch. He will remember what happened the last time the Cup of Nations was held mid-season. Liverpool were second to the eventual champions Chelsea at the turn of the year in 2016-17 but they failed to win either of their Premier League fixtures, lost in the semi-final of the League Cup to Southampton and were knocked out of the FA Cup by the Championship leaders Wolves. Mané missed only two Premier League matches after being flown back on a private jet just in time to face Chelsea hours after missing the penalty that had eliminated Senegal in a quarter-final shootout against Cameroon. Fifa regulations stipulate that players must be released by their clubs on 27 December – 13 days before the tournament’s first match. That means Salah, Mané and Keïta could play in Liverpool’s Premier League game against Leeds on Boxing Day but would not be available for the trip to Leicester two days later. However, there is a possibility that some could be given dispensation to join up with their national squads at a later date depending on what can be agreed with their clubs. Discussions are believed to be ongoing, with Chelsea wanting Édouard Mendy and Hakim Ziyech to face Liverpool at Stamford Bridge on 2 January before joining up with Senegal and Morocco respectively. Klopp will hope he can persuade the Egyptian FA to allow Salah to arrive as late as possible. “In the past because the Afcon was in the winter it was really a reason not to sign an African player because you would lose him for four weeks in the middle of the season,” he said in June 2019 in an interview for my book Made in Africa: the history of African players in the Premier League. “That was something we had in our minds always.” The return to a mid-season competition could be reflected in the fact that the number of African players in the Premier League (46) this season has fallen since the peak of 59 in 2007-08. The vast majority are expected to be in Cameroon. Brighton and Leicester may be grateful for Zambia’s failure to qualify, leaving the summer signings Enock Mwepu and Patson Daka at their disposal – although those clubs will be planning for the absence of the key midfielders in Yves Bissouma and Wilfred Ndidi respectively. Ndidi and his clubmate Kelechi Iheanacho are among seven Nigerians – more than any other nation – who could be called up from English clubs by the long-serving German manager Gernot Rohr, who is seeking to build on third place last time. Watford have three Super Eagles in Peter Etebo, William Troost-Ekong and Emmanuel Dennis, and are also facing the prospect of losing Senegal’s Ismaïla Sarr and Adam Masina of Morocco for a crucial period that includes league fixtures against fellow strugglers Norwich and Newcastle. Crystal Palace supporters’ hopes that Zaha’s request not to be selected for Ivory Coast’s World Cup qualifiers this month could mean he is available to Patrick Vieira in January were dashed when the 29-year-old clarified his intentions to take part in Afcon, although his country’s defeat by Cameroon in his absence means the Elephants will not be in Qatar next year. Vieira is also likely to be without Cheikhou Kouyaté, Jeffrey Schlupp and Jordan Ayew, and his Arsenal counterpart Mikel Arteta will not be able to call on Aubameyang, Thomas Partey, Mohamed Elneny or Nicolas Pépé. Riyad Mahrez’s departure to play for Algeria may not be keenly felt by Manchester City given he has started only twice in the Premier League. Mahrez led Algeria to victory at the last tournament in Egypt and was a key component of the City team that won the title last season. In this campaign he has been a regular in the Champions League. With that tournament’s knockout stages due to begin on 15 February, nine days after the Afcon final, at least he and West Ham’s Saïd Benrahma will definitely be back to what could by then be a very different-looking Premier League table.Financial crises are a really bad idea. We learned that in the UK with the 2008 banking crisis. It doubled our national debt and was followed by a decade of lost earnings growth. But banks going under contributes to grim politics, too. That’s the lesson from some economic and political history contained in new Bank for International Settlements’ research. It examines Germany’s 1931 banking crisis and the link to the rise of the Nazis. In July that year, the country’s second largest bank – Danatbank – failed, triggering a bank run, financial crisis and big income falls. Areas whose firms were most exposed to Danatbank saw bigger economic declines. But those cities also saw larger increases in the Nazi vote share in 1932. While other banks went bust, it was exposure to Danatbank in particular that contributed to rising Nazi support, with the bank’s Jewish manager, Jakob Goldschmidt, a target for Nazi propaganda. Pre-existing attitudes also mattered. Places with a history of antisemitism saw stronger radicalisation after this shock and the impact persisted after the Nazis came to power. Areas harder hit by the banking crisis had more pogroms and deportations during 1930s Germany. I suspect you already knew this, after 2008, but avoiding banking crashes is a really good idea. So is understanding how economic outcomes and social attitudes sometimes come together with toxic results. Torsten Bell is chief executive of the Resolution Foundation. Read more at resolutionfoundation.orgIt takes a while to register the bullet holes that decorate each signpost along the high road out of Ajaccio, Corsica’s capital. Maybe it’s the distracting octogenarian tailgating wildly in his battered Renault van, or a lack of sleep courtesy of the overnight ferry from Toulon, but as we climb high into the country’s soaring central mountain range, it becomes impossible to ignore the omnipresent, disfigured signposts. Perhaps I shouldn’t have been surprised, given Corsica’s surprisingly violent (surprisingly recent) past. This year my wife, Tess, and I decide to avoid airports, pack the car and hit the road for our holiday. No-fly vacations are seeing a boom in popularity. Increasing awareness of the Earth’s fragility combined with the pandemic’s influence on global travel has seen holidaymakers switch to the road and rail networks, and since 2020 the Global Sustainable Tourism Council has noted a marked move “towards ‘slow’ travel by car and train”. Travelling by car also means the dog can come. Corsica is the nearest, hottest, most affordable option, so we take the Eurotunnel to Calais and point the car south for our crossing from Toulon to Ajaccio. Choosing to drive rather than fly reduces the holiday’s CO2 footprint, but there are other benefits to taking the slow route. The journey becomes part of the adventure, we see more of France and – for the first time in 18 months – we are masters of our own destiny; it’s hugely restorative. We stay overnight at Nuits-Saint-Georges, in Burgundy. Some of the world’s most famous wines are crafted within a few acres of this small town among steep hills coated in ripening vines. At the unassuming Hôtel-Bar de l’Étoile, we enjoy a cold beer, a bottle of Château de Premeaux from just down the road, and a fantastic boeuf bourguignon. The next day we push on south, the temperature increasing as our latitude decreases and the traffic building as we edge past Lyon, Orange and into the more arid landscape of Provence. The scent of pine resin, baked asphalt and salty air greet our arrival at the Mediterranean, before our overnight ferry from Toulon to Ajaccio. Our ultimate destination is Cap Corse, the finger-like, 25-mile promontory that thrusts north into the Ligurian Sea at the top of the island. The journey from Ajaccio is an introduction to the Corsican driving style, a flamboyant mix of French and Italian influences. At Corte, a nasty accident on the same strip of tarmac that witnessed Henri Toivonen’s fatal rally incident in 1986 during the Tour de Corse causes a huge jam. Toivonen’s crash became one of the most famous (and mysterious) in motorsport, and ultimately contributed to the ending of rallying’s high-speed Group B class. We detour via Saint-Florent to avoid the worst of the tailback. It’s an ancient fishing port with a commanding citadel and floods of tourists. This is wine country, and at Domaine Bazzarini we buy five litres of rosé from a petrol-style pump for €12.50. It is rustic, and delicious. Cap Corse is just round the corner, so with difficulty we stop admiring our rosé and head for the tiny fishing port of Marine de Scalo, below the village of Pino, where we have an Airbnb for the fortnight. Like much of Corsica, Cap Corse feels old and, despite the stunning scenery, there’s an ancient presence to the craggy, dramatic country that feels ominous, brooding and even savage. Bullet holes start appearing in the signposts again. Corsica’s unique history created a breeding ground for violence based on an ancient honour code, and the vendetta campaigns and banditry that plagued the island for centuries were the result. The vendettas, which cost tens of thousands of Corsican lives, were largely managed out by the French government by the mid-19th century, but the last bandit, a murderer called Muzarettu, died as recently as 1952. After a life spent hiding from justice in the maquis, Corsica’s fragrant bush land, he slipped quietly into one of the island’s numerous Franciscan monasteries, made his peace with God and died of facial cancer, the only adversary he failed to outrun. Cap Corse has something for everyone, and most places are within a 45-minute drive. A car is essential for getting about (the island’s scenic railway does not extend beyond Bastia), and you’ll need cash pretty much everywhere. Centuri, a small fishing port, boasts a wealth of seafood restaurants around a small harbour (we had a great lunch at Le Langoustier). Gastronomes may prefer Michelin-starred Le Pirate in Erbalunga. In the same village is the charming, old-world Hôtel Castel Brando, which we discovered by accident when seeking sanctuary from an enormous dog that had started its own vendetta against our own. The dramatic coastline offers limitless swimming spots, but our favourite one was the small, pebble beach at Marine de Scalo. West-facing, this lovely spot gets the full effect of the incandescent evening light, and is framed by a dilapidated convent, a slowly collapsing Genoese watchtower and a sprinkling of grey, stone dwellings. These severe buildings are typical of Corsican architecture, and seem to grow out of the rock they’re built from. The harbour’s tiny bar (Buvette U Paradu) serves local chestnut beer, meats and cheeses, and most evenings the patron plays the guitar and sings as the sun sinks over the horizon. Not for the faint-hearted, the D80 coastal road that cuts down the west coast of the Cap Corse offers stunning views and a sheer drop to the sea. The family mausoleums dotted across the countryside are magnificent, and you’ll need to stop frequently at the roadside stalls and shops selling traditional Corsican cheese (brocciu) and honey. The latter, born of the macquis nectar but classified in six variants, depending on when it was made and with what, is particularly worth stopping for and parting with your cash. By mid-September our fortnight is up. The leaves on our Airbnb’s plane tree have moved from green to orange, and from rustling in the sea breeze to rattling and clattering as they harden and die. Our return journey starts with a 4am ferry from Bastia to Nice, docking in the early afternoon. The overnight option of our outbound route is better, the boat best experienced in an unconscious state. We spend the night at Saint-Raphaël, west of Nice, and swim off the rocks in the evening sun, aware of an autumnal chill as we watch superyachts crawl up the coast towards Monaco, already mourning our holiday as it moves into its closing stages. We enjoy a final dinner of steak and grilled sea bream, before an early night in preparation for the journey home. The drive north offers the chance to say a long goodbye to the holiday. We don’t miss the abrupt, disorientating end to a trip flying provides. Reinvigorated by the salty, rugged, Corsican landscape, and the privilege of getting to know France at our own pace as we travel through the country under our own steam, it feels like the slow way is the best way. Route planner Outbound London to Eurotunnel, Folkestone crossing to Calais from £91 one way Calais to Nuits-Saints-Georges 360 miles, 5.30hrs Nuits-Saints-Georges Stay: Vign’Appart (vignappart.com), from €99, central pet-friendly flats Eat Hôtel-Bar de l’Étoile (hotel-restaurant-letoile.com), or pizza at I Bravi Ragazzi Nuits-Saints-Georges to Toulon 338 miles, 5.20hrs Toulon to Ajaccio Overnight ferry (corsica-ferries.co.uk), from €97.98 one way, pet-friendly cabins available Ajaccio to Saint-Florent 96 miles, 2.50 hrs Saint-Florent Eat: Restaurant MaThy’S Stock up at E Leclerc, one of the last supermarkets before Cap Corse. You’ll also need a stock of cash, as few restaurants and independents in Cap Corse take cards Saint-Florent to Pino 27 miles, 1.17hrs Pino Stay: Airbnbs and guesthouses from £51 a night. Eat: Buvette U Paradu (cash only, sandwich bar with seasonal opening and amazing sunset) Return Pino to Bastia 27 miles, 1hr Bastia to Nice Car ferry, from €83.87 one way, pet-friendly cabins available Nice to Saint-Raphaël 44 miles, 1.15hrs Saint-Raphaël Stay: Hôtel Provençal (hotel-provencal.com) from €64 room-only Saint-Raphaël-London (via Eurotunnel) 830 miles, 14hrs. Break the journey with a night in Beaune or Dijon Approximate carbon emissions from myclimate.org In a plug-in hybrid: 0.95 tonnes Flights and comparable rental car: 1.4 tonnesFrance Pierre Langlais, TV critic at Télérama: ‘Hypocrate is code red all the time – it’s very powerful’ I’ve been writing about French TV since 2005 and it feels like we’re always saying: “Ah, finally we’re making great work.” And then you get tons of shit coming out. That’s still true, but now there’s a new generation that at least wants to do things differently. And the best French shows, I believe, are brilliant. Hypocrate (Canal+) is one of them. Created by Thomas Lilti, who trained as a doctor, it’s about the everyday life of a hospital near Paris which is perennially in crisis. It highlights the lack of money and human resources in the French health system and it’s full of tension. In the first season, the senior doctors are quarantined at home so the younger doctors have to take care of the patients. In season two, the emergency ward gets flooded by water. So it’s code red the whole time. It’s very powerful, and sometimes tough to watch, but after The Bureau it’s considered the best French drama right now. L’Opéra (OCS) is a fly-on-the-wall series about the Opera Garnier in Paris. You follow three main characters – the principal dancer, whose career is in jeopardy, the dance director and a young dancer who’s black in a historically white institution. Like The Bureau, it takes something that is very mysterious and romantic and shows what’s going on behind the scenes. You have a lot of people walking around the Opera dealing with contracts and lawsuits and there are strikes and unions as well as the classic rivalries on stage. I was very surprised how well it works. You really care about the characters. Breakout TV star Tiphaine Daviot, who was very believable in [romantic drama] Une Belle Histoire. She gives this feeling of being fragile, but with a very strong and complex inner world. Given the right roles, she could be one of the best actresses of her generation. My TV moment of the pandemic so far The show that really stood out for me was Ted Lasso (Apple TV). It’s exactly what we needed – smart and feelgood but not stupidly so. South Korea Nemo Kim, culture journalist and critic: ‘After Squid Game, people are looking for the next big hit’ There’s a tremendous sense of excitement among TV creators in South Korea at the moment. Before Squid Game, attracting international investment was like getting blood out of a stone. Now people are really receptive and looking for the next big hit. DP is a compelling military drama that was number one on Netflix in South Korea a couple of months ago. DP stands for “Deserter Pursuit”: a South Korean military unit that chases down soldiers who go AWOL. Praised for its realistic portrayal of military life –the bullying, the substandard living conditions – it has a strong cast. Jung Hae-in plays the lead, an everyman who joins the unit and gets PTSD. It’s clever casting because, with his K-pop star looks, he has a huge female following in Korea. Move to Heaven (Netflix) is about a young man with Asperger’s who inherits a cleaning service from his late father – specifically cleaning up after dead people, including suicides and murder victims. The show mixes his story with those of the dead people, told through photos and other possessions they leave behind. It’s really rare for Korean TV drama to focus on death and this show is also notable for centring on the lives and deaths of the “lowest of the low” in society. It sounds depressing, but I found it quite the opposite. It made me think that time is really limited and we need to focus on the precious things in life. Breakout TV star Lee Je Hoon, excellent in Taxi Driver, is incredibly versatile and crosses genres with ease. My favourite TV moment of the pandemic I really enjoyed Taxi Driver (SBS), an action thriller about a firm that specialises in helping ordinary people who have been wronged get revenge. It’s a realistic portrayal of how victims suffer in various dark corners of South Korean society. India Mini Anthikad Chibber, The Hindu: ‘The first season of Sacred Games burned everyone’s eyeballs’ TV in India used to be either soap operas or musicals. But just in the past year or two, some really good dramas have been released. Sacred Games is India’s first Netflix original series. It’s based on Vikram Chandra’s sprawling 2006 novel. When the book came out, I remember asking Chandra about the chances of it being adapted – it seemed impossible to condense the whole thing into a two-hour film. But now, with the rise of long-form TV, it totally makes sense. It’s about a policeman in Mumbai who gets a call from a gangster saying that he has 25 days to save the city. Then it goes back in time to tell how the gangster got into his life of crime and how he’s connected to the policeman’s father. It is a first for India in many ways: it has a bona fide movie star in Saif Ali Khan as the policeman (movie stars would never normally go from the big screen to the small); it’s dark and violent (the opening scene features a dog being thrown out of a building) and it delves into politics, crime and the police force. The cast is great, the writing is fantastic. It caught everybody’s imagination and the first season burned everyone’s eyeballs. The Family Man is a fun thriller about a regular-seeming guy with a wife and two kids, who’s actually a spy working for an ultra-secret Indian intelligence agency. His family think he’s just some office drone, while actually he’s out there saving the world. Then he’ll get a call from the principal saying his daughter hasn’t turned in her school work. It’s light but also thrilling and great to binge-watch. Breakout TV star Jaideep Ahlawat, who plays Inspector Hathiram Chaudhary in the crime thriller Paatal Lok, is brilliant. My TV moment of the pandemic The White Lotus for its luxury setting as well as its satirical tone – a swanky resort in Hawaii at a time when one could not travel was very tempting. Australia Luke Buckmaster, Guardian Australia: ‘Wakefield has this air of unpredictability… the characters periodically break into song’ Wakefield (ABC) is a story about mental illness and the volatility of the mind. It’s told from the perspective of a nurse called Nik, played by Rudi Dharmalingam, who works at a facility in a beautiful part of New South Wales. There’s a mystery around whether the protagonist is losing his mind and the show teases out issues rooted in his past and his psyche. It sounds like quite a heavy, One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest-style drama, but it’s told with real elegance and style, with really great performances. And it’s got this air of unpredictability. It takes you by surprise, when the characters periodically break into song. The documentary The Beach, though it was made in 2019, seemed bizarrely well suited to the pandemic. It follows the respected Indigenous Australian film-maker Warwick Thornton (Samson and Delilah) as he spends time on his own at a beach shack in the middle of nowhere talking to the chickens, monologuing about times past and pivotal moments in his life. In a strange and lovely way, it’s also a cooking show as we watch him prepare fish that he caught himself and so on. It’s got a rustic, back-to-nature charm and looks really cinematic. Stateless taps into Australia’s history of housing refugees and asylum seekers in detention centres in the middle of nowhere. The show oscillates between staff and detainees at the facility, as they riot or get caught up in their own personal dramas. It adds a rich, dramatic layer to a political discussion that has gone on in Australia for a long time around the ethics (or lack of ethics) involved in putting people who haven’t been found guilty of any crimes behind bars and stripping away their rights and basic dignities. Breakout TV star In ABC’s cunningly scripted comedy Why Are You Like This, Olivia Junkeer is excellent as Mia, who uses modern sensitivities to further her own agenda and distract from her rampantly immoral and unprofessional behaviour. It’s a sharp, prickly, attitude-filled performance. My TV moment of the pandemic The ending of The White Lotus, the most essential show of the pandemic. It is outrageously memorable, combining gross-out comedy with the resolution of a mystery teased out across its entire arc. Germany Andreas Borcholte, Der Spiegel: ‘Despite being about young people and drugs, it’s great fun’ Comedy is a mainstay in German television but it’s usually pretty dull. How to Sell Drugs Online (Fast) (Netflix), which has just launched its third season, is great, though – very fast and very funny. It’s about a young nerd who is starting an online shop for a school project. When his girlfriend comes back from a year in the US talking about MDMA, he gets the idea to sell drugs on the dark web. It’s good hearted, and despite being about young people and drugs, it’s not very dark. It’s great fun. The Mopes (Ufa) is another clever comedy about a figure personifying depression, played by Nora Tschirner, who develops compassion for the struggling musician she’s assigned to. He’s not supposed to see her, but suddenly he becomes aware of her whispering things such as “You’re worthless” in his ear. Then they develop a friendship. It’s funny and sarcastic and the production design is great, which is pretty unusual for German comedy series. Due to the international success of shows such as Dark, there’s a lot more money going around for German fantasy and sci-fi series. Tribes of Europa (Netflix) is pretty small-scale compared to similar American shows but it’s surprisingly good, with a younger audience in mind. After a climate apocalypse, Europe is divided into tribes, with Berlin as a centre of evil forces. When a family from a smaller tribe gets split up, three siblings have to find their way home through a Mad Max-like landscape. Breakout TV star Emilio Sakraya, who starred in 4 Blocks and was the lead in Tribes of Europa. He’s on his way to German film-stardom playing the notorious rapper Xatar in the forthcoming biopic Rheingold from director Fatih Akin. My pandemic TV moment Two very popular German TV entertainers, Joko Winterscheidt and Klaas Heufer-Umlauf (Joko und Klaas) won 15 minutes of airtime on the private broadcaster ProSieben to do whatever they wanted. They ended up with a six-hour documentary showing the work of nurses in an intensive care unit. It was fascinating, heartbreaking, shocking – and very brave. Nigeria Adesola Ade-Unuigbe, BellaNaija.com: ‘Think Peaky Blinders in Nigeria’ King of Boys: The Return of the King is a TV sequel to the 2018 movie King of Boys and the first original Netflix series from Nigeria. It tells the story of underworld kingpin Eniola Salami (Sola Sobowale) who wants to become governor of Lagos state, and her furious scramble to outwit her enemies. The acting, production and sheer expertise of the seven-part series were remarkable, and it was great to have so much of the dialogue in native languages. It was the right mix of gangsterism and drama. Think Peaky Blinders in Nigeria. Castle &amp; Castle (Netflix) is a drama series set in a Lagos law firm run by a couple, Remi and Tega Castle, who are struggling to keep their firm afloat. The cases offer a fascinating glimpse into the lives and cultures of Nigerians. Top-notch acting, developed characters and complex storylines make this a binge-worthy show. I love how The Men’s Club (Red TV) has set the pace for web shows in Nigeria. The story follows the everyday lives of four male characters as they engage with women, business and the hassles of living in Lagos. Full of drama and humour, it is a super-relatable series which has gained a cult following. Breakout TV star Toni Tones, who stars as a younger Eniola Salami in King of Boys: Return of the King. She had to learn the Yoruba language for the role and spent a few months living with Sola Sobowale to pick up her mannerisms. My TV moment of the pandemic All that viral footage of kids and pets crashing live broadcasts from home – such as when Trivago CEO Axel Hefer’s grumpy son walks in on his CNN interview. Israel Hannah Brown, Jerusalem Post: ‘Nelly Tagar is probably the funniest actress I’ve ever seen’ So many Israeli series have been huge international hits in recent years – Fauda, Shtisel, Tehran, among many others – but there are a few great shows that haven’t been picked up or remade yet… Sisters is a comedy about three adult sisters whose lives fall apart when their parents go travelling. They are incapable of managing by themselves. The youngest is a miserable soldier whose boss underestimates her. The oldest, a schoolteacher, has become a lesbian and is trying to deal with her ex. The middle sister – played by Nelly Tagar, probably the funniest comic actress I’ve ever seen – can’t get a job and is completely hopeless. There have been three seasons so far but I feel like it could go on for ever, because the characters will never straighten out their lives. I think Line in the Sand (Keshet 12) will be remade. It’s a fact-based crime drama starring Tsahi Halevi, set in Nahariya, a small coastal city in the far north of Israel, where criminal gangs became very prevalent and infiltrated the police force. It’s an action story, and gets a bit violent at times, but it’s very suspenseful. Autonomies (Hot 3) is a dystopian series set in a future where Israeli society is divided into two separate territories, one secular and one religious. It’s an exaggerated version of the existing conflicts. It becomes a detective story when a girl is kidnapped from one side to the other. It’s quite noirish and has some really great actors. You can definitely recognise yourself on one side or other of the divide. Breakout TV star Shahar Tavoch was in Valley of Tears (Apple TV), a very strong series about the Yom Kippur war. He plays a young, nerdy guy who figures out that there’s going to be a huge battle but nobody will listen to him. It was very real, his performance. It really got to me. My TV moment of the pandemic The scene in The Queen’s Gambit where she’s in her bath when she’s meant to be playing a chess game and then comes down wearing this great black-and-white outfit. I just completely forgot about everything else that was going on in the world. That’s a sign of great storytelling. Mexico Mauricio González Lara, Letras Libres: ‘Un Extraño Enemigo is very noir, immersive and unsettling’ Mexico is one of the world’s most celebrated producers of soap operas, and they still dominate our TV, but there have been some notable exceptions in the past few years. Un Extraño Enemigo (An Unknown Enemy) (Amazon Prime) is a thriller about the political manoeuvrings behind the student protests in 1968 that ended in a mass killing perpetrated by government forces in Mexico City. It’s told in a very noir kind of way, the atmosphere is immersive and unsettling, and it features an amazingly calibrated performance by Daniel Giménez Cacho as the official who pulls the strings behind the curtain. It’s very dark but it has a lot of humour and you don’t need to know anything about Mexican history to really enjoy it. Somos (Netflix), which means “We are”, is about a 2011 massacre of basically a whole town in northern Mexico by the Zetas drug cartel. It’s closer to The Wire than Scarface or Narcos, because it shows how the town struggles with the drug dealers in everyday life and you see how the different parts of the whole structure interact under the cartel threat. It was written by the novelist Fernanda Melchor, so it’s very dark and feverish and engrossing. For something closer to a soap opera, there’s Luis Miguel (Netflix), a biopic of the amazingly charismatic pop singer, who is like the Mexican Frank Sinatra combined with Elvis. The show was a huge phenomenon in Mexico. Breakout TV star Harold Torres in ZeroZeroZero plays a guy from the army who breaks bad and becomes a narco. Paul Schrader wrote in his Facebook page that Torres reminded him of [the celebrated Japanese actor] Toshiro Mifune. It’s a great performance. My TV moment of the pandemic I caught myself postponing the viewing of all the masterpieces on my to-watch list for the endless consumption of food shows such as MasterChef, Top Chef, Hell’s Kitchen, The Great British Bake Off and [Spanish global gastronomy show] Me voy a comer el mundo. Italy Chiara Lagana, freelance culture writer: ‘Mattia Torres exposes Italian society with bittersweet irony’ La Linea Verticale (Rai 3) is about a man undergoing a medical operation to remove a tumour. It is autobiographical: director Mattia Torre was himself dealing with cancer (he died, aged 47, shortly after the series came out). Torre was a genius. He had a way of exposing our flaws and critiquing Italian society with wit and bittersweet irony. The show is really funny and devastatingly sad at the same time. Niccolò Ammaniti is a very well-known Italian author who has branched out into directing. Anna (Sky Italia), adapted from his own book, is about a virus that kills only adults, so kids have to finda way to survive on their own. It’s set in Sicily, which no one ever thought could be the location for a dystopian drama. Il Cacciatore (The Hunter) (Rai 2) is about a magistrate fighting the Sicilian mafia in the mid-90s. It’s not black and white – it doesn’t tell you that Mafia people are pure evil – and it’s really compelling. It reminded me a bit of Narcos, in the way it’s made, and it immerses you in Sicily like Gomorrah did for Naples. Breakout TV star Giulia Dragotto, who plays the title role in Anna, is just 14. Her career was launched by the show. Hopefully we’ll be seeing a lot more of her. My TV moment of the pandemic I got a lot of solace from rewatching all of Mad Men, one of my favourite shows. Spain Natalia Marcos, El País: ‘Antidisturbios is Spanish TV at its best’ 2020 was a great year for Spanish TV drama. For me, the best was Antidisturbios [Riot Police] (Movistar+), created by Rodrigo Sorogoyen and Isabel Peña. It follows a riot police unit in Madrid, starting with an eviction that goes wrong before turning into a story about high-level corruption. The directing and the writing are brilliant, very realistic, with really gripping action scenes and outstanding performances. An example of Spanish TV at its best. Also from 2020, Veneno (Atresmedia Player) was inspired by the real story of Cristina Ortiz, aka La Veneno, a trans woman who was very popular in Spain in the 1990s. The series, created by Javier Calvo and Javier Ambrossi, follows her story from prostitution to stardom to her death. It was revolutionary in Spain – a lot of trans people were involved on both sides of the cameras. A sweet, powerful, nostalgic and sad portrait of Spanish society in the 90s. The recent boom of Spanish TV drama is rooted in the strength of free broadcast television, the place where the big hits are born. Antena 3 is the producer of Fariña (Cocaine Coast), a crime drama based on the story of the dealer Sito Miñanco and the drugs business that flourished on the Galician coast in the 1980s, when people in the fishing industry made quick and easy money from smuggling and drug trafficking. Breakout TV star Ana Rujas is a young actress and writer who co-created and starred in the drama Cardo (Atresplayer Premium), about a woman’s existential crisis following an accident. Her acting is so powerful and her voice as creator is so interesting that she’s definitely someone to watch. My TV moment of the pandemic I loved the pandemic comedy special of Mythic Quest on Apple TV+. It took advantage of lockdown limitations, with a smart use of the screens and videoconferencing. It reflected very well the loneliness, anxiety and uncertainty most people felt at the beginning of the pandemic. And it was hilarious.Just after you enter the Cohen Quad, a building designed by Alison Brooks Architects for Exeter College, Oxford, a perspective of wooden arches recedes before you. They are planar and skinny, like a succession of stage flats, and allow sunlight to filter from the left. The arches pause, then start again in the distance, now made of concrete, lit from the right and aligned at a slightly different angle. The effect is inviting and mysterious, with an enigmatic scale that’s a bit Alice in Wonderland. It’s an elegant rabbit hole. The arches’ rhythm frames irregularities that you might not immediately notice. The floor slopes down at first, following the fall of the land in this particular location. There’s a subtle dilation in the wooden enfilade – the arches get higher and wider in the middle of the sequence – and a corresponding contraction in the concrete ones. They shrink in the middle of their run. The architecture is playful, free and enjoyable. Pleasure is taken in building materials and volume and light, and in the ways of putting them together. The purpose of the project is to expand the 700-year-old college, whose historic site in the centre of the city has no room for expansion. The newer building, half a mile away, has accommodation for 90 undergraduate and postgraduate students, an auditorium, seminar rooms and a cafe, as well as a basement archive for the college’s collections of manuscripts and old books. Cohen Quad is a self-sufficient satellite – students can live, eat, socialise and study here – but also close enough to the ancient mothership for them to go easily from one to the other. It’s on a site formerly occupied by Ruskin College, which has relocated elsewhere, whose only-fairly-good 1913 facade and part of its flanking walls have been retained. If this is a manoeuvre beloved of cynical developers – keep the historic skin and gut the rest – here it is justified by the result, to free up space for a generous and open building, which manages to get a lot out of a limited amount of volume. It achieves an abundance of internal personalities: places that are expansive or intimate, introverted or outward looking, high, low, bright, shadowy, materials that are natural or machine-made, sculpted, hollowed-out, assembled, jointed, welded. Brooks, who is an architect best known for award-winning housing schemes in Cambridge, Harlow and the London borough of Brent, says that the idea is to “draw students out of their rooms”, to “give them choices where to work” and to make “every space a different kind of gathering space”. What you notice most on the outside is a big, scaly roof, clad in diamond-patterned stainless steel, rounded off at its angles, which wraps down over the walls. It is meant to make the building feel like a big house, enveloping and sheltering, riffing on the eventful skylines of Oxford’s collegiate buildings, while also referring to the arts and crafts style of decoration that was inspired by William Morris, who studied at the college. The roof is a bit dragony too, which might have pleased another Exeter alumnus, JRR Tolkien. Otherwise, the exterior is clad in pale, respectful stone of a kind of which the city has plenty. Two U-shaped courts are formed, each open on one side, conceived as less inward-looking versions of the traditional Oxford quadrangle. One faces towards the gardens of neighbouring Worcester College, the other towards a domestic-scaled street that runs along one side of the Cohen Quad’s site. The wooden arcade runs down one side of one of these courts, the concrete along the other. Together they form a central spine off which you can reach the main functions of the building. In the centre, in the pause between the two arcades, is a “learning commons”, an open, multilevel area where students can and do sit down with their laptops or play with their phones or chat or gaze out the windows or do whatever helps their intellectual cogs to turn. The architecture gets most boisterous in the auditorium, a place of pushing and pulling and lightness and oomph. It has a vault in two halves, with a low bulbous section hanging in defiance of gravity from a soaring convex part, both of them formed in a freeform timber gothic of wooden struts and ribs. The students’ rooms are calm, made with enduring materials including cherry wood and concrete, with an additional little window for casting daylight on to a built-in desk. Fellows’ rooms on the top floor have high, curved ceilings that follow the shape of the dragon roof. The design helps you feel where you are, whether under the roof or at ground level or in a place hollowed out of the earth, and keeps giving you views out to the modest terraces and grand institutions around. It also places you in time, with its references to the quads and cloisters and stone walls of old Oxford within what is plainly a contemporary building. The Cohen Quad is not all perfect: something terrible has happened to the wall with the neighbouring garden, which looks like a cheap wooden fence, and some of the encounters of its multiple forms and materials work better than others. It has also had a bumpy ride getting here: it was mostly complete four years ago, but some problems with construction followed by the pandemic mean that it can only now be fully appreciated. But it’s a rare thing to see architecture at once so imaginative and thought through, where ideas as to how people might live and work together shape everything from the big roof to a little desktop window. The Anniversary Building for another Oxford college, St Hilda’s, also plays with tradition. Here, the idea was to make the most of an asset – the college’s long and verdant frontage on to the River Cherwell – while remedying a weakness, which is to unify what was a straggle of existing buildings. So the architects Jay Gort and Fiona Scott, who, like Brooks, have some well-considered housing projects to their name, have designed a long, cranked block that echoes the river’s meander and added an entrance tower with a crown-like top. They have created a pavilion for events and lectures on the water’s edge, whose glazed walls allow you to enjoy the views. A newly re-planted landscape runs between the buildings. Like the Cohen Quad, the Anniversary Building plays with history and building materials, while providing such things as student rooms, common rooms and spaces for teaching and functions. The notion here is that the old form of the quadrangle has been unfolded, such that you get a riverside garden rather than the traditional enclosure, while still making a place that is sheltered and reflective. The plain brickwork of the long block gets scalloped and frilly at the top, such that it nicely catches light and shadow. From time to time the metalwork breaks out into patterns of oak leaves. It’s not quite the tour de force that is the Cohen Quad – the interiors are a more familiar affair of white-painted plasterboard – but it is still a thoughtful and civilised piece of design. All of which leaves me wishing there was more work like this outside the privileged enclaves of Oxford. It certainly helps that a venerable institution such as Exeter College can attract funding from someone such as the venture capitalist and philanthropist Ronald Cohen, but it’s not all about money. Alison Brooks argues that, at a construction cost of £30m for about 6,000 square metres of accommodation, the building that she designed is not outrageously expensive. More important, she says, is the lack of a corporate mentality that believes that places of education should be built like office blocks. Commissioning in Oxford probably has much to do with self-confidence and a sense of keeping up with the past. But there is no fundamental reason why the qualities of buildings such as the Cohen Quad and the Anniversary Building can’t be more widely available. Meanwhile, they should be enjoyed for the achievements they are.Retellings of classical myths may be all the rage in publishing but, as Charlotte Higgins notes in the introduction to Greek Myths, her own erudite and exhilarating collection, it’s a trend as old as the stories themselves. Though certain versions came to dominate, there was no canonical account of “the Greek myths”, even in antiquity. As she puts it: “Bubbling, argumentative diversity is everywhere in classical literature.” As early as the 5th century BC, Euripides was using these dramas as a lens through which to view his own times more clearly, and their enduring scope for mapping extremes of the human experience continues to lure sharp writers. “The Greek myths are the opposite of timeless: they are timely,” writes Higgins, the Guardian’s chief culture writer. What is relatively new is the way in which female mythological characters are now being placed at the centre of narratives in which they’ve traditionally been peripheral. Taking her lead from the likes of Pat Barker and Madeline Miller, Higgins’s Greek Myths: A New Retelling is narrated by female characters. Or rather, it’s woven by female characters, because to give voice to this very 21st-century impulse, she uses a classical literary convention known as ekphrasis, or the telling of tales through descriptions of striking works of art – in this case, tapestries. The words “text” and “textile” share a common Latin root, and throughout antiquity there was a persistent connection between the two. Higgins seeks to reassert it here, depicting Helen of Troy sitting at her loom, weaving images of the war for which she was a pretext – “there was always an excuse for war, some symbol or stand-in. It was often a woman.” The Athenian princess Philomela, her tongue cut out, gives an account of rape and imprisonment through the stories she laces into the border of a tapestry that later inspires a gruesome denouement. And a mortal named Arachne challenges the goddess Minerva to a tapestry-making contest. The collection features eight stories in all, its other weaver-narrators including Athena, inventor of the loom, and Penelope, who, still awaiting Odysseus’s return after 20 years, puts off pushy suitors by telling them she must first finish making her father-in-law’s shroud (every night she unravels her day’s work). Together, these women and goddesses beckon us into a land of magic and monsters, impossible tasks and serpentine journeys, while simultaneously underscoring the importance of weaving – generally women’s work – in the classical world. Gusseted with a map, family trees, notes and glossaries, this feminist corrective oddly recalls the kind of old-fashioned mythological compendia that Higgins grew up with. She first fell under the spell of the myths when an older brother bought her a copy of Kenneth McLeish’s Children of the Gods. Initially, she suggests, it was the pictures that enthralled her – emphatic illustrations by Elisabeth Frink that exude dark solidity. Higgins’s own volume is illustrated by the Turner prize-winning Chris Ofili, whose drawings are charming and airy, suggestive in spirit of Matisse’s pencil sketches. While they undoubtedly beautify an already alluring object, the deeper Higgins leads the reader into her forest of tales, the less necessary they feel. Jessie Burton’s retelling, Medusa: The Girl Behind the Myth, is aimed at YA readers, and there’s a graphic novel vibe to its bold jacket, from which its protagonist stares out, defiant and compelling (only beneath the dust jacket are those legendary asps visible). Within are illustrations by the Northumberland-based Olivia Lomenech Gill, an artist whose work at its strongest has something of Frink’s about it. Her full-page colour images harmonise perfectly with a text that, though not always as subtle as it could be, seizes from the very first sentence, its prose pulsing with irresistible, rhythmic energy. Burton’s Medusa addresses the reader directly. Following her rape by the sea god Poseidon – for which Athena punished Medusa by turning her into a gorgon – she fled with her winged sisters to an island where, full of rage and self-loathing, she grows ravenous for connection, “a girl on the edge”. She is four years into her exile when a beautiful young man and his dog land on the island. He is Perseus, and he has been sent, against his will, to kill the mythical creature she has become. Adding some canny twists and turns, Burton uses Medusa’s story to ruminate on themes ranging from the trauma of sexual assault and the toxicity of gender stereotyping to beauty ideals and female autonomy. Hers is a version rooted unmistakably in the #MeToo movement and, as such, it’s destined to become as much an artefact of our own age as it is an illumination of the ancient past. Throughout, its seriousness is balanced by colloquial quips (“Nothing to look at here…”, Medusa knows she should tell Perseus) and sly humour. Each of those restive snakes, for instance, acquires its own name and personality. “Once activated by a fresh imagination, the stories burst into fresh life,” Higgins observes. It’s true of not just her own luminous, astute retellings, but also of Burton’s bracing and powerful Medusa. • Greek Myths: A New Retelling by Charlotte Higgins is published by Vintage (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply • Medusa: The Girl Behind the Myth by Jessie Burton is published by Bloomsbury (£14.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyIt’s New Year’s Eve 1999 and three best friends are driving around north London in a little yellow Peugeot 205 they’ve christened the “Custard Cream”. Think Superbad, but sweeter, as Cappo (Elliot Edusah), Kidda (a scene-stealing Reda Elazouar) and Two Tonne (Jordan Peters) pursue tickets for a sold-out garage rave on the brink of a new millennium. If all goes to plan, Two Tonne will kiss his crush, Sophie (Kassius Nelson), at the stroke of midnight. It’s a bouncy, grin-inducing romp through Caribbean takeaways, designer boutiques stacked with Moschino streetwear and one ill-advised trip south of the river. Sunglasses are worn inside; a member of So Solid Crew is set on fire. The film is as irrepressibly likable as its writer-director, the broadcaster and actor Reggie Yates. The period references to toy Tamagotchis, plum-coloured church suits and garage bangers such as Roy Davis Jr’s Gabriel feel ripped directly from his own youth.Mandatory face masks are back in England. The fear factor has returned. After months of assuming the Covid-19 pandemic was all but over, the UK government has imposed new restrictions in an attempt to curb the spread of the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus. Financial markets didn’t wait for the announcement from Downing Street. It is far too early to know how big a threat the new strain poses but investors assumed the worst as soon as the reports arrived from southern Africa. Share prices fell heavily, with airline stocks the hardest hit as travel bans were re-introduced. Toughening up restrictions in the west in response to Omicron is a classic case of shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted, because for months the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have been warning rich developed countries that an end to the pandemic requires poor people as well as rich to be vaccinated. Gordon Brown has been demanding action from the G7 and the G20 since the start of the year, pointing out that the west has been stockpiling vaccines it will never use while people in Africa go unjabbed. The former prime minister’s warnings have gone unheeded. At the World Trade Organization (WTO), attempts to secure a waiver on intellectual property rights so that countries such as South Africa can produce their own jabs are backed by the US but opposed by the EU, the UK and Switzerland. Some rich countries argue that without patent protection pharmaceutical companies would have no incentive to produce new vaccines and that, in any case, poor countries lack the technical manufacturing expertise to turn the formulas into finished products. Neither the IMF nor the US is convinced by this argument and developing countries will voice their anger at “vaccine apartheid” at this week’s WTO ministerial meeting in Geneva. Whatever the outcome of the intellectual property row, it is already clear multilateralism has failed the test. If ever there was a time for some international solidarity this was it, but the west has over-promised and under-delivered. Sure, rich countries in Europe and North America have run up big bills fighting Covid-19 and are keen to reduce budget deficits, but penny-pinching on vaccines for developing countries was always going to be a false economy. Either rich nations make it possible for poor countries to increase jab rates or they have to seal themselves off from the unvaccinated parts of the world. The fact that the first cases of Omicron have already been reported in the UK shows how difficult it is to do the latter. While the first duty of any government is to ensure the safety of its own people, there are times when this can only be done by acting collectively and this is one of them. Some problems are global in nature. Last month, the World Health Organization said less than 10% of the 54 countries in Africa were on course to hit the target of vaccinating 40% of their population by the end of 2021. Other variants are likely to follow. The argument in favour of donating more vaccines or waiving intellectual property rights remains the same as it has been since the start of the pandemic: the right thing to do is also the self-interested thing to do. That’s true even in the best-case scenario where vaccines provide protection against Omicron and the new strain proves to be less transmissible than currently feared. Why? Because while some countries – such as the UK – will try to adopt a wait-and-see approach others may be more risk-averse. Austria imposed tough new lockdown restrictions last week because its relatively low (by European standards) vaccine rate had led to a surge in the number of infections. China, far more important to the global economy than Austria, tends to have a zero-tolerance approach to Covid and could decide to close factories and ports, thereby adding to already acute supply-chain bottlenecks. The dilemma facing central banks will intensify. On the one hand, additional inflationary pressure will make the case for higher interest rates stronger. On the other, the possibility that demand will weaken as consumers and businesses grow more cautious would justify doing nothing. The Bank of England’s monetary policy committee receives briefings from Chris Whitty, the government’s chief medical officer, and in the short term what he says about the health implications of Omicron could be as important as any piece of economic data in determining what happens to borrowing costs. And this is just the best case scenario. In the worst case, the new variant spreads quickly and vaccines offer only limited protection. Infection rates rise and governments feel obliged to once again impose restrictions on economic activity. Whitty thinks the public will be less willing to accept curbs on their personal freedoms than they were in the spring of 2020 and he is almost certainly right. Those who have been vaccinated think they can live their lives normally. Many of the unvaccinated – the young, in particular – feel the risk of them getting seriously ill or dying from Covid is slim (which it is). Another lockdown would not just be economically damaging; it would be ignored by many and a hard political sell. If the worst does happen, developed countries will have only themselves to blame because they had it within their gift to prevent new variants from emerging. There is still time to do the right thing. Rich nations need to ensure vaccine targets in poor countries are hit. They need to meet their financial pledges. They need to stop stockpiling vaccines they will never use. They need to reverse aid cuts. They need to waive patent protection. They need to stop being so short-sighted.Mince pie season has to be one of the best times for me; I try to eat one a day during December. After missing out last year, this year I’ll be working hard to visit as many bakeries as possible to sample theirs. When mince pies fill you with so much joy, it’s such a disappointment to be sat at the table only to find out that your mates don’t feel the same way about raisins and dried fruit. I’ve got a few like this – they’ll scoop out the filling and eat only the pastry. It makes me sad, so I thought something should be done. This is my take on an alternative mince pie for friends who don’t like them. Sherry apple pies Prep 1 hr Chill 4 hr 35 min Cook 40 min Makes 9 For the pastry 110g caster sugar 260g plain flour A pinch of fine salt 125g cold unsalted butter, cubed 1 egg For the filling 430g peeled and cored bramley apples, diced 120g golden caster sugar ¼ tsp cinnamon 20ml sweet sherry 2 heaped tbsp cornflour Softened butter, for greasing Demerara sugar, for sprinkling For the pastry, put all the dry ingredients in a large bowl or the bowl of a stand mixer/food processor and mix well. Add the butter, mix until breadcrumbs form, then add the egg and a splash of water, and mix again until a dough forms; add another splash of water, if need be. Knead gently until smooth, then shape into a disc, wrap tightly and refrigerate for four hours Put the apples, sugar and cinnamon in a saucepan, stir and cook over a low-medium heat for about 10 minutes, until the apples turn translucent while still keeping their shape and the sugar dissolves. Add the sherry, then use a slotted spoon to transfer the fruit to a large bowl and leave to cool a little. Meanwhile, whisk the cornflour into the remaining appley liquid in the pan until there are no lumps, then pour into the cooked apples, stir to coat the fruit in the cornflour mixture, then leave to cool completely. To assemble the pies, generously grease nine muffin holes in a deep muffin tray, and chill for 15 minutes. Gently knead the chilled pastry, then roll it to about 4-5mm thick. Cut out nine 10cm discs for the bases and nine 6cm discs for the lids, re-rolling the scraps as needed. Press the larger pastry circles into the muffin tin moulds, making sure there are no holes. Spoon in the apple mixture, filling the cases up to ½cm from the top. Pop on the lids and fold over the edges to seal the pies. Chill for 20 minutes. Meanwhile, heat the oven to 190C (170 fan)/375F/gas 5. Pierce the top of each pie with a knife, sprinkle with demerara sugar and bake for 35-40 minutes, until golden. Remove from the oven, leave to cool for 15 minutes, then carefully unmould and eat warm or at room temperature. UK readers: click to buy these ingredients from Ocado Fiona Beckett’s drinks match These pies have got sherry in them, so it makes sense to drink sherry with them – cream sherry, for preference. Waitrose No. 1 Rich Cream Sherry (£11.99 a full-size bottle, 20%), which is made by top sherry producer Lustau, would be perfect.Romanian rabble-rouser Radu Jude takes on scolds, snitches and rightwing moralisers in this tart, teasing satire about a school teacher whose sex tape goes viral. The tripartite structure allows the writer-director to explore the drama from three angles. Jude observes, documentary-style, the current mood on the streets of Bucharest as his recently exposed protagonist Emi (Katia Pascariu) attempts to carry out her errands; another chapter sees an absurdist mock trial with her students’ parents. The cleverest part is the experimental middle section, a “short dictionary of anecdotes, signs and wonders”. A damning mini-essay about Romania’s cultural and political history, it playfully unpacks the conservative attitudes expressed by Emi’s critics.The European Union’s border agency will provide a plane within days to monitor France’s northern coastline in an attempt to stop people making the dangerous Channel crossing, as the French government insisted it would “not be held hostage” by British domestic politics on the issue. Speaking after an emergency meeting of EU ministers in Calais that excluded the UK, the French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, said France was ready for a serious discussion with Britain on illegal migration, but would not be held hostage by London’s domestic politics. Darmanin said the EU border and coast guard agency Frontex would provide a plane from 1 December to monitor France’s northern coastline. Ministers also discussed using drones and Frontex border guards, as part of wider efforts to clamp down on people smuggling gangs in northwestern Europe. France invited representatives from Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands and the European Commission to the meeting, which was called last week after 27 people hoping to claim asylum in the UK died making the perilous crossing, the biggest loss of life in the Channel since such records began in 2014. Speaking after the meeting, the EU commissioner for home affairs, Ylva Johansson, said criminal groups were operating on “an industrial scale” to smuggle people to the UK. She called for more police cooperation and efforts to return people denied asylum to their country of origin. “We need to work together with the UK to address this of course,” she added, citing the need for information exchange, intelligence sharing and a common approach to criminal gangs with British authorities. In a joint statement that focused on security, rather than humanitarian questions, ministers agreed to strengthen police cooperation, intensify information exchange and make use of EU agencies, adding they called “on the United Kingdom to follow a similar approach”. The French government has said five suspected people smugglers arrested near the Belgian border last week had bought unspecified materials in Germany. People seeking to reach the UK often come to France via Belgium to find the shortest crossing point. Sunday’s meeting focused on smuggling networks, which charge from €3,000 (£2,500) to €7,000 for the journey across the Channel. Darmanin said a car with German licence plates was seized in connection with the investigation. The UK home secretary, Priti Patel, had been due to attend the meeting but was disinvited after Boris Johnson published his proposals to tackle the issue in a letter to Emmanuel Macron that was released on Twitter before the French president had received it. Macron said Johnson’s methods were “not serious”. The French government objected to the prime minister’s ideas, including a proposal for all people who cross the Channel to be sent back to France, but also the fact the letter was made public on the social media service. The British prime minister’s call for an agreement to return asylum seekers to the EU – a right the UK lost after Brexit – “wasn’t discussed in a concrete way”, said one source. Relations between France and Britain have hit a low point, with simmering disputes over post-Brexit fishing licences and wider EU-UK relations. The diplomatic spat came as more details emerge of the people who lost their lives in the Channel last week. They included a 45-year-old woman from the Iraqi Kurdish town of Darbandikhan and her three children, a 22-year-old daughter and two sons aged 16 and seven. Most of the 27 people who drowned in Wednesday’s tragedy are believed to be Kurds from Iraq. Families in the region hope that bodies of their loved ones will be repatriated, but officials said they have yet to have confirmation of those dead from the French authorities. France says it has saved the lives of 7,800 people since the start of the year and arrested 1,500 people smugglers. The French government insists there needs to be a European solution. Ahead of the meeting the Patel spoke to her Dutch counterpart, Ankie Broekers-Knol. According to a Home Office statement, they discussed “ideas for enhanced bilateral and EU cooperation, including the need to tackle the criminal gangs that are orchestrating these deadly journeys through shared intelligence and joint law enforcement initiatives”. Both agreed that returns agreements were “essential for breaking the criminal business model”, the Home Office said. Returns agreements with third countries are a way to deport people denied the right to asylum back to their home nation. Yet research suggests nearly two-thirds of people who come to the UK in small boats are refugees. The Refugee Council found that 91% of people who travelled by boat across the Channel over an eighteen-month period in 2020-21 came from countries in the Middle East, Africa and Asia where human rights abuses and persecution were common. Also taking part in the meeting were directors from the EU border agency, Frontex, and EU police agency, Europol. EU member states can call on these agencies and the commission for emergency funds, staff and equipment, such as drones, to patrol the border. Since Brexit, the UK no longer has the option to return people seeking asylum to the EU. Under the EU’s Dublin system, member states can transfer asylum claimants back to the EU country they arrived in, or onward to another where the person has family connections.I’m sure there have been Peppa Pig World jokes in pantos UK-wide this week. But the Lyric’s is backed up by real commitment to the mock-Boris principle. In Aladdin, written by musical comic Vikki Stone, the Emperor (Kate Donnachie) is a Johnson clone – or should that be clown, given the tubby tummy and outsized shoes? Scenes set in his palace unfold in a replica of Downing Street’s much-mocked new press briefing room, where Irvine Iqbal’s Abanazar announces his nefarious plans with a PowerPoint presentation (“Next slide … next slide …”) This all comes in act one of Abigail Graham’s production, which is even more knowing than you’d expect (it opens with an ensemble refit of Blur’s Parklife: “We’re in a panto”), and more concerned with satire (flag-waving nationalism is a particular target) than the basic business of establishing likable characters with whom we want to spend time. Happily, that all falls into place post-interval, when Qasim Mahmood’s Aladdin cultivates a little more charm and Gracie McGonigal’s Wishy gets a showstopping number about the kinds of wishes genies can’t fulfil. Mind you, the singing is top-notch: Ellena Vincent’s Jasmine is particularly strong. As you’d expect of a show by a comedian, there are some choice gags: I liked that “open sesame” was only the first of several security measures needed to open Aladdin’s cave. And there is droll business with a pair of fisher’s waders, as our heroes prepare the TikTok sea shanty that will spring Jasmine from the vile vizier’s clutches. The other standout moment is the magic carpet ride, a sweet romantic encounter and a heart-in-mouth illusion that had me fielding “How did they do that?” questions from my kids all the way home. One disconcerting consequence of the characters’ increased lovableness in act two is that Boris Johnson is revealed to be a good egg after all. Oh, that he’d been trapped for a thousand years in an oil lamp instead, like his Machiavellian wingman. But not all wishes come true. Your dreams of a fun Christmas night out, on the other hand, will. Aladdin is at Lyric Hammersmith, London, until 2 January.Bertie’s of Bay This heritage clothes brand’s niche is reviving the nautical styles traditionally worn on the Yorkshire coastline where it is situated. It was started in 2016 by Matthew Pugh (“With £500 in my pocket for stock and a dream of creating something upmarket, unique and special”), who soon began working with local historians to reinvent the classic fisherman’s sweater without seams, using 100% British oiled wool, which is what people seek this Robin Hood’s Bay nook out for. The Old Bakery, Chapel Street, Robin Hood’s Bay YO22 4SQ (bertiesofbay.co.uk) Crane &amp; Kind Run by sisters Jemma Lascelles and Polly McLachlan, family lifestyle store Crane &amp; Kind stocks children’s clothing, toys and essentials “from small indie enterprises often started by women like us with a passion for creating something beautiful”, says McLachlan. As well as items which are fun, forward-thinking, sustainable and representative, the duo’s Live Kind initiative sees proceeds from their in-house-designed collection donated to children’s wards, and to create care packages for bereaved parents and survivors of domestic abuse. Market Square, Sidmouth EX10 8AR (craneandkind.com) Triangle Store Stocking Universal Works cardigans alongside Grown Alchemist toiletries and LF Markey dungarees, this Clapton store is the result of “local and loyal customers”, says founder Tory Mullen, who started it as a vintage shop in 2014 before diversifying her offering in 2017 to become one of the East End’s most popular destinations for curated cool. Mullen now also designs a line of jewellery each season, made by Karin Andreasson and also available online where minutes could easily turn into hours. 81 Chatsworth Road, London E5 0LH (trianglestore.co.uk) Not Just Another Store Featuring more than 25 international and independent brands spanning fashion, literature, art, homeware and interiors by designers from across the globe, Not Just Another Store focuses on “experiences, people and culture”, says co-founder Joel Adebayo. From emerging designers such as Sandy Liang to more established, sustainable brands like Re/Done, it’s a rich mix. “To be an independent business in the UK is a privilege and a blessing – we get to build a community of consumers who become an integral part of our mission to serve and invigorate high-street retail.” 8-13 New Inn Street, London EC2A 3PY (notjustanotherstore.com) Angela Flanders For those who want to immerse themselves in the heady world of perfumery, Angela Flanders perfumers is an immersive experience. Founded eponymously in 1985, it continues to thrive on London’s Columbia Road, now run by her daughter Kate, who presides over in-house scents, such as amber noir, bluebell and mandarin and mint. Home fragrance, skincare and therapeutics are also available in store and via its boutique-style website that beautifully mirrors the romance of its bricks-and-mortar shop. 96 Columbia Road, London E2 7QB (angelaflanders-perfumer.com) The Green and Found Describing itself as a “sanctuary of art, craft and nature,”, Green and Found sells everything from vintage planters and found objects to a colourful selection of moulded glass candles – all of which are limited edition, artisanal or hand-crafted. Founded by James Shouli and Adolfo Ramos Alicart in December 2020, it has already become an integral part of the vibrant Deal community and an online go-to, with a regularly updated website. “We wanted the shop to be a place that is thoughtful, individual and with truly personal service. And everyone in Deal has been so supportive,” says Shouli. Captain’s Garden Stables, Victoria Road, Deal CT14 7BA (thegreenandfound.com) Studio Muse Specialists in handmade vegan beauty and home fragrances, Studio Muse in Pontcanna is “a heart-led brand championing self-love and feeling good again”, says owner, and former beauty industry professional, Amy Adams. Alongside the luxurious local spa goodies, candles and diffusers, Adams delights in British-grown, fresh-cut flowers, plastic-free floral design and “spending time curating our brand to service our local community”. 1A Pontcanna Street, Pontcanna, Cardiff CF11 9HQ (studiomusepontcanna.co.uk) Last Night I Dreamt With well-known and emerging jewellery brands sitting beside each other, Nottingham boutique Last Night I Dreamt is a physical and online dreamscape for magpies. Founder Rebecca Gibbons’s raison d’être is human connection. “We experience laughter and tears, people sharing their stories and leaving our boutique happier than when they came in and with stunning sparkles in hand! I believe it’s this connection and magic that can only be found in small independents.” 6-8 Queens Street, Southwell NG25 0AA (lastnightIdreamt.co.uk) Fabhatrix Situated in the heart of Edinburgh’s Grassmarket, Fabhatrix sells hats that are handmade using British wools, felts, tweeds and cottons. You name it, it has it, from trilbies to tricorns, silk fascinators made using vintage brooches and whimsical patched top hats using upcycled Harris tweed jackets. Established by milliner Fawns Reid in 2002, it has become a city destination that prides itself on its variety as well as its wide range of sizes. 13 Cowgatehead, Edinburgh EH1 1JY (fabhatrix.com) Eye Room Run by husband-and-wife duo Tomas and Hafiya Oppedal, Eye Room is the only independent opticians in Leeds city centre. Specialising in frames from other independent optical brands, it has been bringing its brand of hygge to Yorkshire with its Scandinavian-style shop since 2015. Being independent is central to what they do, says Tomas. “We thrive on offering an alternative to those who seek to be individual, and love the connections we make with our customers.” 9 Mill Hill, Leeds LS1 5DQ (eyeroom.co.uk) Robinson’s Shoes Founded in 1954 by Billy Robinson as a shoe repair shop, Robinson’s has evolved to become a firm favourite on the Belfast footwear scene, having been taken over by son-in-law Robin Stewart. Selling classic as well as contemporary takes on traditional shoes, such as loafers, Derby and boat shoes for men and women, its own Robinson Irish Brogue remains its niche product. 25-27 Queens Arcade, Belfast BT1 5FE (robinsonsshoes.com) London Undercover Honouring the art of umbrella making in a modern context, London Undercover is the secret go-to capital independent for fashion brands and brolly aficionados alike. Hand made using traditional techniques and craftsmanship, its offering spans classic wooden-handled covers and everyday foldable options in neon greens. At its impossible-to-choose-from online shop, personalisation by way of engraved collars and leather foils allows customers to make this quintessentially British accessory extra special. 28 Lamb’s Conduit Street, London WC1N 3LE (londonundercover.co.uk) Sancho’s An early advocate of making sustainable fashion desirable, Sancho’s opened in Exeter in 2015, established by Kalkidan Legesse and Vidmantas Markevicius. Its mission was to “help people make more environmentally sound choices”, and it curated an offering of more than 100 verified sustainable fashion brands to help them do it. “We get to build a like-minded community, support brands that are changing the world and find ways to creatively represent our values both on the high street and online,” says Legesse. To complement their curated brands, they have recently launched their own line of cotton loungewear, also available on its body-positive website. 117 Fore Street, Exeter EX4 3JQ (sanchosshop.com) North Street Potters A local institution for potters and aspirational ceramicists, North Street Potters has “remained determinedly independent”, says its founder Naine Woodrow, since she set it up in 1978. Making hand-thrown tableware, she has ensured her local business has “gone from strength to strength with very many women working and training with us over the years”. Their pieces are for sale at affordable prices and not only sought out “enthusiastically” by new customers, but restaurants, too, thanks to the made-to-order option. 24 North Street, London SW4 0HB (northstreetpotters.com) Merchant &amp; Mills Founded by Carolyn Denham and Roderick Field in 2010 to shine a light on the art of sewing, handmade fabrics and pattern-cutting, this Rye shop is somewhere you can guarantee on finding a rare and unique roll of cloth, from raw linen and ikat weave to triple-stripe ticking. Meanwhile, its online haberdashery not only sells the best scissors, buttons and other tools, but also sewing patterns which come with detailed notes on what you’ll need to make your own. 14a Tower Street, Rye, East Sussex TN31 7AT (merchantandmills.com) Papersmiths Diaries, pencils and Post-its never looked so good, thanks to Papersmiths. As well as stocking niche brands from around the world in store and on its colourful website, it has its own charming line of British-made notebooks with multicoloured pages. Run by Sidonie Warren (who started the business in 2013 “with £500, lots of help from family and friends and an obsession with stationery and paper goods”), its three shops – the other two are in London – thrive off “community-driven, creative neighbourhoods”, says Warren. 21 Sydney Street, Brighton BN1 4EN (papersmiths.co.uk) Present &amp; Correct “If it’s nerdy and attractive, then it’s in!” says Neal Whittington, the graphic designer who founded stationers Present &amp; Correct in 2009. In its current Clerkenwell location (and via its ridiculously shoppable website), customers can expect to find “everything from postage stamps, old forms and labels, pencils and notebooks up to desk organisers, giant paperclips and toolboxes”, which he sources from more than 18 countries. Highlights include new and vintage office supplies and a retro line of “pick ’n’ mix” erasers. 23 Arlington Way, London EC1R 1UY (presentandcorrect.com) Janet Bell Started by husband-and-wife Janet and Sean Bell in 2007, Beaumaris-based Janet Bell Gallery &amp; Lifestyle Store sells original acrylic and watercolour artworks by Janet, depicting the sweeping vistas of the Anglesey coast, complemented by Scandinavian homeware in a nod to her Danish roots. “We love being able to support other small businesses, and work with many local independents in championing the beautiful Isle of Anglesey and what it has to offer,” she says. 11 Church Street, Beaumaris LL58 8AB (janetbell.co.uk) Born &amp; Bred Born &amp; Bred is a studio-cum-shop where customers can watch makers, artists and jewellers work, and then buy their creations. Established by silversmith Linzi Rooney, who found herself looking for company while she was freelancing solo from home with a newborn in 2014, it has become a space for people to mingle, get inspired and support each other in setting up their own independent ventures. “Our goal is to help makers take creative projects from hobbies and side-hustles to profitable, sustainable businesses,” says Rooney. 60-62 Ann Street Belfast BT1 4EG (wearebornandbred.com) House By Betty With a focus on household accessories that are “useful, beautiful and not over fussy, whether they are 100 years old or new,” House By Betty is an emporium of treasures. Founded by Lauren Treharne straight from university, it is now situated in a national building in Carmarthen, thanks to a crowdfunding effort during the pandemic, patrons of which can now bag marbled enamel mugs, rattan mirrors, bamboo rakes and wooden postcards, all of which make Treharne’s discerning mix. 17 St Catherine’s Walk, Carmarthen SA31 1GA (housebybetty.com) Form Lifestyle Store The Manchester-based Form Lifestyle Store specialises in small-batch ceramics thrown in the UK by makers who founders Elly Amoroso and Harry Williams work closely with and support. Stocking only small, independent artisans in their Northern Quarter shop and on their beautifully shot website, the pair eschew big-name brands to ensure transparency and shine a light on talented, unsung creatives. “The pieces that we stock have been made slowly and with care; with a focus on natural materials, longevity, and simplicity in design,” says Amoroso. 6 Bradley Street, Manchester M1 1EH (form-shop.com) Les Couilles du Chien “The beauty of being an independent is the freedom to offer customers a very personal edit of items from all over the world,” says Jerome Dodd, founder of antique shop Les Couilles du Chien in London’s Golbourne Road. His shop has been a destination for interior fiends since 1994. “Our motto of ‘re-use the past to create the future’ could not be more apt at a time when sustainability should be top of all our thoughts when making purchases,” he says. 65 Golborne Road, London W10 5NP (lescouillesduchien.com) Retro Vintage Founder Stuart Murray only discovered his passion for midcentury furniture four years ago, but, “It was love-at-first-sight,” he says. “I wondered if I could make enough of a living from dealing in these wonderful items to allow me to indulge my own love of design.” Fast forward to 2021 and he’s getting to do both, with a showroom in central Glasgow and the other just outside in Stewarton, where he was brought up. “It’s really nice to be bringing the business here,” he says. His website gets a weekly update, too, with original pieces by Breuer and Eames. 44-45 Magbiehill Park, Stewarton KA3 3DX (retrovintageonline.co.uk) Bound Concept Bound Concept is one of Belfast’s top spots for a “sculptural ceramic vase or lighting that serves as functional art”, says co-founder Tara Thallon. Drawing inspiration from her travels, Thallon, along with co-founder Natalie Davis, stocks items by a range of independent artists and rising stars – such as Slowdown Studio’s embroidered rugs, and Kristina Dam Studio with its minimalist cabinets and glassware – in its store and on its website, which resembles an interiors shoot of its own. “When you go to a beautiful city for the first time, it is the independent and wonderfully unique stores run by hard-working enthusiasts that you always remember,” she says. 108 North Street, Belfast BT1 1LE (boundconcept.com) Nil Living Starting off as a market stall before taking up residence in Newcastle’s Grainger Market, Lucy Ritson’s chic and colourful Nil Living emporium is the first dedicated zero-waste refill shop in the city. Loved for its liquid and food refills, including everything from hand sanitiser to washing detergent on tap, its bare-brick trendy New York-style interior puts sustainability and style side by side. “I found adapting to a zero-waste lifestyle was overwhelming, time consuming and not easy, so I founded Nil Living to give everyone the choice of a sustainable lifestyle,” says Ritson. The Grainger Market, Grainger Street, Newcastle NE1 5QW (nilliving.com) Pilea Situated in owner Lula Oatley’s “dream premises” at the top of Catherine Hill in Frome, Pilea Plants is home to classic as well as more unusual houseplants, such as the Alocasia Baginda Dragon Scale – otherwise known as the exotic elephant ear. Oatley’s MO is educating her customers “so that they feel confident taking a plant home and nurturing it. Most plants aren’t provided with the information needed to know how to keep them happy,” she adds. 16 Catherine Hill, Frome, Somerset BA11 1BZ (pileaplantshop.com) Objects of Use A trailblazer in the genre of modern hardware stores, Objects of Use could be mistaken for an architects’ or artists’ studio such is its curation of contemporary craft-led home, gardening and camping tools. Conceived by Alexis Dexter and Hazel Rattigan, the shop collaborates with independent designers to bring consciously made utensils and accessories from around the world to a UK audience, venturing to Japan, Korea, and Finland, as well as staying local. 6 Lincoln House, Market Street, Oxford OX1 3EQ (objectsofuse.com) Jacksons Nurseries Family-run Jacksons Nurseries has been a Staffordshire favourite for more than 50 years, but thanks to its incredibly comprehensive and regularly updated website that offers customers the option to buy by flower colour, flowering time, foliage type and hardiness, it has become a UK jewel. With a farm shop and a tea room, it is a great place to stop for a scone before perusing its collection of secateurs. Thorney Edge Road, Bagnall, Stoke-on-Trent ST9 9LE (jacksonsnurseries.co.uk) David Penton &amp; Son An oldie and always a goody, David Penton &amp; Son is the sort of hardware DIY store that all others are modelled on. Still trading from Marylebone Lane where it has been doing so for 167 years, it now also offers a delightful website where you can buy all the things you can’t find anywhere any more – Ajax powder, Red Buoy soap, banister brushes, or spring balance, anyone? (If they haven’t got it they will try to order it.) 64 Marylebone Lane, London W1U 2PE (pentonshardware.co.uk) The Goods Shed “Our main purpose is to be a platform or conduit for local produce for Kentish farmers, this hasn’t always been the easiest option but is our reason for existence,” says director Susanna Sait, founder of food hall The Goods Shed in Canterbury which is widely regarded as foodie Nirvana. The finest local meats and cheeses sit alongside larder staples and charcuterie delicacies – produce which Sait credits to the agility that being an independent business brings. “We have the flexibility and agility to respond positively to the issues facing food supply chain particularly the last few years,” she says – a flexibility that extends to local delivery via its well-stocked website. Station Road West, Canterbury CT2 8AN (thegoodsshed.co.uk) Mellis Cheese Established in 1993 by Iain and Karen Mellis, this family-owned institution is now run by their son, Rory. Only dealing with small-scale farmhouse cheesemakers and producers, and specialising on those from Scotland, the business prides itself on getting to know everyone who walks through their doors. “Independent businesses have a massive advantage in this sense as they can really connect with their loyal customers, which is the bread and butter of any retail business,” says Rory. “Our customers are one of the most important factors to us and we are incredibly thankful to them.” 6 Bakers Place, Stockbridge, Edinburgh EH3 6SY (mellischeese.net) The Bishy Weigh The Bishy Weigh sells hundreds of eco pantry ingredients – like dried fruit, cereal and pasta – as well as toiletries and household goods by weight, so customers can refill used containers or recycled paper bags and avoid waste by buying the amount they actually need. “We love to source our products from local suppliers and producers wherever possible,” says Alice Hildred, who started the York business in 2018, describes it as “more than just a shop, we are part of our local community”. 1 Bishopthorpe Road, York YO23 1NA (thebishyweigh.co.uk) Parish Wines What this local Walthamstow village shop doesn’t know about wine isn’t worth Googling. As well as having more than 100 different quality varieties starting at decent prices (what it calls its “bang-for-buck” wines), it also runs a successful membership club which starts at £33 and a popular delivery service via its almost too-easy-to-use website. It runs a loyalty programme, too – get 10 stamps, get a bottle of wine for free – which has proven more than a little popular with locals. 21 Orford Road, Walthamstow Village E17 9NL (parishwines.co.uk) William Curley If you had to choose one chocolate shop to get locked into, you should make it this one, from the cheery orange shop front to the beautiful array of chocolates inside, all found in a cute, secret little courtyard – it’s amazing. Individual chocolates, chocolate-covered dates, chewy bars, biscuits: heaven. Find it and get lost in it. 33 Smith’s Court, London W1D 7DP (williamcurley.co.uk) Misco’s Meg and Cisco moved into their blue-tiled Staffordshire shop earlier this year. Misco’s cake balls (gluten free) are legendary, but then so are most of the amazing chocolates they sell – locals are rightly proud and boastful of this small but lovely shop. Look for the assorted boxes of delicious little chocolates tied up with colourful bows – never mind about the perfect present for anyone else, buy one for yourself. If you’re lucky they may be selling homemade crumble-topped stewed fruit with ice-cream and caramelised almonds. 14 Sheepmarket, Leek ST13 5HW (miscoschocolates.com) Paul A Young Although Paul A Young’s Soho shop is larger, his Islington shop is in a little passageway, which all adds to the feeling of discovery. The knowledge from the chocolatiers is seductive and you can buy loose chocolates, bars or hot chocolate. Look out for the brownies: whether or not you’re a fan, his are amazing. 33 Camden Passage, London N1 8EA (paulayoung.co.uk) Dormouse If you need just one reason to visit Dormouse’s little shop it could be to buy its legendary Toasted White chocolate. But there are also many others. There is a great core collection of craft chocolate (both its own and other makers they admire), but also seasonal offerings in funky square bars. This Christmas, look out for Get Stuffed and the Stollen bar. Unit O, Deansgate Mews, Great Northern Warehouse, Manchester M3 4EN (dormousechocolates.com) Pump Street Chocolate Orford is a tiny village near the coast of Suffolk, but it has much to offer: it’s home to the Pump Street Bakery, where the best pastries are sold (and people queue down the street) and right across the road is now a dedicated chocolate shop selling not just Pump Street chocolate, but great bars from other makers, too. A favourite here is rye crumb, milk and sea salt, but you can also find vegan milk versions and caramelised nuts, hot chocolate flakes and seasonal chocolate shapes. 1 Pump Street, Orford, Suffolk IP12 2LZ (pumpstreetchocolate.com) Wright’s Food A shop and kitchen, Wright’s is run by Maryann and Simon Wright, who specialise in local and organic produce such as lamb and beef from Pembrokeshire, free-range pork from Carmarthenshire, fruit and veg from a farm in Cardigan and an own brand Tomato Catsup red sauce named as a nod to the family cat. “Working with other small producers means we can make use of gluts, which become chutneys, sauces and the like, and come together to support each other which has been even more important.” Llanarthne, Carmarthenshire SA32 8JU (shop.wrightsfood.co.uk) Monorail Music With a mind-boggling breadth and depth of new and secondhand vinyl, and an equally good website, Monorail is regarded as the best record shop north of the border. Regular customers include local royalty such as Mogwai, Belle &amp; Sebastian, and Optimo, making for an inclusive sense of a local music community hub. 97 King Street, Glasgow G1 5RB (monorailmusic.com) Banquet Records Banquet stocks a decent spread of contemporary vinyl, majoring in punk/emo. Its USP lies in its outside-London postcode and yet its close proximity to the capital, which enables bossman/councillor Jon Tolley to put on live events that don’t clash with London gig exclusivity, in good-value deals for tickets, albums and merchandise. 52 Eden Street, Kingston, Surrey KT1 1EE (banquetrecords.com) Kingbee Records A survivor from the golden days of record collecting in the 80s, this vinyl institution in trendy Chorlton has a reputation as one of the best secondhand shops in the UK. And Kingbee’s website is well updated with reassuringly expensive rarities, particularly 1960s pop and northern soul. 519 Wilbraham Road, Chorlton, Manchester M21 0UF (kingbeerecords.co.uk) Resident Music This hipster’s heaven carries all the latest alternative-leaning vinyl releases and reissues, and a substantial selection of back catalogue, too. Resident’s snazzily presented website also offers a useful list of local gigs stretching through to late 2022, for which tickets can only be bought in person or over the phone. 28 Kensington Gardens, Brighton BN1 4AL (resident-music.com) Honest Jon’s Records Now unrivalled as London’s most pan-globalist record store, Honest Jon’s has been at its Portobello site since 1974, with financial backing from Damon Albarn. It stocks every strand of music, from jazz, blues and reggae, through to dance (Latin, techno, etc) and the more outré stuff that they invitingly call “outernational”. 278 Portobello Road, London W10 5TE (honestjons.com) Mr B’s Emporium For fans of Jane Austen, a visit to Bath is a must, along with a visit to a bookshop which is becoming an institution in its own right. Mr B’s Emporium offers bespoke reading subscription services, as well as “reading spas” where a team member chats through your reading tastes over tea and cake and then draws up a recommended reading list for you. Just be sure to book ahead for those as they are very popular. 13-15 John Street, Bath BA1 2JL (mrbsemporium.com) Book Corner This pretty bookshop in Saltburn is as charming and elegant as the town itself. Owned by budding author Jenna Warren, it has a great range of paperbacks, with a particular focus on contemporary fiction, and Warren is always happy to make recommendations. Her online shop is well stocked, too. 24 Milton Street, Saltburn-by-the-Sea, North Yorkshire TS12 1DG (bookcornershop.co.uk) The Portobello Bookshop In a coastal suburb a few miles to the east of Edinburgh’s city centre, this bright and breezy shop is brilliantly stocked with an extensive but carefully chosen range of titles. Meanwhile, online they sell other delights including signed titles, boardgames and stationery. 46 Portobello High Street, Edinburgh EH15 1DA (theportobellobookshop.com) Salts Mill Find this gem of a shop in what was once the largest industrial building in the world. Today, the vast building is a cultural centre at the heart of a Unesco world heritage site which houses exhibitions, art galleries and also this fantastic bookshop which is a treasure trove of contemporary art titles, poetry, local history as well as signed first editions. Victoria Road, Saltaire, Shipley, West Yorkshire BD18 3LA (saltsmillshop.co.uk) Gay’s the Word Soon after Gay’s the Word opened in Bloomsbury in the late 1970s, the content of its books was considered so obscene it was raided by Customs &amp; Excise and its stock seized. The shop’s success in challenging that view was pivotal in the fight for gay rights in the UK. There are now quite a few LGBTQ+ bookshops around the country, but do stop in and visit the original. It’s still a hub of the community, and also a vibrant and welcoming bookshop. 66 Marchmont Street, London WC1N 1AB (gaystheword.co.uk) Persephone Books Persephone has reprinted out-of-print tomes by mid-20th century female writers since Nicola Beauman founded it in “a room above a pub” in 1998. It has now relocated from London to Bath. Novels mingle with cookery books and memoirs. “People ask how we choose our books and the answer is we have to completely and utterly love every single one,” says her daughter Fran. “It is a cliché of publishing that a book will not sell unless someone is passionately behind it, but it’s true.” 8 Edgar Buildings, Bath BA1 2EE (persephonebooks.co.uk) • This article was amended on 1 December 2021. Susanna Sait, founder of The Goods Shed, Canterbury, was misnamed “Salt”. Bookshop Tours of Britain by Louise Boland is published by Fairlight BooksAshley Giles, the managing director of the England men’s team, has indicated he believes Michael Vaughan should be given a chance to be rehabilitated and resume his media career after the allegations of racism made against him by Azeem Rafiq. Giles admitted there was no place for racism in cricket but when asked specifically about Vaughan, his former England captain with whom he won the 2005 Ashes, he said that refusing to give people a second chance and an opportunity to be educated was “not a healthy way forward” for the sport. Vaughan has been fighting for his media career and reputation ever since Rafiq alleged that before a match against Nottinghamshire at Trent Bridge in 2009 he told him and three other Yorkshire players of Asian descent: “Too many of you lot, we need to do something about it.” He has strenuously denied ever saying those words, while two other players – Rana Naved-ul-Hasan and the England spinner Adil Rashid – have backed up Rafiq’s account of that day. Vaughan denied the allegation again during an interview with the BBC’s Dan Walker on Saturday, although he did apologise to Rafiq for “the hurt” he had gone through at Yorkshire. The 47-year-old, who has been dropped from the BBC’s coverage of the upcoming Ashes series in Australia, was also forced during that BBC interview to apologise for a series of historic xenophobic tweets, including one posted in the aftermath of the Manchester Arena bombing in 2017 that suggested the England all-rounder Moeen Ali should ask fellow Muslims he did not know if they were terrorists. Asked specifically about Vaughan’s situation, Giles, who is in Brisbane with England’s Ashes squad, said: “I can’t comment on what the BBC should do with one of their employees. But I think tolerance is really important. “We all do make mistakes and we will again. But we have to be able to tolerate, educate and rehabilitate otherwise people aren’t going to open up and share their experiences and learn. “Does zero tolerance mean we shouldn’t accept discrimination and racism? Absolutely. But not giving people second chances, I’m not sure that’s a healthy way forward for us because it’s certainly not going to bring people forward to either share their positive or negative experiences or even bring people forward to say, ‘I just don’t know – I don’t know how to react in this environment’, or what to say. “We all know that this can be a bit of a minefield. Even the language we use around this area almost changes by the month. So for me we’ve got to educate more, we’ve got to call it out in the dressing room much more effectively if we see it because perhaps all of us in the past – and I’m not just talking about cricket – have let things go. We’ve got to be prepared to call them out and by that I don’t mean we kick chairs and tables over and start a fight. We just make it very clear that those sorts of behaviours aren’t right in our dressing rooms or environments and actually in all workplaces because, although cricket has an opportunity to do something very strong, I don’t believe for one minute these same issues don’t exist in society. So I think it’s a collective responsibility for all of us to do something about this.” Giles also gave his backing for the England captain, Joe Root, to stop any Ashes Test where he felt his players were being abused by the crowd on the basis of their race or nationality. “We know crowds can be lively here – I’ve experienced that myself as a player,” Giles said. “But I’d certainly trust Joe Root to do what is right on the field. If he chose to bring the team into the middle of the field and stop the game while that was investigated, then absolutely. I don’t think any of our players should be subject to any abuse actually but discrimination and racism particularly.” Giles also confirmed he is talking to his Australian counterparts over how the new Omicron Covid variant may affect England’s Ashes tour. Several Australian states tightened their border restrictions over the weekend and there is a concern some players’ families who are flying into Melbourne before Christmas might be forced to quarantine on arrival if the situation deteriorates. “It’s very early days but I’ve actually got a call after this to start discussing that situation,” Giles said. “We’re obviously hoping it won’t affect anything. There are going to be changes to those border controls in terms of our families being able to travel etc and we clearly hope that’s not going to affect us. But we are in the hands of national and local governments. “We always knew things could change. We will do everything we can to make sure the families are accommodated and of course that the players are happy.”The modern adapter of Cinderella is faced with two questions. How to give agency to a central character who is subject not only to the cruelty of her adoptive family but also to the whims of a passing prince? And, in an egalitarian age, how not to suggest that the way to flee poverty is to marry into the ruling class? Writer, director and Ugly Sister Barrie Hunter has answers to both in this classy show that combines the polish of storytelling theatre with the merry excesses of panto. Played by Betty Valencia, this Cinderella is easily the most intelligent person on the stage – and a lovely, unmannered singer to boot. Employed in the department store run by her stepmother (an entertainingly horrid Helen Logan), she is economically exploited but never a victim. She is too bright and pragmatic. The odds are against her, but she is in control. Her good nature inspires the show’s most radical departure. Fellow worker Buttons (a spritely Lewis Winter Petrie) recognises how deserving she is. With a little guiding magic from Neshla Caplan’s Fairy Godmother, he raids the shop’s stock to transform himself into the Prince. His announcement of a ball is one elaborate trick. On the minus side, the ruse means Buttons knows full well to whose foot the slipper belongs – a detail Hunter neatly glosses over – but on the plus side, it means Cinderella is every bit his equal. No palace for her, then, but she does inherit the shop. And that, in this season of good will, is an opportunity for up-the-workers redress. She re-employs sacked staff, improves pay and conditions, and looks set to be the model employer. A happy ending for all! Cinderella is at Perth theatre until 31 December.Record numbers of unaccompanied child asylum seekers who arrived in the UK on small boats are being accommodated in four hotels along England’s south coast, a situation that the Children’s Society has described as “shocking”. About 250 unaccompanied children who arrived in small boats are thought to be accommodated in hotels, which Ofsted said was an unacceptable practice. In September, Home Office officials told the home affairs select committee it was accommodating 70 unaccompanied children in hotels. On 23 November the government announced that a scheme for this group of children to be dispersed to different local authorities was temporarily being made mandatory. But individual councils have two weeks to make representations against this new rule. London councils currently care for 1,500 of these children – a third of the total. Kent county council officials said they were at capacity, caring for 363 unaccompanied child asylum seekers as of 23 November along with 1,071 care leavers. Children’s and refugee charities say their concern for young refugees’ welfare is mounting as record numbers of adults as well as children continue to arrive in the UK in small boats. Marieke Widmann, policy and practice adviser at the Children’s Society, said: “These are vulnerable children and young people who have often fled war and persecution and may be frightened and distressed after an unimaginably traumatic journey. “It’s crucial they get the help, support and security they need when they arrive here alone, including access to appropriate accommodation. Moving unaccompanied children into hotels with limited care and supervision is shocking and places these already vulnerable children at incredible risk. We are aware several children have already gone missing. “The Home Office has a duty to protect all children and promote their welfare. It must ensure these children receive proper care and support so they feel safe and secure and can recover from the terrible trauma they have been through.” The question of who is legally responsible for these children has been raised by lawyers. Rebecca Ives, a solicitor at Wilsons, said: “The home secretary is effectively acting as the corporate parent for these children. Central government does not have any statutory powers to act in this way or to accommodate [unaccompanied asylum-seeking children] in hotels. “We are concerned that the Home Office practice of accommodating unaccompanied asylum seeker children in hotels is removing them from the protections and safeguarding afforded to them under the 1989 Children Act. Some of them will be victims of trafficking and/or torture and therefore particularly vulnerable and at risk. “It has been stated that these children will only be in hotels for very brief periods whilst alternative arrangements are made, but for some children this period lasts for more than one month.” Bridget Chapman of Kent Refugee Action Network said: “We were concerned to discover that these unaccompanied asylum seeker children who recently arrived on small boats are being accommodated in hotels on the south coast. “We have a lot of expertise in supporting these young people and it is our remit to do so. But the Home Office has not contacted us about this. The children are being guarded by security guards. We don’t know if they have enough privacy, if they are being supported by qualified social workers, nor whose jurisdiction they are under. “Hotels are not suitable places to accommodate these children. Who is checking up on them and how long will they be in the hotels?” A government spokesperson said: “We are working around the clock with local authorities to seek permanent places for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children across the UK. Our efforts remain focused on ensuring every single unaccompanied child receives appropriate support and care whilst we seek a permanent place for them. “We are determined to end the use of hotels as soon as possible and our nationality and borders bill will fix the broken asylum system.”In December 2019, Boris Johnson was electioneering in Salisbury, where he visited a butcher’s shop and local military veterans’ centre. The same city is also the home of the Trussell Trust, which runs the UK’s largest network of food banks – and Johnson was asked whether anything in the Conservative party’s manifesto might reduce the need for the kind of help it provides. He answered in the affirmative, claiming that helping people with living costs was a personal “crusade”, paying tribute to “everybody who gets involved with running food banks”, but also insisting that “it is wrong that people should be dependent on them”. He then mentioned “cutting national insurance for everyone”, before his punchline: “It is imperative in my view that the next government, if I’m lucky enough to be leading it, tackles the cost of living for everybody in this country. That’s what we’re going to do.” Then as now, words just tumbled out of his mouth. We all know what happened to the national insurance promise, and if Johnson and his ministers had any credible intention of reducing living costs, any such hope has now been quashed. Instead we’ve had soaring energy bills, higher inflation and the cruel end of the £20-a-week universal credit “uplift” – partially mitigated via changes in the budget aimed at people in employment, but still a grim reality for the 3.4 million people on that benefit who are not in work. But as worry spreads about the so-called Omicron variant of Covid, what millions of people face this winter is also part of another story. Three months after Johnson’s visit to Salisbury, the first lockdown saw an inspirational explosion of “mutual aid” and all those tributes to low-paid key workers – both of which, from an optimistic perspective, suggested public attitudes towards poverty and insecurity somewhat different from the mixture of indifference and old-fashioned moralism that we are often told form the views of a majority (“silent” or otherwise). For the briefest of moments, it felt as if the dawning realisation that being poor made people much more likely to suffer Covid-19’s worst effects might prompt at least the first stirrings of a political watershed. The footballer Marcus Rashford began campaigning on so-called “holiday hunger” in the summer of 2020, and not only forced two government U-turns, but breached the walls of daytime TV and the rightwing press. But now normal service seems to have been resumed. Whatever fantasies are still being entertained about “building back better”, we are facing the latest stage of the Covid crisis in an even worse social state than when the whole thing began. Last Wednesday, the Trussell Trust released figures showing that although its provision of food parcels had come down from its peak in 2020, the latest figure is 11% higher than it was at the same point in 2019. Over the ensuing two years, the number of food parcels it supplies for children has increased at double the rate for adults. In the six months to the end of September, its staff and volunteers provided around 5,000 parcels each day, and the trust expects that figure to rise to 7,000 by Christmas. “Food banks in our network continue to see more and more people facing destitution,” said its chief executive, Emma Revie. A few days ago, I spoke to people in charge of a handful of food banks, advice services and community organisations. The cut to universal credit, they told me, was causing gradually rising hunger, and there was a deep sense of foreboding about rising fuel prices. Moreover, things were much more difficult because grants from central government to food banks ceased in April, and the kind of ad hoc help symbolised by the £500m household support fund (hastily created by the government when anger about the universal credit cut was peaking, and somewhat optimistically intended as a one-off source of help “during the final stages of economic recovery”) was simply insufficient. “It looks like a lot of money on paper, but it’s going to go in an instant,” one chief executive of a food charity told me. In Somerset, my local food bank is part of an organisation called Fair Frome. When I spoke to the people in charge, they said that compared to October, need already seems to be up by around a third. Help from the public, I was told, is as generous as ever: “If we do a shout-out for food, it arrives.” New volunteers came aboard at the height of the pandemic, and have stayed. But they are endlessly dealing with the symptoms of very familiar problems, such as poorly paid work (around 40% of the people who need food parcels have jobs), and a paucity of affordable rented housing. The upshot? “This winter is going to be a nightmare for a lot of people.” The Bonny Downs Community Association does its work in the East Ham area of the London borough of Newham. Its chair, David Mann, told me that the end of the benefits “uplift” had pushed many of the people it helps into borrowing money, “but that’s unsustainable, and our team are bracing themselves for a crisis period after Christmas, when people will run out of stopgaps”. Because of the rise in fuel costs, he said, “landlords are now demanding an increase of about £100 a month, which most people can’t pay”. One woman his people were helping, he went on, was currently living in a converted shed owned by a rogue landlord, with a monthly rent of £850, which left her with about £15 a month to cover basic expenses such as food and clothes. “With the cut in universal credit,” Mann said, “she won’t be able to cover her rent, and she’ll have no money for food, let alone clothing or transport fares.” He also talked about people victimised by the asylum and immigration system who had no access to any help from the state at all, and many services the association provides that were now completely overstretched: “Our debt advice centre is at capacity and we’ve had to stop taking bookings for the rest of this year.” Five years after the 2016 referendum, there is a common view of Britain and its ruling politicians being stuck in the past. We tend to think of that condition in terms of Brexity nostalgia and faux-imperial arrogance, but the most appalling example of that failure to leave history behind is surely the return of a kind of poverty that often feels like some awful echo of the 19th century. Amid all the news about food banks, one recent story made that point with a vividness worthy of a Dickens novel. Last Monday, only 13 or so miles from East Ham, Johnson entertained donors at the Conservatives’ fundraising winter party, held in the grimly appropriate setting of the Victoria and Albert Museum. Partygoers had paid more than £1,000 for their tickets, and were treated to an auction, at which £22,000 was successfully bid for a “karaoke session” with Liz Truss, and a game of cricket with Rishi Sunak came in at £35,000. Here, in a different universe from the one in which people go hungry, lies one reason why Johnson’s idea of “everybody in this country” is nothing of the kind, and why poverty and everything that comes with it are being not just tolerated, but actively increased – even after all the horrors we have been through. John Harris is a Guardian columnistWhen Saikou Demba was a young man starting out in the hospitality business, he opened a little hotel on the Gambian coast called the Leybato and ran a beach bar on the wide expanse of golden sand. The hotel is still there, a relaxed spot where guests can lie in hammocks beneath swaying palm trees and stroll along shell-studded pathways. But the beach bar is not. At high tide, Demba reckons it would be about five or six metres into the sea. “The first year the tide came in high but it was OK,” he says. “The second year, the tide came in high but it was OK. The third year, I came down one day and it [the bar] wasn’t there: half of it went into the sea.” That was in the 1980s, before most people had even heard of the greenhouse effect. But to Demba, 71, and many others like him, it was obvious even then that things were changing. The sea was coming in further and further every year, and the coastline, bit by bit, was crumbling. Now, the Leybato has lost not only its beach bar but, at high tide, its beach: the sea comes right up to the bottom of the terrace and splashes over the top. The erosion of the coastline is clearly visible in the cracked paving stones and exposed roots of the coconut trees. The sea grass that used to carpet the ocean floor has gone. “Those grasses were protecting the sea, but there are no more now,” says Demba. “I also used to see turtles, big turtles. Now, none. We are in a very sad situation.” All along the 50-mile coastline of the Gambia, Africa’s smallest mainland country, hotels and guesthouses are facing similar pressures. And, in a developing country where tourism makes up about 20% of GDP and employs tens of thousands of people, it could not be more important that they withstand them. “We have already learned the lesson from Covid-19. Tourism is very, very important [for the country],” says Alpha Saine, front-office manager of the Kairaba hotel, one of the two most luxurious in the country. After a prolonged absence during the pandemic, European tourists are starting to return to the Gambia, even if numbers appear significantly down. Saine hopes Covid soon “becomes history”. The threat posed to the industry by the climate crisis, however, is more formidable in the long term, and no one appears to have found a solution that works for all. On the beaches of the Kairaba and Senegambia hotels, the beating heart of the Gambia’s “smiling coast” tourism industry, a barrier of rocks has been laid that runs for several hundred metres along the shoreline, stopping the waves from encroaching too far. When the tide is low the beach is still big and, in the age of Covid, gloriously empty – but at high tide it is a narrow strip of sand. That is not enough to put most people off. Taking a stroll in the sunshine with the waves lapping around her feet, Ann Eady – on her 15th Gambian holiday – says the barrier doesn’t bother her at all. “They’ve got to maintain the beauty they’ve got. It would be a shame for it to go,” says Eady, from Dewsbury, West Yorkshire. The rocks are effective, but Lamin Komma, head of coastal and marine environment at the Gambia’s National Environment Agency, is clear about the project’s limitations. “You cannot protect the entire coast with rocks. You cannot do that,” he says. Komma, who is developing a coastal management plan for the Ministry of Environment, Climate Change and Natural Resources, wants the country to focus more on boosting its natural defences, for example, planting coconut trees and mangroves, which can help keep sand in place and absorb carbon in the process. “Putting [in] hard structures, yes, it’s fine, but it’s very expensive and it only serves maybe a period of time,” Komma says. The other thing that needs to change is the country’s expectation that donor partners will foot the bill, he adds. “We cannot keep on relying on donors. We have to have mechanisms in place,” he says. Over at the Leybato, where Demba breaks off from an afternoon feast of watermelon to talk to the Guardian, he seems in tune with this mindset. Not for him the rock barriers, or sea walls. “I have my plan: planting coconut trees,” he says. He has already planted dozens, and there are more to come. But although hopeful and ambitious, Demba is also angry that for more than three decades he has been seeing the climate crisis coming and nothing has been done to stop it. “I don’t think they’re listening to us,” he says, standing beside his crumbling terrace, referring to the political leaders meeting last week at Cop26. “That woman, from Sweden I think [Greta Thunberg], they have to listen to the message she is giving the world: not for us now – I’m 71 – but the young people. Climate change is real. The floods, the fire, they are real. But we have no power to do anything about them. We are the victims, we in Africa, and we are powerless. We just want our children to have a future.” Additional reporting by Omar Wally Sign up for a different view with our Global Dispatch newsletter – a roundup of our top stories from around the world, recommended reads, and thoughts from our team on key development and human rights issues, delivered to your inbox every two weeks:Sign up for Global Dispatch – please check your spam folder for the confirmation emailThe past 18 months have yielded a number of unexpected collaborations as artists who have long admired each other’s work suddenly found themselves with time on their hands. One such pair is Daedelus and Joshua Idehen: the former, aka Alfred Darlington, a waistcoat-wearing linchpin of the LA beats scene, now relocated to Boston; the latter, the poet laureate of UK jazz, a British-born Nigerian living in Sweden, whose fragmentary utterings have seared tracks by The Comet is Coming and Sons Of Kemet. Strange, then, that Holy Water Over Sons is largely beatless, a series of borderless lullabies for the end of the world. Idehen’s streams of consciousness are couched in electronic soundscapes that swirl across genres, untethered. The two had been trading ideas for a while, but last year’s BLM movement has refocused their message, and themes of racial injustice and identity on songs such as Floyd, Target and Pedal Down, No Breaks contrast intriguingly with warped organ, sun-dappled Fender Rhodes piano and lambent pools of strings arranged by Miguel Atwood-Ferguson. It’s an understated, often ominous listen, and Daedelus lets Idehen’s gifted lyricism and personality shine, giving his voice the air of a digitised street preacher delivering powerful sermons on protest and revolution. The more intimate closer, Standing in My Own Way, is a bruised lament about lost friendship and personal shortcomings that shows Idehen’s vulnerability too. This is touted as a “mini album”; you can’t help but wonder what alchemy might happen if they make it into the studio in person.The worthy winner of the Baillie Gifford prize earlier this month, Patrick Radden Keefe’s Empire of Pain is a work of nonfiction that has the dramatic scope and moral power of a Victorian novel. It’s about corruption that is so profitable no one wants to see it and denial so embedded it’s almost hereditary. The book focuses on the Sackler family, who, for the second half of the 20th century and for much of the 21st, were very wealthy and very secretive. It would turn out that they had a lot to be secretive about. Keefe begins his story with Arthur Sackler, the eldest of three boys born to a Ukrainian Jewish grocer in Brooklyn in 1913. Arthur was an extraordinary figure, highly gifted and even more motivated. He funded himself through college and medical school, partly by his work as an advertising copywriter, trained as a psychiatrist and became a leading medical publisher. He also paid for his two younger brothers, Mortimer and Raymond, to attend medical school and the three of them bought or set up a number of businesses, one of them being Purdue Frederick, a small pharmaceutical company that would later change its name to Purdue Pharma. As the owner of a medical advertising agency, Arthur aggressively marketed Valium direct to physicians with misleading and false information. A drug that, in contrast to Arthur’s claims, led to high dependency, Valium became one of the bestselling medicines of the 1960s and 1970s and Arthur made sure that he received a healthy percentage cut on sales. As he grew increasingly rich, he liked to remain in the shadows, often keeping his name away from the businesses he owned or controlled. But he was also a keen philanthropist with a consuming determination to get his family name inscribed on the walls of the most important art galleries, museums and universities in the world. In this combination of commercial furtiveness and philanthropic attention-seeking, Arthur was matched by his brothers. And so it was that the Sackler name became prominent in the Louvre, the Tate, the Metropolitan and the Guggenheim galleries, as well as at Yale, Harvard and Oxford universities and a number of medical schools. The brothers were feted the world over and no one worried too much about how they came by their money. But if Arthur made his first fortune from the questionable marketing of Valium, his brothers went on to make an even larger one by employing those tactics to sell a drug called OxyContin. Twice as powerful as morphine, OxyContin was developed and patented by Purdue and aimed at anyone who suffered from pain. Morphine was the drug used to treat cancer patients and was viewed by the medical establishment as too strong and addictive for general patients. But Purdue claimed the new slow-release drug was less addictive than other opioids and it was approved by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) without the company’s claims being tested. The decision was taken by an FDA official who turned up a year later working for Purdue Pharma with a starting package worth nearly $400,000 a year. At that time, Purdue was under the guidance of Richard Sackler, son of Raymond. He was an exacting boss, constantly demanding more sales from his salespeople and seemingly unconcerned by growing accounts of addiction and deaths that accompanied OxyContin’s massive marketing success. Keefe paints devastating portraits of the main Sacklers, their greed, pride and monumental sense of entitlement. In many respects, they are reminiscent of the appalling Roys in the TV series Succession, galvanised by astonishing profits but fundamentally removed from the world they are busy despoiling. As opioid addiction became an epidemic in the US, the family that had become multi-billionaires as a result of its sales and abuse made sure to remain hidden from view. A battery of lawyers was on hand to prevent the curious from venturing very far. When a New York Times journalist who’d been following the story wrote a book about the opioid crisis that named the Sacklers, the family used its muscle to ensure that the newspaper removed him from writing any further on the subject. Meanwhile, as the death toll continued to grow (it’s estimated that more than 450,000 Americans died as a result of various opioids, of which OxyContin was the bestselling), the Sacklers took out an estimated $14bn from Purdue, which then passed through a multiplicity of offshore shell companies and bank accounts to furnish their private tastes and, of course, philanthropy. When eventually, under public pressure, the government caught up with Purdue, the company filed for bankruptcy and, protected by some of the best lawyers in the business, the Sacklers walked free of any criminal charges, still adamant they had done nothing wrong. Empire of Pain is a gripping tale of capitalism at its most innovative and ruthless that Keefe tells with a masterful grasp of the material. Purdue Pharma promised a life free of pain. But as the author notes, while the company knew everything about how to get people on to OxyContin, they seemed to have little idea of, or interest in, how to get them off it. • Empire of Pain: The Secret History of the Sackler Dynasty by Patrick Radden Keefe is published by Picador (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyStephen Sondheim, who has died aged 91, was a leading light of musical theatre over the course of more than six decades, from the moment in 1957 when he achieved renown as Leonard Bernstein’s lyricist for West Side Story. He went on to establish a place for himself with intelligent, unconventional works such as Company (1970), Sweeney Todd (1979) and Into the Woods (1987), which brought him a following appreciative of the new departures he made, even if his chosen path was not obvious or easy. Sondheim saw himself as heir to Oscar Hammerstein II, who had written the lyrics for Oklahoma! (1943) and South Pacific (1949). Many expected him to revive the floundering American musical, supplying new perceptiveness, relevance and verve. Yet, although the half-century following Hammerstein’s death in 1960 was a golden age full of long-running musicals in the West End and Broadway, and despite his considerable gifts with words and music, Sondheim never scored a true hit show. Nonetheless, new productions and film versions continued for the rest of his life and beyond, and his best work may well last longer than the more profitable musicals of his time. The old firms – Rodgers and Hart, Rodgers and Hammerstein, and Lerner and Loewe – comprised fruitful collaborations between composers and wordsmiths. Sondheim, on the other hand, wrote both music and lyrics himself. Some commercial flops resulted, but Sondheim took after Cole Porter in supplying both text and tune for a number of adorable hit songs. The most famous, recorded more than 500 times – notably by Frank Sinatra – was Send in the Clowns, from A Little Night Music (1973), a nostalgic almost-operetta developed from Ingmar Bergman’s 1955 film Smiles of a Summer Night. Barbra Streisand took up I’m Still Here from Follies (1971), and The Ladies Who Lunch from Company. Who’s That Woman?, The Little Things You Do Together, Liaisons, Someone in a Tree, and Anyone Can Whistle were all good vehicles for singers. But these numbers are better as out-takes than in their original dramatic contexts. However grownup his themes and coherent his dramas, Sondheim’s ambition to carry through the revolution that Hammerstein had achieved with Oklahoma!, the first musical where songs moved the plot forward and belonged to the character singing them, may have been unrealistic. Born in New York, Stephen was the only child of a comfortably middle-class family. His mother, Janet (nee Fox, and known as Foxy), a dress designer, and father, Herbert, a clothing manufacturer, were partners in a New York fashion business. They divorced when Stephen was 10, and he ended up disliking his mother so much that in 1992 he did not go her funeral. Foxy was friends with Hammerstein’s wife, Dorothy, and after the divorce she and Stephen moved to live near the Hammersteins, on a farm in Pennsylvania. During his adolescence, Sondheim would look to Hammerstein as a substitute father. Sondheim had started playing the piano by ear from the age of four, before studying the piano and organ sporadically at school. Ravel was one of his early musical discoveries, which he eagerly shared with Hammerstein, giving him a recording of the Piano Trio as a birthday present. In 1990 Sondheim told an audience at the National Theatre: “Most popular music and most show music owes its origins to Ravel.” From an early age, he showed his skill at mind games and crosswords, submitting a puzzle to the New York Times at the age of 14. (Later he subscribed to the Observer and entered its fiendish Ximenes puzzle contests. He did not win, though he was highly commended.) At Williams college, Massachusetts, he planned at 16 to major in maths, but a freshman music course inspired him to study that subject instead. He wrote a musical called By George, and showed it to Hammerstein, who said it was terrible but talented, and showed him where he had gone wrong. This process turned into the unofficial yet fundamental course on which Sondheim learned to write musicals, adapting various plays, working on non-dramatic narrative and creating an original story. At 18, Sondheim witnessed the staging of his first student work, All That Glitters – with his own book, music and lyrics. On graduation he won a $3,000 prize, paid annually for two years, went on to take private composition lessons in New York with the avant-garde composer Milton Babbitt, and also found work as a television scriptwriter. Lemuel Ayers asked him to write a show that would become Saturday Night (unperformed until the end of the century, as Ayers died unexpectedly). The resulting material was good enough to convince Arthur Laurents, who was doing the book for West Side Story, that Sondheim should write the lyrics. And that marked his entry into the hall of fame. He became and remained a highly self-conscious intellectual artist, who knew precisely what he wanted to achieve. In the first of two books about his lyrics, Finishing the Hat (2010), he touched on the mysteries of his taste and its narrow range, key to his successes as well as his failures. Sondheim musicals are best appreciated through original cast recordings. The songs give the essence of what motivated their creation. In 1977, Sondheim explained that hit tunes were irrelevant. Melody was merely a reflection of familiarity – as if all tunes were equal until dinned into a listener’s memory. His music was characteristic and very recognisable, whether or not it chimed with popular taste. Some thought it too influenced by his rhythmic facility and the fast syllabic flow of his clever lyrics. West Side Story, based on Romeo and Juliet, was not the first Shakespeare adaptation to hit Broadway: it had been preceded in 1948 by Porter’s hugely successful collaboration with Sam and Bella Spewack, Kiss Me Kate, based on The Taming of the Shrew. But Bernstein’s music, the tough inner-city New York location and Jerome Robbins’ choreography struck a new note – and Sondheim’s song texts were a significant part of that novelty. Two years later, Sondheim collaborated again as lyricist – this time with Jule Styne on Gypsy, based on the life of the stripper and burlesque star Gypsy Rose Lee. In 1962, he displayed his talent as composer as well as lyricist with his successful Broadway breakthrough, A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum. Based on a classic Plautus farce, it enjoyed a two-year run. In Broadway terms, A Funny Thing was unusually economical, with no changes of costume or set. Having the incomparable Zero Mostel in New York and Frankie Howerd in London as the slave Pseudolus added real value. Anyone Can Whistle (1964), with Lee Remick and Angela Lansbury, proved to be a flop, as did Sondheim’s collaboration with Richard Rodgers, Do I Hear a Waltz? (1965). But the cast recording of Anyone Can Whistle fared better, and Sondheim began to attract a cult following, enhanced by the modest but genuine artistic success of Company. He came to be hailed as the most significant innovator in musical theatre of his day. Generally he fared best with London’s theatre critics, which perhaps compensated for his critical reception in the US. A footnote in Finishing the Hat claims: “Musicals are the only public art form reviewed mostly by ignoramuses. Plays, at least in [the US], are reviewed by people whose knowledge is comprised of what they read in Variety and gossip columns, and who know nothing, of course, about music.” However, fans promoted and protected him. Commercial failure boosted his myth as suffering genius. He became a cause. It helped that he was backed by Cameron Mackintosh, a theatrical entrepreneur with deep pockets. Sondheim, British critics maintained, had created “the intelligent musical”. But was there something missing from his work? He had a tendency to adopt elaborate dramatic structures and concepts. His shows tended to go limp at the interval, most notably Sunday in the Park With George (1984), contrasting the French painter George Seurat with how art was made a century later. He liked complex storylines laden with significance. However, aside from A Funny Thing, perhaps they lacked humanity and affection. That may have stemmed in part from the competition that Sondheim met after 1975, when A Chorus Line (created by Michael Bennett, with music by Marvin Hamlisch) and Evita (with music by Andrew Lloyd Webber) swept in. Though A Chorus Line, the perfect backstage musical, was blatantly sentimental, it picked up a theme that Sondheim’s Follies (for which Bennett in 1971 created memorable choreography) had fluffed; while its initial run of more than 500 performances brought seven Tonys and it has been much revived since, it did not recoup its investment. And Lloyd Webber’s works were conceptually provocative in just the way Sondheim seemed to want to be. “The point about Andrew,” he said, “is that people just happen to like what he likes.” Sondheim’s reputation as an innovator grew, but Lloyd Webber’s brash, bold, obvious vehicles underlined with their implacable popularity just how out of joint with popular taste Sondheim was. He had an explanation: “What makes smash-hit musicals are stories that audiences want to hear. And it’s always the same story, how everything turns out terrific in the end and the audience goes out thinking, ‘That’s what life is all about.’ Unfortunately that’s seldom the kind of material that attracts me. In fact I never think of whether it’s reassuring until the whole show’s written.” Musicals had traditionally been the voice of hope, perhaps naive, perhaps foolish. Sondheim’s were about understanding. He rebelled against the dream-market ethos of popular theatre. Among Sondheim’s close collaborators was the stage director Hal Prince, whom he had met at the premiere of South Pacific. Together they scored many prizewinning successes, from Company to Sweeney Todd, but also some later flops, including Merrily We Roll Along (1981) and Bounce (2003). After Prince, Sondheim collaborated with James Lapine, who helped devise, write the dialogue and direct the first productions of Sunday in the Park With George, Into the Woods, jumbling up and analysing an assortment of fairy stories, and Passion (1994), set in the Italy of the Risorgimento. He also worked with the librettist John Weidman on Pacific Overtures (1976), about the 19th-century westernisation of Japan, and Assassins (1990), about those aspiring to kill US presidents. He also collaborated with George Furth, Hugh Wheeler, James Goldman and Jerry Zaks. For brilliant orchestrations, starting in 1970 with Company, he turned to Jonathan Tunick. Sondheim continued to find it easier to get his work staged in London than on Broadway. A portmanteau revue of his songs, Side By Side By Sondheim, was a big West End hit in 1976. Pacific Overtures and Sweeney Todd were programmed by English National Opera and Covent Garden in, respectively, 1987 and 2003. Thanks to Mackintosh, Sondheim had a London theatre renamed after him in 2020, following that on Broadway to mark his 80th birthday in 2010. Sondheim was, too, the first holder of the post of Cameron Mackintosh visiting professor of drama at Oxford University, in 1990. Sondheim’s nihilistic paean on social injustices, Sweeney Todd, was often revived, and in 2007 was adapted for the cinema by Tim Burton, with Johnny Depp in the title role and Helena Bonham Carter. The show’s relish for cruelty and grand guignol originated in the Christopher Bond play on which it was based. It had real comic energy, as David McVicar showed in his Opera North revival, staged in 2002. A decade later it returned to the London stage in Jonathan Kent’s production starring Michael Ball and Imelda Staunton. Smaller London venues, the Menier Chocolate Factory and the Donmar Warehouse, gave Sondheim revivals with success. Film versions included Rob Marshall’s Into the Woods (2014) and, about to be seen in cinemas, Steven Spielberg’s West Side Story. In 2009 Lin- Manuel Miranda rendered that work’s lyrics into Spanish, and in 2020 it was reimagined, for Broadway, and this year has seen New York stagings of Assassins and Company. When the latter opened, Sondheim was 40. It tells the story of a bachelor and his friends, and how he can never quite get married or genuinely involved with a woman. Sondheim had not had a long-term relationship of any sort when writing his musical comedy, and recalled that he asked a married female friend to explain what relationships were all about. He came out as gay later in the 1970s, but did not live with a partner until the 90s. “It was difficult at times,” he said in 2010. “I went through what everybody goes through in their first serious relationship, which most people do in their late teens or 20s, and which I didn’t until I was 60. So it was difficult for me to learn; but it was also joyful.” In 2017 he married Jeffrey Romley, who survives him, as does his half-brother Walter. • Stephen Joshua Sondheim, composer and lyricist, born 22 March 1930; died 26 November 2021Butlin’s is poised to be sold off next year, potentially triggering a bidding war for the famous holiday camp brand, which has benefited recently from the staycation trend driven by the pandemic. US private equity giant Blackstone, which owns the majority of Butlin’s parent company, Bourne Leisure, is understood to have already selected investment bankers to conduct an auction next year. It comes as the travel industry reacts to the impact of the new Omicron Covid-19 variant, which could trigger a fresh wave of demand for UK holidays that do not involve the costly PCR tests, paperwork and a potential requirement to self-isolate upon return from abroad. Butlin’s was established 85 years ago by Billy Butlin, who had visited Barry Island in Wales and “felt sorry for families staying in drab guest houses with nothing much to do”. Butlin set up his first park in Skegness, Lincolnshire, in 1936 with the aim of creating a new type of seaside break, which would provide a range of activities and entertainment. That resort still trades today, along with two others at Bognor Regis in West Sussex and Minehead in Somerset. At one point there were nine camps, seven hotels and even a Butlin’s in the Bahamas. A camp on Barry Island opened in 1966 but closed 30 years later. For decades Butlin’s was famous – or notorious - for competitions to find the holidaymaker with the knobbliest knees or most glamorous grandmothers. It struggled with a downmarket image, and was widely lampooned. However, in recent years it has been trying to position itself as a rival to the likes of Center Parcs, with millions of pounds invested in new features such as pool complexes and improved accommodation, alongside moves into new markets such as live music weekends for fans and a bigger push into conferences and events. The decision to look at selling off Butlin’s comes less than a year after a majority stake in Bourne Leisure, which also owns Warner Leisure Hotels and Haven Holidays, was acquired by Blackstone for about £3bn. It is thought that Bourne Leisure and Blackstone have concluded that Butlin’s is “non-core” to their future objectives. Some analysts had predicted the move for some time. Bourne Leisure’s accounts for 2020 show the firm slumped to a £151m pre-tax loss, compared with a profit of £145m in 2019. The accounts stated: “The group, like many others, has been affected by the impact that the Covid-19 outbreak has had on the UK’s economy, mainly through the short-term closures of some of our sites.” The three resorts reopened their doors in May this year, and Butlin’s recently announced that its summer 2022 lineup would include the likes of dance group Diversity. The company’s accounts also said that during 2020 it refunded site fees to its owners during the lockdowns, and offered its holidaymakers cash refunds for any cancelled breaks. It is thought that investment bank Rothschild has been retained by Bourne Leisure and Blackstone to oversee the sale, which could prompt bids from rivals in the leisure sector. Bourne Leisure and Blackstone both declined to comment.Inspired by the city’s activists and creatives, journalist and film-maker Alex King moved to Athens in 2017 to chronicle attempts to breathe new life into a city worn down by crisis. Food Athens has a fascinating mix of young innovators bringing fresh ideas to the city’s culinary scene and idiosyncratic old eateries that feel frozen in time. For lunch, head down Karori Street in the ancient Psiri district to Feyrouz, which is run by a family of cooks and musicians who trace their ancestry back through Lebanon, Cyprus and Istanbul to ancient Antioch. Their delicious pan-Mediterranean street food celebrates the way generations of people moved around this region – taking their foods, flavours and music with them. For dinner, Kottaroú, behind the railway station on Agias Sofias, is an underground taverna that dates back to 1885, where you can feast on homemade specialities while musicians play intimate rebetiko (Greek blues) sets. Inspiration You need special eyes to fall in love with the concrete chaos of modern Athens. I started to see it all in a new way and appreciate its architecture and social history thanks to Nikos Vatopoulos, urban explorer and culture editor at Greek newspaper Kathimerini. I interviewed him for We’ll Always Have Athens, a podcast I co-produced in the first lockdown. Whenever I need inspiration, I follow a flâneurial adventure from Nikos’s book Walking in Athens: they are pure urban poetry and discovery. It led me to areas near where he grew up, such as Patisia and Kypseli, with their experimental modernist housing, strongholds of the wartime resistance and a marble dog statue beloved by generations of Athenian children. Nightlife You often hear the ruckus from inside Communitism before you see it. The labyrinthine mansion-cum-workshop that houses this community-run art space looks like it could fall down at any minute. But while its guardians slowly restore the place from inside, it hosts some of the most original and free-spirited events in Athens, from political discussions to art shows, Balkan brass band spectaculars and techno parties. Green space Climbing one of the hills of Athens is a great way to catch a breath of fresh air and appreciate the city’s spectacular geography. But nothing can compare to the view from 1,000-metre Mount Hymettus. It’s great for hiking but I love to cycle up through Kaisariani forest an hour or two before sunset. You are rewarded with increasingly jaw-dropping views at each break in the trees until you reach the summit and catch the last rays of sun over the Saronic Gulf. Neighbourhood Kypseli, where I live, has one of the most interesting social, architectural and cultural mixes of any European neighbourhood. In the 1950s and 60s it was the most desirable area in the city, where international stars like Frank Sinatra would hang out when they visited. It then fell into a long decay after its well-heeled residents left for the suburbs. A resurgence over the past decade or so has transformed it into Athens’ most diverse and exciting neighbourhood. The grand but faded modernist apartment blocks coexist with exciting incomers such as Kolchidas Georgian bakery on Fokionos Negri Street and Lalibela Ethiopian restaurant on Naxou. Relive Kypseli’s glamorous past with a film at Stella, a retro open-air cinema with bright neon-pink lighting, then drinks at Au Revoir, a nouvelle-vague-with-a-Greek-twist drinking hole run by the Papatheodorou family since 1958. Stay Monsieur Didot (doubles from €131 B&amp;B) shows what can be done when a neoclassical building is lovingly restored. The boutique hotel pays homage to Ambroise Firmin Didot, a French entrepreneur who brought his grandfather’s typeface to Greece with a field press during the 1821 War of Independence. It’s a great place to stay if you need inspiration for your next masterpiece. Alex King is author of Soul of Athens – A Guide to 30 Exceptional Experiences, £13.99, Jonglez PublishingWhich British monarchs would have survived their illness or wounding if today’s medical knowledge had existed then? (Bonus question: which monarchs would we have had but for illnesses that are now easily preventable?) Jane Shaw Send new questions to nq@theguardian.com. Readers reply Richard I died of sepsis and gangrene 11 days after being shot in the shoulder with a crossbow bolt; modern antibiotics would almost certainly have saved his life. If he had lived, John would not have come to the throne and lost most of England’s holdings in France, nor would the barons have rebelled and forced John to seal Magna Carta (and subsequent kings to reissue it). The modern world, not just England, would be a very different place as a consequence. RichWoods Richard was 41 when he died, with no legitimate heirs. If he hadn’t died then, there’s a high chance he’d have got himself killed in some other military misadventure and John would have ended up in charge anyway. Plus, a large part of why John lost so much French territory was that he couldn’t afford to defend it, in large part because of debts Richard had accrued by getting captured on the way home from the Crusades. It’s not really clear whether Richard living a few years longer would have made any difference to that. Also, John got a papal bull nullifying Magna Carta almost immediately. Subsequent kings only reissued it as a means of placating rebellious barons – they would presumably have had to have signed a similar treaty with the barons if it had never existed. As to which people might have become monarchs if they’d had access to modern medicine, Edward the Black Prince died from the effects of dysentery he contracted on campaign. He was an extremely popular figure in England and presumably would have made an effective (if brutal) ruler, and his disease could be easily cured today. Prince Arthur Tudor – Henry VIII’s older brother – died aged 15 at Ludlow castle after contracting some kind of respiratory infection, possibly tuberculosis or influenza. He’d have a high chance of survival today. Prince Henry Stuart – Charles I’s older brother – died of typhoid fever aged 18, so never got to reign as King Henry IX. He would probably have been put right by a strong course of antibiotics. It’s fascinating to think that two of the most pivotal rulers in English history only became king through their elder brothers’ misfortune. There are some obvious forks British history could have taken given modern medical intervention. ProjectXRay John, signing a treaty and immediately trying to nullify it? He wasn’t an ancestor of our current leader, was he? tpnrty If Arthur had not died we’d all still be speaking Latin and divorce would be illegal. Plus, Hilary Mantel might not have won two Bookers. lisamarie3 Had Edward I’s eldest surviving son not died at the age of 10, England would have had a King Alfonso and we would all be significantly better at football. ButtockMcscruttock Albert, Queen Victoria’s consort, would have almost certainly have survived his tragic early death with modern medicine and treatment. If he had lived, maybe Victoria wouldn’t have been such a misery and maybe Albert’s diplomatic skills would have eased some of the tensions in the wider European family of monarchy, which contributed to the first world war. Cassandraknows2 I’m less interested in monarchs and more in composers. Mozart and Mahler almost certainly died of eminently treatable infective illnesses that would have been easily survivable today. Imagine all that music that we have never heard. Peter Neville, Powys William the Conqueror ruptured his internal organs on the pommel of his saddle when his horse jumped a wall in Normandy and he subsequently died. Surgical intervention would almost certainly have saved him. But that’s only the beginning of the story. By the time he was transported to Caen Cathedral for his funeral he was as ripe as a camembert. While lying in state there, the gases trapped in his abdomen escaped with a loud hissing sound and the stench sent the crowd of assembled mourners fleeing from the cathedral. rumblestrips Henry V died of dysentery at 35 during the siege of a French castle. Despite all the lionising of him by Shakespeare and the rest, he remains a might-have-been of history. Had he lived, he would have become king of both England and France within a year. The Wars of the Roses would have been much less likely and the Tudors certainly wouldn’t have risen to the throne. It’s unlikely an English-French dual monarchy would have endured beyond his death, but it’s certainly an interesting what-if. Ionic_bond Alexander, prince of Scotland – son of King Alexander III of Scotland – died of an unspecified fever in 1284 at the age of 20. Although I don’t know what kind of fever it was, I assume that modern medicine could have saved him. He would have succeeded his father as king, the Scottish lords wouldn’t have asked Edward I of England to choose a new king for them, William Wallace would have lived his life out as a minor member of the Scottish nobility and Braveheart would never have been made. BellaTheCook Folic acid added to her diet might have prevented Elizabeth of York, wife of Henry VII, from succumbing to anaemia and dying in childbirth. Which might in turn have prolonged Henry’s life, stopped him from relying on Empson and Dudley, and perhaps given him a clearer, less grief-addled head when it came to preventing Catherine of Aragon from marrying his second son. She could have been sent back to Spain, Henry VIII could have made a better marriage, had a son, and … perhaps no Reformation. Not that I’m against the Reformation. Asurea Supposing Richard III’s wife and son could have been cured of whatever natural cause they died of? Nobody able to spread nasty rumours about how he had murdered his wife in order to marry his niece; a legitimate male heir still around; Henry Tudor might have thought twice, and we’d have had the King in the North for a bit longer than two years. SpoilheapSurfer Edward VI, the male heir that Henry VIII so desired, died at 15 most probably of TB, which could be easily treated today. A longer reign would have avoided the subsequent bloody turmoil of his successor, Mary, and perhaps led to a more Protestant religious settlement (compared with the compromise enacted under Elizabeth I) being established in England with the survival of its most vocal proponents (Cranmer, Latimer and Ridley, all executed by Mary). Even more critically, if he had wed and sired an heir, the Tudor dynasty might have continued for a lot longer, and the Stuarts would probably have never come to the throne (and hence no subsequent personal or political union with Scotland, or civil war/Cromwell). deepsubs The accounts of Queen Caroline’s death are harrowing (wife to George II). She had suffered an umbilical hernia at the birth of her final child in 1724 and, in November 1737, it was discovered that part of her small intestine was poking through the opening. Her doctors cut off the part that was protruding, thus making it impossible for anything to pass through her body. She died days later, in agony. It was definitely a case of “died of the doctors”. One of her daughters suffered from the same condition. PMWoolley Princess Charlotte, the daughter of George IV, died in childbirth along with her son. If she had survived, there would have been no Queen Victoria whose numerous children married into all the European royal families. Imagine: no Kaiser Wilhelm of Germany and no Tsarina Alexandra bringing haemophilia into the Russian royal family. Whatduck Mary II died at age 32 from smallpox; her husband, William III, five years later from pneumonia. If they had lived much longer it is possible that the house of Hanover might not have ascended the English throne. Floppyears Modern medicine might actually have saved Anne Boleyn. Henry is thought to have suffered a brain injury in a fall, which affected his temperament. Before it, he was intelligent, reasonable and generous. After his fall he suddenly became suspicious and aggressive. An MRI scan and brain surgery might have succeeded. Anne would not have been executed and might have had a healthy son. No Bloody Mary with Catholic persecutions but sadly no Elizabeth I either. But we might still be ruled by Tudors now instead of a German family. Shân Morgain, Newport Surely King Arthur would have been fine with modern antidepressants and psychotherapy: “No Arthur, there is no (living) lady in the lake, no magic sword and Merlin is a wise man, not a ‘wizard’.” Walter MennekensOn the weather forecasts, they always say: “With the wind, it’ll feel like …” How is the wind-chill factor calculated? Mick Rawlinson, Brighton Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.As Keir Starmer’s aides tuned into Boris Johnson’s South Tyneside speech to the CBI last Monday, on the alert for any policy details the Labour leader could use for his own speech later that day, they couldn’t believe their luck. The Conservative government’s relationship with business was already scratchy, after two tax-raising budgets, the shelving of plans to overhaul the hated business rates system, and Johnson’s criticism of the haulage industry during the fuel crisis. But any emollience the prime minister had hoped to show in his Tyneside speech was overshadowed by his bumbling delivery – including a lengthy digression about Peppa Pig. Later that same day, quoting the CBI’s first annual report, from 1965, Starmer told business leaders, “the whole future of Britain rests upon the success of industry”. Two years after Labour’s catastrophic defeat at the 2019 general election on a radical manifesto that included nationalisation of key utilities including rail, mail and broadband, Starmer and his frontbench colleagues are putting in the hard yards in the hope of convincing Britain’s businesses they are on their side. Jeremy Corbyn’s shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, did carry out a “tea offensive” among business leaders, and then shadow City minister, Jonathan Reynolds, kept the channels open with the finance sector; but both sides say contacts with Starmer’s top team are much more regular. “It’s not been an entire sea change,” says one senior business figure. “Under Corbyn, and particularly with McDonnell, they were very keen to hear from us and they saw it as quite important too for presenting their economic credibility. What’s different under Starmer is there’s more structure and it’s a lot more frequent.” A supermarket executive said: “Rachel Reeves [the current shadow chancellor] is definitely making an effort with business and trying to present Labour as a party of business to an extent I don’t see with the Tories at the moment. We are getting a hell of a lot of invites to roundtables and meet-and-greets. It’s an active agenda for her.” Labour now holds regular Zoom meetings with the “B5” group of business trade bodies – the CBI, Make UK, the Federation of Small Businesses (FSB), the British Chambers of Commerce and the Institute of Directors. Chaired by Starmer, Reeves, shadow business secretary, Ed Miliband, and others on a rotating basis, the focus of the meetings at first was around the challenges companies faced during the pandemic. Consultations like these led to Labour campaigning hard for the continuation of business support when the chancellor was preparing to turn off the taps in autumn 2020, and pushing for financial help for firms hit by regional Covid restrictions. Close contacts have continued after lockdown, however, with the subjects under discussion switching to supply chain problems, staff shortages, and rising energy costs. The party has announced a number of pro-business policies in recent months, including a promise to scrap business rates and replace them with a system less punitive for firms with a high street presence. In another move apparently pitched at business, Starmer also irked Miliband at the party’s annual conference by pledging not to nationalise the “Big Six” energy firms, a possibility Miliband had left open in interviews and felt shouldn’t yet have been taken off the table. Labour’s conference also saw the abrupt resignation of shadow business minister Andy McDonald, after he was told to oppose a £15-an-hour minimum wage – a reminder of scepticism on the left of the party about Starmer’s direction. Miliband’s team insist he has been central to rethinking Labour’s relationship with business in recent months, but Reeves is perceived by some party insiders as making much of the running, with Miliband more focused on the climate change part of his brief – perhaps understandably, with the Cop26 summit being held in Glasgow earlier this month. “You can see where his heart is,” said one colleague. Labour strategists point out that voters’ perceptions of whether a party is economically competent is closely correlated with whether they view it as “business friendly”. So they hope by winning over the business community, they can show the public they are ready to run what Starmer in his CBI speech called “a tight ship” – something they view as crucial to winning a general election. In the past month Reeves has held round table events with small businesses in the north-east and West Midlands, as well as a broader event in Stoke-on-Trent alongside Starmer with a group of about 30 voters of all political stripes. The shadow chancellor brings up her experience working in banking and financial services for over 10 years, including a spell as an economist at the Bank of England. She speaks of prudent management of the public finances, acknowledging a weak point for Labour that has clung to the party since the Tory attacks led by George Osborne following the 2008 financial crisis. Speaking to voters in Stoke earlier this month , she told the crowd Labour would increase taxes on big digital companies such as Amazon while scrapping business rates, in a plan designed to support small firms and revitalise the high street. Irritation at the multinational retailer run by Jeff Bezos came up time and again in the former Labour heartland. “When Rachel said we need a level-playing field, I think that obviously resonated,” Starmer told the audience. Some business leaders remain far from won over, however. The boss of a multibillion pound global investment fund, which owns significant infrastructure assets in the UK, said while the Tories are “absolutely destroying their reputation ... Labour still has no credibility”. He said that while Labour are “more palatable” they have “zero track record”: “You would be electing a party that has not been in power for some time and would have to have extremely clear policies. The door is open for Labour to write a much clearer manifesto than the Tories.” The Tories’s tax-raising spree, including tax hikes that hit small businesses, have raised hackles among the traditionally Conservative-supporting entrepreneur class. Craig Beaumont, chief of external affairs at the FSB, said: “No party can afford to take small business votes for granted. “Labour has changed since the Corbyn era, and has been keen to listen to small businesses’ concerns. We are very happy that the party adopted our proposals to take 200,000 small firms out of business rates and overhaul the system. “If the Conservatives don’t want to be outmatched, they urgently need to up their game.In November 1940, two passengers boarded a train in Toulouse headed for Madrid, then onward to Lisbon. One was a striking Black woman in expensive furs; the other purportedly her secretary, a blonde Frenchman with moustache and thick glasses. Josephine Baker, toast of Paris, the world’s first Black female superstar, one of its most photographed women and Europe’s highest-paid entertainer, was travelling, openly and in her habitual style, as herself – but she was playing a brand new role. Her supposed assistant was Jacques Abtey, a French intelligence officer developing an underground counter-intelligence network to gather strategic information and funnel it to Charles de Gaulle’s London HQ, where the pair hoped to travel after Portugal. Ostensibly, they were on their way to scout venues for Baker’s planned tour of the Iberian peninsula. In reality, they carried secret details of German troops in western France, including photos of landing craft the Nazis were lining up to invade Britain. The information was mostly written on the singer’s musical scores in invisible ink, to be revealed with lemon juice. The photographs she had hidden in her underwear. The whole package was handed to British agents at the Lisbon embassy – who informed Abtey and Baker they would be far more valuable assets in France than in London. So back to occupied France Baker duly went. “She was immensely brave, and utterly committed,” Hanna Diamond, a Cardiff university professor, said of Baker, who on Tuesday will become the first Black woman to enter the Panthéon in Paris, the mausoleum for France’s “great men”. “There’s a lot we don’t know, and may never know, about exactly what espionage work she did, the secrets she actually transmitted,” said Diamond, an expert on second world war France who is researching a book about Baker’s wartime exploits. “Bits of her life we know a great deal about: the humble beginnings in Missouri, the international sensation of 20s and 30s Paris, the US civil rights activist, the mother of an adopted, multiracial family … That’s not the case for the resistance heroine.” President Emmanuel Macron decided this summer that 46 years after her death, Baker would become only the sixth woman to be memorialised in the Panthéon in a ceremony on 30 November – the anniversary of the marriage to Jean Lion that allowed her to acquire French nationality. Born Freda Josephine McDonald in St Louis in 1906, Baker left school at 12 and landed a place in one of the first all-Black musicals on Broadway in 1921. Like many Black American artists at the time, she moved to France to escape discrimination. Emerging from the chorus line of La Revue Nègre, she became a huge star, tapping into colonialist, racist and male sexist fantasies in performances that both shocked and delighted audiences and won admirers from Ernest Hemingway to Pablo Picasso. Dubbed “the Black Venus”, she danced the charleston in nothing but a string of pearls and a skirt made of 16 rubber bananas, performed with a snake wrapped suggestively round her neck, strolled down the Champs-Élysées with her pet cheetah, and became an international superstar. Off stage, as the hit songs and starring movie roles succeeded one another, Baker cultivated a scandalous private life, having affairs with men and women including the novelist Colette, the architect Le Corbusier and the crown prince of Sweden. After the war she fought for equal rights as energetically in public as at home, speaking before Martin Luther King at the 1963 March on Washington and adopting 12 children from around the world to live with her in her chateau in the Dordogne. Her wartime spying activities, however, are – for obvious reasons – rather less reliably documented. Much of what is known, said Diamond, who recently published an initial, primary source extended essay on Baker’s war, comes from a book Abtey published in 1948. “He was a maverick figure – a bit of an operator,” she said. “He was clearly telling his own story, making his own case, at least as much as he was telling hers. He was not, let’s say, disinterested, and it’s proving hard to track down original source material to verify his account.” What is sure, though, is that Abtey recruited Baker after meeting her – reluctantly – in late 1939, introduced by a patriotic promoter. Determined to show her gratitude to the country that had made her and contribute to the war effort, the star was already performing for Allied troops, and working with refugees for the Red Cross. (Later in the war, she would refuse to perform for Germans). “She had an unconditional love for France. She wanted to do her bit for the patrie,” said Diamond. “She also intuitively understood the dangers of Nazism. She helped Lion and his Jewish family escape the Germans. She had little formal education, but she associated Nazism with the racism she’d known.” Abtey was wary of what Baker could offer and sceptical of what a female superstar could realistically do. But she talked him into setting her a test, sending her to the Italian embassy where she extracted sensitive information from an attaché and successfully brought it back. Abtey, who is widely assumed to have been the singer’s off-and-on lover, became her handler. He trained her in basic spycraft techniques – invisible ink, writing up your arm, reading upside down – but soon saw her real usefulness lay in her magnetic charm, and effortless ability to switch roles. She was a performer, and spying would be her greatest part. “She subverts our notion of what spying is,” said Diamond. “It’s subterfuge, going under the radar. But here’s this huge star, hiding in plain sight. No one suspects her. And most importantly, she can travel anywhere, and take an entourage with her. For Abtey, that’s priceless. As much as she’s a spy, she’s an espionage facilitator.” From early 1941 onwards, that is what Baker did. Instructed by London to base themselves in North Africa, she and Abtey went to Morocco. The singer travelled from Casablanca to Lisbon, Seville, Madrid, Barcelona, giving concerts, attending receptions in her honour, flattering attachés, politicians and envoys – and passing handwritten notes, generally pinned to her bra, to British agents. For some months, she was seriously ill with blood poisoning, possibly after a miscarriage. But even while she was convalescing, her hospital room became a venue for secret meetings, with diplomats, personalities and officials summoned to Baker’s bedside where gossip was exchanged and secrets smuggled out. With North Africa, following the Allied invasion of 1942, now De Gaulle’s operational and administrative springboard, Baker resumed travelling across the region after her recovery, giving concerts for the troops, fundraising for the resistance – and gathering intelligence as she went. In 1944, she enlisted as a women’s air force auxiliary. “She absolutely saw herself as a soldier,” Diamond said. “She saw what she did as the best way, the most effective way, for her to fight her war. And while there’s this cloud of uncertainty over what exactly she passed on, she certainly passed on plenty.” Ultimately, said Diamond, Baker “realised very early that she could use her celebrity for a cause. And she did. She took huge risks. She deserved her Légion d’honneur – and her Croix de Guerre.”The House Republican leader, Kevin McCarthy, said on Saturday he had “reached out” to Democrats over Islamophobic comments made by one of his party, Lauren Boebert of Colorado, about the Minnesota Democrat Ilhan Omar. Boebert apologised for the remarks, in which she likened one of the first Muslim women elected to Congress to a suicide bomber, on Friday, saying she wanted to meet Omar in person. Omar responded by condemning the remarks and calling for action from party leaders. In a statement to CNN, McCarthy said: “I spoke with Leader [Steny] Hoyer today to help facilitate that meeting so that Congress can get back to talking to each other and working on the challenges facing the American people.” McCarthy did not condemn Boebert’s remarks. He also faced criticism from within his own ranks, after another pro-Trump extremist, Marjorie Taylor Greene of Georgia, tweeted that she had “a good call” with McCarthy and liked “what he has planned ahead”. Greene had criticised McCarthy, seeking to cast doubt on his ambitions to be speaker should as seems likely Republicans take back the House next year. A Republican who spoke anonymously to CNN and was described as a moderate said McCarthy was “taking the middle of the conference for granted. McCarthy could have a bigger math problem [in the election for speaker] with the moderates”. The anonymous moderate said his wing of the party – more of a rump, perhaps, given Donald Trump’s dominance – was upset about McCarthy’s embrace of extremists. One such extremist, Paul Gosar of Arizona, was this month censured for tweeting a video which depicted him killing Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York – like Omar a leading progressive and woman of colour in Congress – and threatening Joe Biden. Gosar lost committee assignments. McCarthy said he would get them back under a Republican speakership and held out the same prospect to Greene, who was stripped of her committees in February for racist, antisemitic and generally incendiary behaviour. McCarthy has faced calls from the right to punish Republicans who voted for the bipartisan infrastructure bill, as well as the 10 who voted to impeach Trump over the deadly Capitol riot. Two who voted to impeach, Adam Kinzinger of Illinois and Anthony Gonzalez of Ohio, will retire next year. Primary challengers await the rest including Liz Cheney of Wyoming, a stringent conservative nonetheless split from the Trumpists over the Capitol attack. On Saturday, Kinzinger criticised the minority leader’s call with Greene, writing: “Here is real strength, when Kevin McCarthy has to call a freshman begging for permission to stay in power. What has Kevin promised? The people deserve to know.” He also said it had “been a while” since most “normal members … last talked to Kevin”. The anonymous moderate who spoke to CNN said the party was on a “collision course” with itself, as their side “isn’t going to take this much longer”. On Sunday, Asa Hutchinson, the governor of Arkansas who is seen by some as a possible presidential nominee from the more moderate side of the party, told CNN’s State of the Union McCarthy should have condemned Boebert. “Even in our own caucus, our own members, if they go the wrong direction, I mean, it has to be called out,” Hutchinson said. “It has to be dealt with particularly whenever it is breaching the civility, whenever it is crossing the line in terms of violence or increasing divides in our country.” Earlier this week, Jackie Speier, a senior Democrat from California, told the Guardian McCarthy had “a number of radical extremists in his caucus that are very effective communicators to the right fringe, and he can’t really rein them in because reining them in means they will attack him. “So they have become the face of the House Republicans. You might as well put a brass ring in Kevin McCarthy’s nose because they’re pulling him around.”Talks between world powers and Iran on salvaging the 2015 nuclear deal will resume in Vienna on Monday after a five-month hiatus, but expectations of a breakthrough are low. The talks could liberate Iran from hundreds of western economic sanctions or lead to a tightening of the economic noose and the intensified threat of military attacks by Israel. The scale of Iran’s negotiating demands, ideological outlook of Iran’s new administration and western fears that Iran is covertly boosting its nuclear programme has created a sense of pessimism. Joe Biden has offered to take the US back into the nuclear deal that Donald Trump left in 2018, but Iran and the US are in dispute over the precise US sanctions that must be lifted, and how Iran would reverse the multiple steps it has taken to build its nuclear programme in breach of the deal. After a round of bilateral talks on Sunday, the formal talks will take place at the Coburg hotel between Iran, Russia, China, the UK, France, Germany and the EU on Monday afternoon. Iran has again said it will not hold talk direct talks with the US delegation. Russia’s ambassador to the talks said the near 30-strong Iranian negotiating team was impressive and a good sign, but warned after the five-month delay that: “The talks can’t last for ever. There is the obvious need to speed up the process”. The bulk of the Iranian negotiating team remains unchanged even though the chief negotiator is now Ali Bagheri Kani, the deputy foreign minister and a hardliner that understands English, but not well enough to speak fluently. The new Iranian regime says, at least rhetorically, it is coming to the talks not simply to pick up where the six previous rounds of talks ended, but to play new cards: including a demand for financial compensation from America for previous sanctions, and, even more problematic, for a guarantee that America will not leave the agreement again. The west regards both demands as unrealistic, and if seriously pursued in Vienna, the talks are doomed to failure. Biden has said if he rejoins the agreement his administration will not again leave, seen as the only guarantee he can make constitutionally. Western diplomats admit they are unclear whether the new regime wants a deal or is playing for time covertly to strengthen its nuclear programme. Robert Malley, the head of the US negotiating team, said: “If that’s Iran’s approach, which is to try to use the negotiations as cover for an accelerated nuclear programme, and as I say, drag its feet at the nuclear table, we will have to respond in a way that is not our preference. Nobody should be surprised if at that point there is increased pressure on Iran”. UK diplomats are reluctant to say Iran is now as little as four to six weeks away from the “breakout time” it needs to amass enough fissile material for a single nuclear weapon. The west is unclear partly because UN nuclear inspectors from the IAEA have been denied full access to the disputed nuclear sites, and talks last week to restore access broke down. Raphael Grossi, the International Atomic Energy Agency’s (IAEA) director general, again offered on Friday to return to Tehran, but has received no response. Iran is still many years from being able to weaponise its nuclear material, a goal it insists it is not seeking. Should the Vienna talks collapse, the likelihood is the US and its allies will initially confront Iran at the IAEA next month by calling for an emergency meeting. Israel’s prime minister, Naftali Bennett, is building a coalition to take tough measures against Iran if the talks collapse. Diplomats doubt Iran feels under sufficient economic or political pressure to rejoin the scheme but also point to the growing fortnight long protests over water shortages in Isfahan as a sign that internally Iran more fragile than it appears. Lifting economic sanctions remains a popular objective inside Iran, but the current regime have done little to prepare the nation politically for the compromises that might be necessary. Omer Carmi, former visiting fellow at the Washington Institute, warns Iranian politicians are “implying to domestic audiences that Iran need not lift a finger at the negotiating table to secure sanctions relief”. Ground covered but not resolved in the talks include the extent of sanctions relief, how to verify that sanctions have been lifted and how Iran expects European nations to respond if the US was to leave the agreement again. Iran has long emphasised that it expects Washington to remove all sanctions that are “related to the nuclear deal”, including 1,500 individual sanctions. In dispute are Trump-era sanctions from more than 500 individuals seen by the US as linked to human rights abuses or terrorism, including the 2017 Countering America’s Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA). On verification Tehran will be asked if it would allow an impartial body to supervise sanctions have been lifted, and what benchmarks would be required such as the country’s ability to buy/sell oil and transfer its foreign currency reserves. Bagheri said he would also want European governments to guarantee they will trade with Iran and allow Russia and China to join any special trading vehicle.Last year, Dara McAnulty’s Diary of a Young Naturalist revealed a compelling new teenage voice in nature writing and conservation. Scenes from the Wild is an 80-minute song cycle with music by Cheryl Frances-Hoad, setting words by Amanda Holden that distil the essence of McAnulty’s book into 26 succinct poems. It was Holden’s last completed project before her sudden death in early September and, as performed by the tenor William Morgan and the City of London Sinfonia in this premiere conducted by Geoffrey Paterson, it’s a captivating work, marrying insightful words to gently powerful music. It begins with a recording of a blackbird’s song, lingering long enough so that we really listen to its detail. There are a few lines of speech from the tenor soloist, in character as McAnulty; then a low bass note sounds and, with a characteristic lack of musical preamble, we are into the first song. The work is economically scored and often very beautiful, never more so than when the soloist is singing about the oak tree (McAnulty’s first name means “oak”), which forms a steady touchpoint. The descriptions of wildlife are pithy yet evocative: we hear about “the monochrome suit of a razorbill; the art deco lines of a northern gannet”. Occasionally, the music is onomatopoeic, but more often it’s allusive: a solo viola in an off-key jig disperses an elegant crowd of wading seabirds; an angular, swooping violin tune traces the ballet as researchers are hoisted up to a goshawk nest to tag the chicks; a chattering piccolo moves behind us as if making a bat’s squeaks clearly audible. In among all this we get a strong sense of McAnulty’s character – his defiance as his autism draws the attention of the school bullies, his “solar flare” of anger at humanity’s careless destruction of nature, and, in a passage of especially skilful musical storytelling, the way in which those angry mists can be cleared by both his mother and by nature itself. The potential for staging the piece could be more extensively explored than it was with the lighting changes and small moments of interaction between singer and players here, and the reverberant, word-swallowing acoustic of Southwark Cathedral made things harder for Morgan, but thanks to his tireless performance those words communicated as surely as if they were McAnulty’s own.There is a new front in Britain’s planning wars. Rows over obstructed views and architectural style are being elbowed aside by concerns about the carbon footprint of new buildings. This week, Marks &amp; Spencer became the latest company challenged over its climate impact, when opponents warned that the planned demolition of its 90-year-old flagship store on Oxford Street and replacement with a new structure will create so much carbon dioxide that 2.4m trees would need to be planted to offset it. The City of London is facing pressure over designs for new courts and offices on the site of six demolished buildings off Fleet Street after an independent academic estimated it would cost 19,000 tonnes of CO2 more than an alternative scenario based on refurbishment and extension. The destruction of almost an entire city block was granted consent earlier this year. And in Derby, plans to bulldoze the 1970s brutalist concrete Assembly Rooms rather than refitting it for future use are reckoned to use CO2 equivalent to driving around the world 738 times. The focus comes amid rising concern at the impact of construction on the climate. The World Green Building Council calculates that buildings are responsible for 39% of global energy-related carbon emissions: 28% from energy needed to heat, cool and power them, and 11% from materials and construction. The production of cement accounts for 8% of global carbon emissions, according to research by the Chatham House thinktank. There are signs that planning officials are starting to give greater weight to the carbon footprint of new buildings. Earlier this month, Michael Gove, the secretary of state for levelling up, housing and communities, rejected a plan by the architect Lord Foster to build a 305-metre viewing platform in the City of London, citing its “highly unsustainable concept of using vast quantities of reinforced concrete for the foundations and lift shaft to transport visitors to as high a level as possible to enjoy a view”. Developers counter that new more energy-efficient buildings will in the long term prove more carbon-friendly. On Friday, the countryside campaign group CPRE, which is increasingly scrutinising the climate impact of housebuilding, called for the government to give local authorities greater powers to refuse planning applications due to concerns over carbon emissions. Will Hurst, managing editor of the Architect’s Journal magazine, whose RetrofitFirst campaign commissioned the Derby and London carbon calculations, said: “Our throwaway building culture is one of the key reasons that UK construction has such an appalling carbon footprint. The planning system could make re-use of existing buildings the default.” “If Marks &amp; Spencer is serious about zero carbon, it needs to rethink its plans and retrofit its buildings, not demolish them,” said Geoff Barraclough, Labour’s shadow cabinet member for planning at Westminster city council, after the scheme was granted planning permission on Tuesday. Nicholas Boys Smith, who chairs the advisory board of the government’s Office for Place, which is tasked with driving up design standards, described the M&amp;S scheme as “wasting embodied carbon” and said the retailer has “got this one very badly wrong and should rethink”. Marks &amp; Spencer said its historic home is no longer fit for purpose and after 16 years of operation its new building will offset the carbon impact of its construction and will be more energy-efficient. Sacha Berendji, the company’s property director, said it “positively contributes to our net-zero targets over the long term”. The City of London, which is the developer and planning authority for the courts project, said it is targeting net-zero carbon emissions for the whole Square Mile by 2040. It said calculations used to criticise the plan only considered the upfront carbon impact and did not account for the buildings’ impact over their expected 125-year design life. A spokesperson said the scheme “will reduce energy demand through effective insulation and includes green roofs and an all-electric heating and cooling system, using ground-source heat-pump technology and power sourced from 100% renewable supplies”. Derby city council said refurbishment would only add up to 20 years to the life of the Assembly Rooms, while the plans for a new facility would have a 40-year design life.A 16-year-old boy has been named as the victim in a fatal stabbing in west London. Rishmeet Singh died from a stab wound inflicted during a fight involving a group of people at about 9pm on Wednesday. Paramedics from the London ambulance service were called to an address on Raleigh Road in Southall. Social media footage shows an ambulance crew trying to save the boy’s life in the front garden of the house but the teenager died at the scene. Police have yet to make an arrest and they are now appealing for any information that could help piece together the events of Wednesday night. DCI James Shirley, who is leading the investigation, said: “My thoughts and those of my team are with Rishmeet’s family and friends at this incredibly difficult time. “I want to reassure them and the wider community that we are working around the clock to bring the person, or people, responsible for Rishmeet’s death to justice.” Shirley added: “I want to take this opportunity to reiterate my appeal for anyone who was in the area around Raleigh Road just after 9pm on Wednesday and saw this incident to get in contact. “You may have vital evidence that could help us progress this investigation. “I would also ask local residents in the area, or road users who were around Raleigh Road at the time of this attack, to check any footage they may have captured on doorbell, dashboard or CCTV cameras. If you can help, please get in touch.” Police have put in place a section 35 dispersal order, which gives officers powers to direct people to leave an area, until Sunday afternoon in Southall Broadway, Southall Green, the Havelock Estate, Uxbridge town centre and Hayes town centre. Residents across Hounslow, Hillingdon and Ealing were told to expect to see an increased policing presence over the coming days. Ch Supt Sean Wilson, head of policing in the area, said: “Rishmeet’s family have been devastated by his death and my thoughts are with them. Specialist detectives continue to work at pace to find out who was responsible for this attack. “I would also add my appeal to the public to get in touch if they have any information that could help the investigation. “I know that this tragic incident will have understandably shocked the local community and our officers throughout the west area share that shock.” Singh is the 28th teenager to be killed on the streets of London this year.Geordie folk singer and razor-sharp chronicler of modern Britain Richard Dawson and Finnish experimental rock veterans Circle might seem an odd match on paper, but Henki, largely recorded in Pori, on Finland’s west coast before the pandemic, defies expectations. Loosely based around botanists and plants (unless Ed Sheeran goes off-piste in the next five weeks, Silene is likely to be the standout song of 2021 written from the perspective of a 32,000-year-old seed), the seven songs here have been intricately crafted, with imaginative, constantly evolving arrangements highlighting Circle’s prog credentials. There are also unexpectedly euphoric choruses too: the instrumental mid-section of Silphium makes like a more dissonant take on Xanadu-era Rush, then gradually builds momentum before exploding back to life again just before the 11-minute mark. Methuselah gallops along like a flora-fixated Iron Maiden as it tells the cautionary tale of Donald Currey, a researcher trying to find the oldest tree on Earth who only realised he’d found it after he’d cut it down in 1964. Throughout, there is so much going on that it takes many listens to absorb everything. But persevere and a tour de force of botanical rock takes form.A Nobel prize-winning economic theory used by investors is showing early signs of helping save threatened coral reefs, scientists say. Researchers at Australia’s University of Queensland used modern portfolio theory (MPT), a mathematical framework developed by the economist Harry Markowitz in the 1950s to help risk-averse investors maximise returns, to identify the 50 reefs or coral sanctuaries around the world that are most likely to survive the climate crisis and be able to repopulate other reefs, if other threats are absent. The study recommends targeting investment in conservation projects that have the “strongest potential to succeed” in protecting priority reefs. The gains go beyond positive ecological outcomes and include crucial social, economic, health and nutritional benefits for communities, according to partners, organisations and funders interviewed by Blue Earth Consultants. Prof Ove Hoegh-Guldberg, a climate scientist at the University of Queensland, who helped lead the “50 reefs” project, said: “It’s essentially a strategy to help us make decisions about what to protect, if we are to have corals at the end of the century.” “It is our best shot at having a long-term future for coral reefs,” he said. Coral reefs face a dire future. Even if drastic emission reductions ensured global heating was limited to 1.5C above pre-industrial levels – which would require almost halving global CO2 emissions by 2030 from 2010 levels – 70% to 90% of today’s corals would vanish. In October, a study of coral reef health found 14% has been lost globally in less than a decade, with bleaching events caused by raised sea-surface temperatures the biggest culprit. “Modern portfolio theory is a framework that aims to reduce risk while maximising returns,” said Hoegh-Guldberg. “It’s treating conservation sort of as an investment opportunity.” The strategy, which came out of a meeting of scientists at the Hawaiʻi Institute of Marine Biology in 2017, tapped into the theory to help scientists choose a “balanced” portfolio of coral reefs. “You’ve got hundreds of these reefs across the planet,” said Hoegh-Guldberg. “Which one do you pick, so that you concentrate your efforts on it?” Dr Hawthorne Beyer, a fellow at the University of Queensland researching the use of quantitative modelling in managing environmental systems, said: “Talk to people in the business world and they get it immediately. It’s a very logical idea and makes a lot of sense. Ours was the first to apply it on a global scale.” The scientists divided the world’s coral reefs into “bioclimatic units” (BCU) of 500 sq km (190 sq miles). They used 174 metrics, in five categories, including temperature history and projections, ocean acidification, invasive species, cyclone activity and connectivity to other reefs, for each one. Then, using a process called “scalarisation”, they produced estimates for each BCU. This captured the widest range of possibilities for the future. “We don’t know which metrics are the best metrics at predicting risk,” explained Beyer. The team then used MPT to quantify threats and identify the reefs offering the best options for conservation, while allowing for the uncertainty over future risks from climate change. “You don’t want to put all your eggs in one basket, or bet on one measure of risk, when we have massive uncertainty about what the risks will be,” he said. The project identified reefs across the Middle East, northern and eastern Africa, Australia, the Caribbean, Pacific islands, South America, south-east and south Asia. They include parts of the Great Barrier Reef in Australia, the Egyptian and southern Red Sea, and parts of the “coral triangle” around Indonesia, Malaysia, Papua New Guinea and the Philippines. But, based on the criteria for climate and connectivity, the model excluded several ecologically significant areas, such as Hawaii and Central America’s Barrier Reef. Nearly $93m (£70m) has been invested in the project, funded by Bloomberg Philanthropies’ Vibrant Oceans initiative and others. The report found the 50 reefs-inspired approach had helped at least 26 organisations, and eight funders have now prioritised 60 coral reef ecosystems across more than 40 countries. Coral reefs cover just 0.2% of the ocean floor but are home to at least a quarter of all marine species and support hundreds of millions of people. Conservation efforts inspired by the study have focused on five threats to coral: fishing; “non-point source pollution”, such as from fertilisers, runoff from roads, or sediment; wastewater pollution; coastal development; and stress to reefs from climatic extremes. Emily Darling, director of coral reef conservation at the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), said part of the benefit was having a clear blueprint of where best to focus their efforts. “One of the biggest benefits of the 50 reef approach has been this compelling message that climate change is the critical threat to coral reefs and this is an approach that can give reefs a fighting chance.” The WCS has $18m in funding for work in 11 countries, including Fiji, Indonesia, Kenya and Tanzania, on 21 of the 50 reefs, to help communities reduce pressure on the precious ecosystems. “We are looking at non-climate threats such as overexploitation, destructive fishing, unsustainable tourism, coastal development, water pollution. We then ask ‘well, what are the top local pressures?’,” said Darling. “And that’s how we identify which intervention to tailor to those different situations.” A no-take marine protected area between Kenya and Tanzania – in which no fishing, mining, drilling or similar activities are allowed – has been supported by WSC to protect the corals from these other pressures running alongside global heating. “By doing that, we will not only safeguard coral reef biodiversity, but also the whales, spinner dolphins, the dugong, coelacanth fish, that whole ecosystem,” she said. One of the 50 reefs identified is the “happy coral” sanctuary discovered in Tanzania, reported by the Guardian last year, where coral species have thrived despite warming events that have killed neighbouring reefs.The 18th-century Irish poem Caoineadh Airt Uí Laoghaire is a “keen” written by Eibhlín Dubh Ní Chonaill, a woman mourning her husband and raging at his murder. Doireann Ní Ghríofa first encountered it as a schoolgirl with a gift for daydreaming. By the time she found her way back to it, she was married and midway through a decade during which she was either pregnant, breastfeeding or both, her days filled with the “drudge work” of raising four small children. In snatched moments of solitude – invariably accompanied by a whirring breast pump – she would study her tatty photocopy of the poem, “inviting the voice of another woman to haunt my throat a while”. This incandescent, uncategorisable prose debut is the result of her invocation. It’s a book that is many things – a reimagining of an 18th-century life that combines scholarship with imaginative verve; an account of obsession and a meditation on the limits of biography; a memoir of post-feminist motherhood. It also features Ní Ghríofa’s own stirring translation of Eibhlín Dubh’s lament. What A Ghost in the Throat is not, however, is straightforward. It may have been written in borrowed pockets of time between supper and bed – indeed, it may only exist because Ní Ghríofa’s husband insisted on getting a vasectomy – but she is unabashed about the satisfaction she finds in homemaking and housework. “In such erasure, for me, lies joy,” she confides about ticking items off a diurnal list comprised of words such as “mop” and “laundry”. She’s less confident when it comes to delving into archives. “I am merely a woman who loves this poem,” she says. But she also happens to be a published poet, and when it comes to prose, is incapable of delivering a dud sentence. This is a text that glints with treasures, from ruminations on the connections between “stanza” and the Italian word for room, to descriptions of “a shiver-bright day” and the “buttery hellos” of nodding daffodils. The book begins with words that will become its refrain: “This is a female text.” In entwining her own existence with the story of a lauded poem and its overlooked author, she busts open the idea of the female text to encompass not merely self-sacrifice and scars, but also merriment, desire, and fierce, sustaining curiosity. • A Ghost in the Throat by Doireann Ní Ghríofa is published by Tramp Press (£8.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWomen’s experiences of domestic and sexual violence will be dramatised in a West End theatre next week to “give voice” to survivors and highlight the scale of abuse. “We all carry a lifetime of experiences – it doesn’t matter who you are or what your background is,” said Sadie Frost, one of those performing in Punched. The evening of short monologues and scenes based on survivors’ stories will raise funds for charities working around gender-based abuse. Described as a homage to The Vagina Monologues, it is directed by Jude Kelly, and performers include Priyanga Burford, Tracy-Ann Oberman, Issy Knopfler and spoken-word poet Miss Yankey. Annie Lennox will make an address via a film shot by Hollywood director Sam Taylor-Johnson, and Saffron Burrows has directed a short film with Marianne Jean-Baptiste in support of a South African rape crisis centre. Punched came out of a conversation between actors Donna Air and Lorien Haynes. “We met to discuss writing a sitcom and by the end of the meeting we had created Punched,” said Air. The pair were alarmed by the “shadow pandemic” of domestic abuse and violence during the Covid lockdowns. In March, the charity Refuge reported a 61% increase in calls to its helpline and other contacts in the previous year. This month, the Office for National Statistics estimated that one in three women over the age of 16 were subjected to at least one form of harassment in the past year – a figure that increases to two in three for women aged 16 to 34. “Dramatising these stories makes them powerful but also easier to witness and process,” said Haynes. “They are all under three minutes, and all self-contained stories of moments in women’s lives. A lot are stories of triumph.” Haynes, a survivor of abuse, said writing and producing Punched “brings up all your own shit, but I’ve always felt it was important to see the bigger picture”. Air said she had been overwhelmed by the response to The Split, a BBC drama in which she played a woman divorcing her controlling husband. “I was surprised how much it spoke to people. I had an enormous number of letters from people who had been feeling very isolated.” Eve Ensler’s The Vagina Monologues became a global sensation after it was first performed in New York in 1996. The producers of Punched hope that adaptations of their show may also eventually find audiences across the world. Each story highlights a different aspect of gender-based violence, including rape, coercive control, sexual harassment and abuse of children. Frost will perform in a two-hander adapted from a screenplay she is writing, featuring a mother and daughter. “It draws on my experiences and those of my friends, but it’s not about me,” she said. There had been a “huge generational shift” in attitudes to domestic and sexual violence, Frost added. Women in their 40s and older had been expected to tolerate certain behaviours, said Air, whereas younger women had “much stronger voices, and put down much firmer boundaries”. Punched is raising funds for three charities: The Circle, founded by Lennox, Refuge, and Southall Black Sisters. “It’s not a fancy theatre show, it’s very stripped back and no-frills,” said Air. All those producing and performing in the event have donated their time. “It won’t be a night of huge performances – it’s a night of being honest,” said Frost. Punched: An Evening of Survivors’ Stories is at the Criterion Theatre in London on Monday 6 December.It began with a sheepskin slipper in 1825, but Clarks is moving out of its comfort zone in a battle for survival under new Chinese leadership. The British footwear institution, founded by Quaker brothers Cyrus and James Clark, shifted from comfort to fashion after the desert boot inspired by James’ great grandson Nathan Clark’s time in Burma in the 1940s became the footwear of choice for the Beatles, Oasis and generations of reggae artists. Now the boot is on the other foot as the founding family were forced to this year cede control to Chinese Olympian Li Ning and private equity group LionRock after slumping into the red and struggling to refinance debts after years of malaise. Li Ning, the billionaire former gymnast who now heads a sports footwear colossus with sales of 14.4bn RMB (£1.7bn), teamed up with LionRock shortly before it pumped £100m into Clarks to take a 51% controlling stake. The Chinese investors want to follow the lead of Dr Martens and Birkenstock, turning Clarks from a historic brand and the pride of Somerset, into an international powerhouse led by expansion in Asia. Industry insiders say they will use the Li Ning brand’s contacts to help secure expansion for Clarks in China and beyond. “The UK will now be not that important,” one said. At home, a potential signal for the future comes via a tie-up with Marks &amp; Spencer, through which Clarks now sells its children’s shoes. But Li Ning will have to pull off a flip of incredible proportions to turn around the troubled brand, where sales have fallen steadily for at least four years and profits have crumbled away since 2014. Clarks has found itself pincered between both discount and upmarket rivals after being kicked aside by trendier trainer purveyors. “You get born in Clarks and you die in Clarks, but from 10 to 70 you don’t want them,” said one industry insider. “Taste moved quicker than they did and the market disappeared rapidly at the mid- to more expensive price point,” a rival said. As the pandemic compounded years of poor trading, Clarks cancelled its dividend to shareholders including the founding family in January for the second consecutive year. That came after it reported a 43% slump in sales to £775m in the year to 30 January as the group sank £172m into the red from a £21.5m profit a year before. Net debt rose to £98m from £32m a year before and the pension surplus dived from nearly £128m to just £9.9m last year. Clarks’ board warned in May that there was “material uncertainty” about its ability to meet targets given the on-going pandemic. While Clarks was trading ahead of budget when it filed its annual report in May, the company said changes in consumer behaviour “may cast significant doubt on [the company’s] ability to continue as a going concern” and it may have to consider an “equity cure” or debt-for-equity swap to raise more cash. Such questions are likely to be top of the minutes at the annual shareholder meeting, set for 23 December when the Clarks family may have to consider losing their grip on the brand entirely. Clarks said this week that its most recently filed accounts reflected the “significant impact” of the pandemic on its business globally. A Clarks spokesperson said: “We are pleased that the company is currently on track to meet its forecast revenue and profit goals, and our debt and cash positions have been considerably improved in the last few months. We still face many challenges, but the loosening of pandemic restrictions in our key markets and the strong management of costs in the past six months have resulted in the delivery of an improved financial position in rapid time.” It said that since LionRock had acquired a majority stake in the business, it had implemented a “focused turnaround strategy designed to protect the future of the business, and to build a foundation for sustainable growth in the years ahead”. Its future strategy may yet take another turn as Clarks is searching for a new boss after going through six chief executives in as many years. Johnny Chen, Clarks’ chair, is currently acting as interim chief executive after taking over from Victor Herrero, a former executive at US fashion label Guess, who stepped down earlier this month after just nine months in the role. The company has spent more than £2m on pay-offs or legal fees relating to the departure of its top-level team, including a very public legal spat with former Zara and Karen Millen boss Mike Shearwood. Clarks is currently in mediation with representatives for workers at its warehouse in Street, Somerset, who say the business is seeking to cut their wages by almost 15% by using controversial fire-and-rehire tactics. A year ago, Clarks left its landlords outraged after pushing through a controversial restructure that cut rent on 60 stores to nil. While Clarks was not alone in suffering during the pandemic, its troubles date back to well before Covid-19 appeared. The company has gone from being the UK’s biggest footwear retailer six years ago to a poor third behind Sports Direct and JD Sports. Its share of the market has halved to 4% during that time as JD’s has grown by more than a third to almost 11%, according to analysts at GlobalData. Problems at home have been compounded by Clarks’ disparate image around the world. In the UK, eight out of 10 of its bestsellers are children’s shoes, while in Asia it is known for trainers and in North America it has a cut-price image. One industry insider said Clarks had suffered from a string of leaders who wanted to sell something different from what their core customers wanted. “For the last five years they have wanted a different consumer and have put the ones they have got on the back burner.” Clarks employed more than 11,000 people in 2014 and had cut 2,500 jobs around the world by January after closing more than 250 shops in the UK alone. Major writedowns on outdated IT systems and millions of pounds worth of unwanted stock have also held back the business. Patrick O’Brien at GlobalData said Clarks was too slow to reduce its store count and move with the times, leaving it in a “real predicament”. “It is very difficult for a retailer like that to remain relevant. They are stuck in a place in people’s psyche that is contrary to where the market is going.” An industry insider put it more bluntly: “It is still a major brand, but they have lost their way completely.”Tour operators are scrambling to rearrange Swiss skiing holidays after the country joined Spain in tightening travel restrictions amid rising concerns about the spread of the new Omicron Covid variant. From Saturday night, Switzerland mandated 10 days of quarantine for all new arrivals, in effect wrecking skiing holidays in the Swiss Alps until further notice. Travel firms are also wrestling with Spain’s ban on non-vaccinated arrivals that will affect British holidaymakers from Wednesday 1 December. Israel was also expected to announce a ban on foreign visitors for a fortnight, which could come into effect from Monday. The international measures to limit the spread of the new Covid variant came as tour operators warned a new testing regime for arrivals to the UK expected to come into effect early this week was “a huge blow for travel businesses”. Boris Johnson announced on Saturday that all arrivals to the UK “must take a day two PCR test and self-isolate until they receive a negative result”. For a family of four wanting a rapid turnaround test so they can leave quarantine within a day, that could increase the cost of their holiday by about £400. The measures will be reviewed in three weeks. In a sign that people are already rethinking travel plans in the light of Omicron’s emergence, Thomas Cook, the UK’s largest tour operator, said sales of holidays on Saturday were at the same level as previous weeks despite running discounts in a Black Friday sale. After Johnson’s announcement on Saturday evening it is expecting a fall in consumer confidence. On Sunday it was contacting customers with booked Swiss skiing holidays to rearrange for a different country or to move the holiday to next year. The timing of the new UK restrictions is bad for the travel industry as the coming weeks up until payday in January are considered the key period for selling holidays for next year, and operators fear the uncertainty about the impact of the new virus strain will cause a bookings slump. The tougher rules set out by Spain, a key market, only add to the difficulties. TUI, which operates skiing holidays under the Crystal Ski brand, said: “Any customers who do not wish to travel and are due to travel up to and including 13 December can change their holiday fee-free using the Crystal Ski Holidays free changes policy. We will continue to monitor the restrictions and if quarantine is still enforced for all UK arrivals, we will cancel holidays and customers would receive a full refund within 14 days.” EasyJet, which flies all across Europe, said its customers “can change their flights without a change fee up to two hours before departure. EasyJet also continues to offer a market-leading refund policy for those impacted by travel bans across Europe, which means that they can receive a refund, voucher or free transfer to a later date, even if their flights are still operating.” It said its flying programme was operating as normal but the airline will “continue to monitor the situation closely.” An Abta spokesperson said: “These changes will add cost to people’s holidays which will undoubtedly impact consumer demand and hold back the industry’s recovery, so it’s vital that this decision is kept under careful review and restrictions are lifted promptly if it becomes clear there is not a risk to the UK vaccination programme. The government must also now consider offering tailored support for travel businesses, which have been among the hardest hit during the pandemic.” Spain announced on Saturday that people arriving from the UK would need to show proof of vaccination, in effect ending an exemption to EU travel restrictions. Evidence of a negative test result and/or proof that arrivals have had Covid will no longer be enough. The official announcement appears to suggest there may be an exemption for children. It states that the new policy covers “people with a vaccination certificate recognised as such by the health ministry, as well as accompanying minors to whom the health ministry extends the effects [of the decision].” Meanwhile there was good news for the many Irish families living in Great Britain who have planned to return to Ireland for their first Christmas since 2019, when the British embassy in Dublin confirmed that PCR tests and quarantine would not be required for people coming into Great Britain from Ireland, Northern Ireland, the Isle of Man or the Channel Islands. The exemption for travellers from the Common Travel Area will not apply if they have been outside the area in the previous 10 days.Omicron, the name of the new Covid-19 variant that is sending worrying signals from southern Africa, sounds like something from Transformers. It has caused panic across the world, among governments, the public and the stock markets. After adding a number of southern African countries to the red list, the UK government has reimposed mandatory masks in England from Tuesday, and will require anyone travelling to the country from abroad to take a PCR test. Omicron is probably the first variant to have scientists worried since Delta became the predominant strain in every country last summer. But how bad is it? What does it mean for future lockdowns – and future deaths? Scientists are waiting on three pieces of data before they will be able to tell what effect this new variant will have over the next six to 12 months. The first is how infectious Omicron is. Can it outcompete Delta? Earlier this year we saw another worrying variant, Beta, that luckily faded away as a result of a selective advantage in Delta that allowed it to transmit faster between people. Limited data from South Africa shows that Omicron is very infectious, but whether it will become the predominant strain remains to be seen. The second thing scientists are waiting for is data showing the impact of this new variant on health outcomes – both in terms of hospitalisations and deaths. The reason governments impose lockdown measures is because hospitals fill up; limiting social mixing helps to slow the spread of the virus and reduce the impact on health services. In an optimistic scenario, Omicron may cause less severe disease and become more like the common cold. In a more realistic scenario, it could cause the same disease levels that we’ve seen with Alpha, Beta and Delta. The third and most concerning piece of data is the potential for Omicron to erode the immunity afforded by vaccines. Crucially, this wouldn’t necessarily mean that our current vaccines would stop working against Omicron. It would mean they would be less effective at stopping transmission – and, most worryingly, at stopping people from going into hospital and dying. This is based on a virological analysis of the sequencing of Omicron’s genome, and we don’t yet know the implications it will have in the real world. Companies such as BioNTech, which developed the Pfizer vaccine, are already trying to gauge the impact their vaccine will have on this variant. So what does this mean for each of us? Right now, we need to continue to do all the things we should already be doing to get through the harsh winter months: getting vaccinated, and boosted, to protect ourselves; using the free home-testing kits to ensure we’re not infecting others, whether in friends’ homes or in pubs and restaurants; wearing masks in crowded places such as public transport and shops; and being attentive to how many close contacts we have. For governments, it means having to plan for several scenarios. The first (and best) would be that Omicron can’t outcompete Delta, or results in milder forms of the disease, or vaccine effectiveness remains high. The worst would be that an updated vaccine is urgently required (scientists could theoretically deliver one in a matter of weeks), followed by a massive vaccination campaign to get this variant-specific booster out to populations as quickly as possible. Governments have learned that it’s better to move earlier with precautionary measures rather than waiting and watching a crisis unfold. Scientists are increasingly cast in the role of “bad guys”; we’re the ones who convey difficult messages and uncertainty to the public, and are transparent on what we know and don’t know. Right now, everyone just wants Covid to be over and normal life to resume. Yet “when will this end?” is the wrong question to be asking – a more appropriate one is: “How do we manage this infectious disease in a more effective way so we get back more of our normal life?” Last winter was particularly bad. This winter will be bad, but not to the same degree. The hope is that by the spring, and definitely by next winter, we will be in a strong position to manage this disease through testing, vaccines and antiviral therapies. But, if nothing else, Omicron has shown that all humans on this planet are in the same boat (albeit in different cabins with differential access to vaccines), and the pandemic will only be over when it’s over in all parts of the world. Not just in Britain. Prof Devi Sridhar is chair of global public health at the University of EdinburghThe UK and France are “engaging in a blame game” over people making perilous Channel crossings in small boats, Labour has said, rather than sitting down together to try to work out a way to prevent more deaths. The diplomatic spat between the countries, which saw France disinvite Priti Patel from a meeting of EU ministers in Calais on Sunday, after Boris Johnson tweeted a letter on the issue to Emmanuel Macron before the French president had received it, was “simply unconscionable”, Lisa Nandy said. “France blames Britain, Britain blames France – the truth is that both governments are engaging in a blame game while children drown off their coastline,” the shadow foreign secretary told Sky’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday programme. “It’s just simply unconscionable and any responsible government on either side of the Channel would set aside those differences and work together to deal with what is a collective shared problem that will only be solved together.” France invited representatives from Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands and the European Commission to the meeting in Calais after 27 people hoping to claim asylum in the UK died last week. While UK officials have held talks in France, Patel, the home secretary, was removed from plans after intense French anger at what they felt was provocative UK action in tweeting the letter. Patel had separately spoken on Sunday to Kajsa Ollongren, the Dutch interior minister, UK officials say. Speaking to Sky, Nandy castigated Patel and Johnson’s approach to liaising with France, and also called for policies to tackle the wider issues connected to illicit Channel crossings, such as a lack of safe routes to claim asylum in the UK. “The government is writing open letters to the French that they are releasing via social media, calling on the French to do things that any responsible government would have already done – to get in place a mechanism across Europe to be able to return people to safe third countries they travel through, to agree safe and legal routes for people who have no obligations to come here,” she said. “The asylum system across Europe and across the world has completely broken down. If you look at the countries that people are freeing from, it’s Syria, it’s Afghanistan, there are reasons why people are on the move and the world has been completely unable to come together to deal with that. “One of the people on the boat that sank just a week ago was an Afghan soldier who said he had given up hope of being able to get to Britain through a legal route, because although the home secretary announced an expansion of their Afghan refugee settlement scheme, that scheme hasn’t even opened yet and that was three months ago. “These routes simply don’t exist and they won’t exist for as long as the government continues to engage in a blame game with others and doesn’t do the hard yards of sitting down around a table and agreeing how we are going to tackle this together.”1922: Scenes from a Turbulent Year Nick Rennison Oldcastle, £12.99, pp255 Attempting a pithy summary of the events of any year is a difficult task, especially one as seismic as 1922. Nick Rennison has given it a go in this entertaining and thoroughly readable canter through the events of a century ago. His account cannot be faulted for lacking comprehensiveness – the downfall of the actor Fatty Arbuckle sits alongside Gandhi’s trial and the publication of Ulysses – but occasionally you wish that Rennison’s breathless narrative would slow down, allowing him to savour the fascinating stories that he shares here. The Retreat Alison Moore Salt, £9.99, pp160 Artists’ retreats are usually portrayed as places of solace and inspiration, but Alison Moore’s intriguing novel offers a bracing counterpoint. She depicts the island of Lieloh, home to the former movie star Valerie Swanson, as a strange and threatening place, full of enigma and artifice. When aspiring painter Sandra Peters joins the retreat, it proves to be anything but a relaxing trip away. Depicting the creative process risks edging towards solipsism, but Moore vividly creates an otherworldly milieu that will make you glad you’re not a resident there. Greenlights Matthew McConaughey Headline, £14.99, pp289 (paperback) Through a chequered career that has included acclaim, ridicule, awards and bafflement, actor Matthew McConaughey has maintained a public reputation as a likable and unpretentious figure, happy both embracing the limelight and veering away from it. His not-quite-memoir offers a smörgåsbord of life lessons, anecdotes and wry observations on fame, oscillating between earnest pop philosophy (the title motif becomes tiresome long before the end) and self-deprecating stories about his time as “Mr Shirtless Romcom Guy”. It would be hard to finish the book and not warm to its author. To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy of 1922: Scenes from a Turbulent Year, The Retreat or Greenlights at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyWhere has Omicron been detected so far? Since the announcement of the first cases in South Africa, Botswana and Hong Kong earlier this week, additional cases have been reported in Belgium, Germany, Italy, the Czech Republic, Australia and the UK. All of these cases were in individuals who had recently arrived from South Africa, Mozambique or Egypt. Dutch authorities have also been sequencing samples from 61 passengers who arrived in Amsterdam from South Africa on Friday and tested positive for Covid-19. Of these, 13 have been identified as Omicron cases. How many UK cases have been identified, and where are they? So far, the UK has identified three cases, two in Nottingham and Brentwood, Essex, which involved travel connections with South Africa, and a further case of an individual who was visiting the UK. Contact tracing and targeted testing at locations where these individuals were likely to have been infectious is currently under way, in order to establish further likely contacts and cases. All positive cases will undergo further genome sequencing to identify whether or not they are infected with the Omicron variant. According to new temporary and precautionary measures set out by Boris Johnson on Saturday, all contacts of suspected Omicron cases must self-isolate, regardless of their vaccination status. Why are we so concerned about this variant? The Omicron variant has a large number of mutations compared with previous variants, more than 30 of which are in the spike protein – the key used by the virus to enter our body’s cells. Such a dramatic change has raised concerns that the antibodies from previous infections or vaccination may no longer be well matched, although it’s likely that some residual immunity, for example from T-cells, will remain. Some of the same mutations have been seen in other partially vaccine-resistant variants, such as Beta and Gamma, although Omicron contains many additional mutations. Purely based on this list of mutations, scientists anticipate that the virus will be more likely to infect – or reinfect – people who have immunity to earlier variants. These are theoretical predictions, though, and studies are rapidly being conducted to test how effectively antibodies neutralise Omicron. Also of concern is how rapidly Omicron appears to have spread within South Africa, where there has been a surge of cases in the past two weeks. More than 80% of these were from Gauteng province, and preliminary analysis suggests Omicron has rapidly become the dominant strain. There is a chance this is a statistical blip linked to a super-spreader event, but the data has triggered enough concern for precautionary measures. Which countries have been added to the UK’s travel “red list”? From 4pm on Sunday, passengers arriving in England from South Africa, Botswana, Lesotho, Eswatini, Zimbabwe and Namibia will be required to book and pay for a government-approved hotel quarantine facility for 10 days. Those who have arrived since midday on Friday but before this deadline must quarantine at home for 10 days and take NHS PCR tests on days two and eight, even if they already have a booking for a lateral flow test. The government has also added to the requirements for travellers from other countries, so all international arrivals must take a PCR test by the end of the second day after their arrival, and self-isolate until they have a negative result. Which countries have introduced travel bans on UK passengers? Israel has responded to the emergence of Omicron by banning all foreigners from entering the country for 14 days. Switzerland has imposed a 10-day quarantine on anyone arriving from the UK, regardless of their vaccination status. The same applies to travellers from the Czech Republic, the Netherlands, Egypt and Malawi. Spain has also imposed restrictions on UK passengers: only those who have been fully vaccinated will be allowed in from 1 December. Previously, anyone could enter if they could show a negative PCR test taken within 72 hours before arrival. What other rules have been brought in to contain Omicron’s spread? Besides the new travel measures and the requirement for contacts of suspected Omicron cases to self-isolate, regardless of their vaccination status, face coverings will be made compulsory in shops and on public transport in England from Tuesday, bringing it closer in line with Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland. Hospitality settings such as pubs and restaurants will be exempt from the change. The new measures will be reviewed in three weeks’ time, the prime minister has said. Is there any difference in the symptoms people are reporting? According to Dr Angelique Coetzee, who runs a private practice in Pretoria, South Africa, the Omicron patients she has seen have presented with relatively mild symptoms, and none of the loss of taste of smell typically associated with Covid-19. Instead, they have had reported unusual symptoms, such as intense fatigue and a high pulse rate. However, it is too soon to know whether these anecdotal reports will be true of everyone who is infected with Omicron. How could it play out in the coming weeks? Within the next month, we should have a far better idea of how contagious Omicron is, and whether or not it is associated with more severe disease. We should also know the extent to which it has been contained, or if it has spread more widely, as is expected by many scientists. Perhaps most important will be the results of those ongoing experiments to test how effectively antibodies neutralise the new variant. Real-world data on reinfection rates will also give a clearer indication of the extent of any change in immunity resistance. Until all this data is available, it makes sense to remain cautious and reimpose some restrictions to limit Omicron’s spread.This was a muted affair in which Manchester City kept West Ham on a long lead and twice pounced expertly via Ilkay Gündogan and Fernandinho to claim the points. The strikes were flashes of high quality from the champions whose control, once they settled, will please Pep Guardiola and though Manuel Lanzini scored in the 95th minute the result was never in doubt. Gündogan’s finish came just after the half-hour and from this juncture City were hardly troubled by David Moyes’s men until the very end. As the congested winter schedule begins there was also an economy of effort that should be welcomed by a manager whose squad was depleted for a 13th Premier League game of the campaign that ended with his team in second place. Injury ruled out Phil Foden and Jack Grealish, as Guardiola named only eight replacements for a meeting with the side three points and one position behind them and which was decorated by a light dusting of snow at kick-off. If the opening half would end close to a white-out due to the conditions, City’s feather-like defence was first exposed by Michail Antonio who shrugged a tentative Rúben Días aside, moved into the area along the left, and crossed but no teammate could finish. Seeing this, Kyle Walker decided direct action at the other end might wake City with a shot that beat Lukasz Fabianski but not the goalkeeper’s right post. Next was a sequence of pinpoint precision that involved Walker, Gündogan and Gabriel Jesus, before the latter’s radar proved awry when trying to return the ball to Gündogan near goal. By now the snow was falling constantly and when Antonio next received it was along the right and this time Aymeric Laporte, preferred to John Stones, was bullied by the No 9 and City were grateful to escape. Both rearguards needed to tighten. At City’s first corner Laporte was allowed to rise highest and head marginally over by a sleepy defence. Moments later, another warning: this time Riyad Mahrez skipped in and drilled home, but it was ruled offside. The pace of the contest had hardly nudged above a trot and was pocked by heavy touches and a clogged midfield. Saïd Benrahma and Gündogan each took aim from 20 yards out with no success and, later, Raheem Sterling’s curler concerned Fabianski who was happy to see the ball sail wide. The Hammers’ forward forays were more sporadic than their hosts yet seemed, at this point, to always threaten. Aaron Cresswell’s attempt to beat Ederson directly from a free-kick was deflected out for a corner. Cresswell and Declan Rice worked the set piece, but up went the flag when the ball was crossed. City, who had been in a slumber, finally jolted into life. Mahrez fielded a long ball on the right, cut inside and fed a lurking Gündogan who could hardly miss from inches out. Ben Johnson, exposed here by Mahrez, saved his side when those in blue next attacked, blocking Jesus’s shot off the line with Fabianski beaten. As the interval approached the pitch markings were becoming tricky to see. Mahrez, too, might have had his vision blighted when smacking a shot off the left post but as the second half commenced the snow had abated and the pitch cleared, following an extended break. This benefited City, who were coasting, and was underlined by an early corner that pinned their visitors back. The Hammers, as the second half went on, continued to be pummelled by some percussive passing. Better from them was a move that had Johnson hitting in a cross that Laporte steered out for a corner. It remained, though, a canter for City. Antonio broke but ceded possession – West Ham did this too much – and suddenly Sterling was skating clear, clipping the ball over for Jesus who should have doubled the lead. The team from east London, who lost last week at Wolves, were being toyed with in a manner which informed them of their status. Rice, though, did keep Ederson honest with a 30-yard piledriver the Brazilian punched away before Gündogan, at the other end, had Fabianski sliding on the turf to keep the deficit to one. The keeper could do nothing about Fernandinho’s late second. On as a substitute, the midfielder sealed the win with a slide-rule finish, while Lanzini’s classy goal – he hit the top corner – was consolation only. Rodri, composed throughout, said afterwards: “It was a very difficult day because of the weather conditions but it is always difficult against this team. We were lucky to get this first goal because in the first half we couldn’t play much. In the second we dominated and could have scored more.” He was correct and with this victory City made it five in a-row in all competitions, for the first time this season. In the corresponding week of last season they began a 28-game unbeaten sequence, 21 of which were victories, that ran until March. For their rivals, this win may be ominous.Claudio Ranieri appreciated the heartwarming welcome he received on his first managerial return to Leicester City but Jamie Vardy, unabashed by Watford’s apparent wish to have the game abandoned as the pitch became covered in snow, showed why he has never been allowed to go away as his two goals proved the difference between the sides. The whole home crowd had taken to their feet just before kick-off to chant Ranieri’s name and applaud the manager who led their team to the Premier League title five years ago. It was an edifyingly emotional moment and clearly moved the Italian, but as the snow reportedly prompted the goalkeeper Daniel Bachmann to ask for the game to be called off, Vardy was intent on not making this too hospitable a return. “He got the reception the fans wanted to give him,” Vardy said of his former manager. “We knew it was down to business on the pitch, though, and we wanted the win. “It is different [the weather]. You see with the ref having to stop it [to clear the snow off the lines in the second half]. These are things you have to deal with. You have to stay professional and we did that. At one point their keeper was trying to get it called off with the ref. But pitches have the undersoil heating and we weren’t worried.” There were pre-match handshakes from his former staff for the Watford manager but one of his most important old players had a more ambiguous welcoming gesture after giving Leicester the lead again in the 34th minute. Vardy had revealed in his autobiography that his former manager nicknamed him “Radio Wanker” because of his incessant dressing-room chatter and he made a beeline towards the visitors’ dugout after making it 2-1 with a delicately dinked shot over Bachmann following James Maddison’s exquisite lofted pass. Vardy raced up the touchline to the benches and then pointed towards Mike Stowell, a surviving member of Leicester’s coaching staff from the Ranieri era, who was stationed behind Ranieri. Leicester’s leading goalscorer then made his point in rather more traditional fashion eight minutes later, heading on Maddison’s corner into the far corner of the net to make it 3-1 at half-time. In the 16th minute, Jonny Evans, passed fit to start after a thigh injury, had played the free-kick that led to Maddison giving Leicester the lead. Bizarrely, William Troost-Ekong opted – or received a shout – to duck under the long pass. That simply allowed Maddison to run in on the blindside and swivel to shoot in with his right foot. Following his goal and performance on Thursday, these are signs Maddison is gradually returning towards his best. “We know when Madders [James Maddison] gets on the ball he has that creativity,” Vardy said. “It is about making the runs for him. It was a massive win.” However swashbuckling Leicester can look going forwards, they are still defensively vulnerable on the transition. Kasper Schmeichel was counting his blessings when Cucho Hernández’s shot deflected heavily off Caglar Soyuncu and hit the inside of the post. Then Emmanuel Dennis was tripped by Wilfred Ndidi – who also gave a penalty away on Thursday – and Josh King converted to equalise. It was no more than Watford, buoyed by their 4-1 demolition of Manchester United eight days earlier, deserved at that stage. Then came Vardy’s two goals before the snow came hammering down during the half-time interval, clearly having an impact on the players’ ability to keep their footing. Timothy Castagne, in particular, did not look comfortable. If only Mo Salah has scored more than Vardy’s nine Premier League goals, then only the Liverpool striker has more goal involvements, assists included, than Dennis after the Watford striker made it 3-2 on the hour mark with his sixth goal since signing from Club Brugge for around £4.5m in the summer. He also has four assists to his name. The Nigerian had just wasted one clear chance that he had earned by dispossessing Castagne but then squaring to King instead of shooting when he repeated the trick, nicking the ball off the Leicester right-back again before this time running through and dinking a cute shot over Schmeichel. Play was held up for a couple of minutes at this point so that the Leicester groundstaff could sweep the lines of snow. As cries of “Ranieri” rang hospitably around the stadium, Leicester made the game safe when Harvey Barnes got in down the left-hand corner of the penalty area and squared the ball for Ademola Lookman to tap home for 4-2.Scott Morrison enters the final parliamentary sitting week of the year facing fresh questions about the Coalition’s record of administering grants to government electorates. New analysis has found, since 2013, the bulk of government grant money has gone to government-held seats. The analysis says $3.9bn has been allocated under seven federal programs since the Coalition came to power, and $2.8bn, or 71% of the total taxpayer-funded pool, has gone to projects in government electorates. According to the analysis, conducted by the Australia Institute, only $903m was distributed to Labor-held seats in programs that gave ministers discretion over how grants were allocated, while $232m went to electorates held by independents or minor parties. The study finds safe Coalition seats received more than $1.6bn, marginal Coalition seats more than $1.1bn, marginal Labor seats about $550m, safe Labor seats $255m and seats held by micro-parties or independents $132m. Some of the skewing can be explained by the fact some discretionary grants programs were broadly limited to regional and rural areas, or to regions outside the major cities, and the Coalition holds the lion’s share of those seats. Three of the seven programs analysed were in this category. But the new analysis will give fresh impetus to criticism about the government’s contentious record in grant allocations. The administration of programs such as sports grants and the allocation of funds for commuter carparks has been excoriated by the Australian National Audit Office. The report from the progressive thinktank comes as Morrison and senior ministers will attempt to neutralise the rolling internal dissent that characterised last week. Liberal senators Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic refused last week to vote with the government on anything, apart from procedural motions, to protest vaccine mandates, and Liberal MP Bridget Archer crossed the floor in an effort to bring on parliamentary debate about a federal anti-corruption commission. Morrison signalled on Sunday the government was unlikely to bring forward legislation giving effect to its own integrity commission proposal this week unless Labor was inclined to support it. Some Liberal backbenchers are concerned the government’s model is too weak, and have lobbied for changes. But there have been divisions in cabinet about measures to strengthen the proposal – including about whether or not to allow public hearings for investigations into politicians. Morrison suggested on Sunday the government was not inclined to beef up its model. But the attorney general Michaelia Cash was more equivocal. “At this point in time, the bill is as it stands,” she told reporters in Canberra. The government is also battling to secure support for its controversial voter ID legislation. It wants to pass that measure this week, but the fate of the bill remains uncertain. Over the weekend, Australia also recorded its first two cases of inbound travellers with the Omicron variant of Covid-19. The new strain has been designated as a variant of concern by the World Health Organization because of its “concerning” mutations and because “preliminary evidence suggests an increased risk of reinfection with this variant”. The cases are in New South Wales. The prime minister told reporters Australia was in a good position to manage the new strain because vaccination rates were among the highest in the world. Morrison encouraged people to get vaccinated if they had not already had the jab, and to get a booster if one was due. Morrison said the emergence of a new strain would not push Australia back to the uncertainties of February and March of 2020, which was the beginning of the coronavirus pandemic. “We now have good knowledge,” the prime minister said. “Good advice. The uncertainties are not like they used to be. “We have good systems which have been proven, which is demonstrated by one of the lowest fatality rates, strongest economies and highest vaccination rates in the world.” While restrictions have been imposed on returning travellers, the prime minister said the objective remained to “open safely and remain safely open”.Baarka didn’t come to mess around. Born Chloe Quayle, the 26-year-old rapper was a former teenage ice addict who did three stints in jail – during her last, five years ago, she gave birth to her third child. Now the Malyangapa Barkindji woman has clawed her way back from what she describes as “the pits of hell” and is on the verge of releasing her debut EP, Blak Matriarchy, through Briggs’ Bad Apples Music. She has been celebrated by GQ as “the new matriarch of Australian rap”; and has her face plastered on billboards across New York, Los Angeles and London as part of YouTube’s Black Voices Music Class of 2022. (“I nearly fainted when I saw [pictures of it],” Barkaa says when we meet over Zoom. “The amount of pride that came from my family and my community ... It was a huge honour.”) Based in south-west Sydney, Barkaa takes her moniker from the Barkindji word for the Darling River. She comes across as warm and humble, with an easy laugh; and chokes up when talking about the pride she has for her “amazing” 11-year-old daughter, Alinta, who frequently performs alongside her. Barkaa’s incendiary song about police violence, Our Lives Matter, has become the unofficial soundtrack of the Black Lives Matter movement in Australia, and she sees herself, artistically speaking, as a direct descendant of First Nations musicians such as Archie Roach, Tiddas, Stiff Gins, Yothu Yindi and Coloured Stone. Thanks to the paths they paved, she says, her generation “can be unapologetically truthful and unapologetically Blak, and it’s a beautiful thing”. She has come a long way since her “wakeup call” in the Emu Plains correctional centre at 21, when her son was removed from her three days after his birth. (All three of her kids are now back at home, and she recently celebrated half a decade free from drugs.) It was a different world to the one she inhabits now; earlier this year she played the Sydney Opera House forecourt, the lights of the harbour stretched out before her as she performed her song Bow Down: “They used to look down on me / Look who’s looking up now. Bow down.” Recalling that moment now, Barkaa smiles: “[Bow Down] is one of my favourite tracks to perform because a lot of people growing up [were like]: ‘Oh you’re not going to be much, you’re just going to be a lowlife, you’re just going to be a junkie, you’re not going to get anywhere, you’re just going to be in and out of prison.’ It’s kind of like: middle fingers up to them – I changed my life around.” Barkaa’s mother is a member of the stolen generations; her uncle died in police custody. Family tragedy drew her to hip-hop and its themes of “injustice and truth-telling and how it is for minorities in the system”. Even at her lowest point, Barkaa says, “there’s always been something in me that drove me to feel like I’m worthy”, and rapping “was something I was always good at”. As a teenager roaming the streets of Blacktown, Barkaa and her friends would “have these rap battles where we’d get in big groups and just go at it”. In juvenile detention, she would write “really radical raps” that rattled her supervisors. Later, while uploading bedroom recordings to social media, she caught the attention of Briggs. Her first proper performance was at a Klub Koori event in 2019. “All the Bad Apples boys were there,” she recalls. “It was daunting. I’m so used to just rapping in my room. After I got off the stage I felt this euphoric feeling of ‘This is what I want to do for the rest of my life. This is my purpose.’” Her songs are politically potent – sampling speeches by Shareena Clanton and Rosalie Kunoth-Monks – and many of her raps are chillingly graphic (White privilege tears on the floor / Suck it up snowflakes / Why you crying for if it’s only a date / It’s a date where all my women got beaten and raped, babies got buried in the sand and they got kicked in the face, she wallops on 22 Clan). But as Barkaa explains: “I just say what’s on my mind.” As Barkaa’s star began to rise, she was approached by a rival record label that wanted to “polish” her. Barkaa was having none of it. “It was a pretty short convo,” she grins. “I was like: ‘Well, why don’t you want me for me? What’s wrong with what I’m doing? I’m not polished at all. I’m rough around the edges. I say shit, I didn’t grow up prim and proper, I grew up in the system … I don’t want to make music that doesn’t resonate with me.” She likens the formidable persona she projects in her music to Beyoncé’s alter ego Sasha Fierce, describing Barkaa as “an outlet to express my anger”. “Barkaa is this staunch person that you can’t mess with ... I guess anger has always been a funny feeling to kind of navigate through – especially as a woman. “When I’m on stage, when I’m Barkaa, I go to work. And then when I come home I get to be with my kids and just chill and be that nurturing mum and tell silly jokes.” It was the rapper’s “joyous and cheeky and fun” side that producer Jaytee Hazard encouraged her to explore on Blak Matriarchy. He helped transform her song King Brown from “a really big angry diss to my ex with a dark boom bap beat” into a salsa party romp. Barkaa is chuffed that King Brown is being embraced by women as a revenge anthem (“I feel like we all experience shitty exes,” she laughs). She has dedicated her forthcoming EP “to the powerful Blak women I am blessed to witness and know in my life”. “Women are the backbone of this country,” Barkaa says. “It’s where I draw my strength – from my mother and my aunties and my daughter and my sisters – and [my music] is just paying homage to them. “I just want to represent my sisters because we’ve been so underrepresented, especially in hip-hop ... If somebody who can come from ice addiction, jail, motherhood and poverty [can do it, then they] can do it too.” Barkaa will have plenty of opportunities to represent in 2022, with a calendar that’s filling up with live shows around Australia. “[And] I hope to go overseas – if they let me in, ’cause of my criminal record,” she says. “A big goal for me would be to be over in London rapping about First Nations people and planting a flag over there and claiming terra nullius. That would be really dope.” Barkaa’s EP Blak Matriarchy is out on 3 December. She performs at the Sydney festival on 18 January; Blak Day Out in Brisbane on 28 January; Womadelaide (11-14 March); Yours and Owls festival in Wollongong (2-3 April); Golden Shores festival in Surfers Paradise (29 April-1 May)To Liam McGarrigle, the federal court building on the edge of Melbourne’s city centre is known by another name. It is “Judge Judy’s house”. It is the same building where Liam “met Ally McBeal”, says his mother, Michelle. Liam, who is autistic and lives with an intellectual disability in regional Victoria, knows the building so well because four years ago his mother was forced to fight the national disability insurance scheme in the federal court. In 2017 the McGarrigles, supported by Victoria Legal Aid, won a landmark case over NDIS transport funding that had implications for thousands of other participants. The agency appealed to the full bench of the federal court. Its appeal was dismissed. Fast forward four years later and the McGarrigles are once again at loggerheads with the agency. Guardian Australia reported that a growing number of families are being forced to appeal against changes to their funding, in what the federal opposition is calling a regime of “stealth cuts” to packages. The Guardian can now reveal that Liam, 26, is also facing a significant cut to his NDIS worth tens of thousands of dollars. Remarkably, that initially included a 70% reduction to the transport funding his parents had successfully secured in the federal court four years earlier. “The main thing that, I’ll be honest, brought me to tears for a split second was the fact they had cut his transport funding,” Michelle McGarrigle, 56, says. Aside from the transport funding, which was reduced from $11,120 to $3,456, McGarrigle was given no clear indication of which of Liam’s supports have been reduced. A 1 November plan letter points to an overall cut of about $38,000 to Liam’s funding package. After Guardian Australia contacted the agency for comment, McGarrigle says she received a call from a national disability insurance agency employee who said the transport funding cut was a “system error”. A spokesperson later said: “The agency has made contact with the family and is working with them to rectify an error that has been made in relation to transport funding. The agency apologises for the error.” The agency was asked whether it would consider the reductions to Liam’s plan, but provided no further comment. It means McGarrigles are still in the dark about which of Liam’s other supports will be reduced, given his plan has still been cut by $30,000. “We’ve put in an internal review,” McGarrigle says. “We’ll now have to wait and see what the outcome of that is. As usual with the NDIS, it can take up to three months, or even more if they want more information.” The McGarrigles live in Moriac, about 30 minutes’ drive east of Geelong. “[Liam] has for quite a few years attended a day program and supported employment five days a week,” McGarrigle says. Because the McGarrigles live outside of Geelong and there is no public transport, he receives NDIS funding to cover the cost of those trips to and from his activities. In 2015, the agency refused to fund the entire cost of the transport, leaving the McGarrigles spending thousands of dollars a year so Liam could participate. A two-year legal battle ensued, through the administrative appeals tribunal and then the federal court. “Ironically, Liam loved it,” McGarrigle says. “He got to go up to Melbourne, he got to go to the market, he got taken out to lunch.” And during that time, the federal court building became “Judge Judy’s house”. But the process was “traumatic” for the family as a whole. “There was two years of my life that was all about trying to prove to the top end that someone like Liam deserves to have a normal life,” McGarrigle says. “Most average Australians don’t have to hire a lawyer and turn up in a court situation. You’re made to feel like you’re the one in the wrong … I’m starting to shake now just thinking about it.” The McGarrigles’ win in the federal court confirmed the agency was required to fully fund any supports or services it has deemed “reasonable and necessary”, such as Liam’s transport costs. In November his new plan was approved, confirming the cut to his package. Losing NDIS funding is difficult to take, but for the McGarrigles the frustration and anxiety is compounded by past experience. “Since the federal court decision, Liam’s life hasn’t changed,” McGarrigle says. “He could have been given a five-year plan … because nothing’s changed.” Instead, even with the agency’s claim of an “error” over the transport cut, the McGarrigles now face another run through the NDIS appeals gauntlet. It will start with an internal review. If that fails, they may be forced to the administrative appeals tribunal, where NDIS participants and their carers are often pitted against externally funded lawyers hired by the agency. Data shows a 20% increase in the number AAT appeals over the past 12 months, while Guardian Australia reported that disability advocacy organisations were being bombarded with new requests for help. Some cannot take new cases due to the backlog. “If Liam didn’t have me … he would be sitting there with a stuffed plan,” McGarrigle says. “How many people are sitting there with less than what they are entitled to?” Bill Shorten, Labor’s NDIS spokesman, calls the situation “diabolical” and accused the government of “presiding over a reign of terror in the NDIS”. “Even after you go to the federal court to get something on the record, the Morrison government will come back and reverse any benefit at your next plan review,” he says. McGarrigle is also not convinced the decision to cut Liam’s transport funding was an “error”, as the agency claimed. Either way, the family faces an uncertain future as they fight for the remaining funding. “My 23-year-old daughter has an independent life where she’s out working five days a week, socialising with friends on the weekend,” McGarrigle says. “I want the same thing for my son. We’re talking about a 26-year-old young man who just wants to go to his day programs five days a week, to go to his work like his dad. “There will need to be supports, and all I’m asking is for those supports to be put in place to even out the playing field. “The idea of the NDIS in the beginning was, ‘this is the support he needs to live a normal life, independently’. Independently doesn’t mean that Mum, at the age of 56, nearly 57, has to put in hours every week making sure that everything is running smoothly. “This is the limbo the NDIS holds us all in constantly, waiting for them to make a decision about how you’re going to live your life.”Even if you have an enormous appetite for baking shows, the cornucopia currently on offer might be a little overwhelming. Some days I load up Netflix and I swear I’m drowning in an ocean of buttercream. But trust me when I say this show takes the cake with the addition of a special ingredient that probably none of us thought to ask for. Luckily, the streaming gods know better. Baking Impossible combines baking with engineering (“bakineering”), which is both utterly hare-brained and the perfectly logical conclusion to our culture’s obsession with creative fusion. We’ve all seen cooking shows and TikTok vids of absurd desserts where you wonder if the chef has compromised flavour for structural integrity; we’ve all played “real or cake”. So why not make people rig circuitry into their desserts and race them through obstacle courses? There’s talent, suspense, some awkward moments as the teammates try to hold back from blaming each other, and a double-whammy wow factor when it actually works. The contestants are paired off in the first episode, with each of the nine teams comprising one baker and one engineer. Some work really well together despite meeting their partners for the first time in this competition, while others struggle to gel. In each episode of the eight-part series, they face a challenge that demands ingenuity from both bakineers, such as making an edible remote-controlled boat that floats and holds a cake. Then, their creations are put through a stress test to assess their engineering (for the first episode, they have to steer their boat down a waterway, racing against the clock) and a taste test to judge their baking. Subsequent challenges span fashion, architecture, robotics and more, requiring skills in different branches of engineering, a wide culinary repertoire, solid teamwork and a quick imagination. Part of what makes the show so compelling is that this is exactly the kind of nonsense many of us would try at home – especially during lockdown – with less success. It’s inherently delightful to watch people do something silly with utter seriousness, so I’m tickled seeing the bakineers make careful calculations with marshmallows and bits of noodle. And there’s real talent on display here – with teams made up of professional bakers and engineers and $100,000 on the line, the process might be a sticky mess, but the results are impressive. As most of the challenges restrict the bakineers to food materials, there are a few ingredients that pop up repeatedly: watermelon rind, dry pasta, tempered chocolate, rice paper, fondant and Isomalt. Some of the creations aren’t entirely edible (I’d challenge you to chew through a coconut husk, for example) but most are, and it’s thrilling to see the teams innovate their own materials for the unusual task at hand. They mix crushed ramen with melted gummy bears and chocolate in the hope of making flexible, edible, load-bearing bricks and transform ombre fruit leathers and laser-cut gelatine into wearable food art. The judges are weirdly qualified for a niche field of expertise that, as far as I know, doesn’t really exist outside this show. There’s award-winning chef Joanne Chang, who graduated from Harvard with a degree in applied mathematics; Stanford-educated astrophysicist and inventor Dr Hakeem Oluseyi; and Andrew Smyth, an aerospace engineer who was a finalist on The Great British Bake Off and coined the term “bakineering” for his unique pursuit. It’s a well-balanced panel that provides detailed, constructive criticism. My only complaint is that host Justin Willman, a comedian and magician, feels a bit surplus to requirements as the trio of judges are perfectly charming and complementary without an extra narrator. At this point, I should warn you that the judges change their clothes with each episode, while the contestants wear copies of the same outfits through the whole season for ease of editing. It’s an odd choice given that contemporary audiences are pretty used to seeing reality TV confessionals that we know were recorded after the fact (eg in RuPaul’s Drag Race), but don’t let it bother you as it has evidently bothered dozens of viewers on social media! I do appreciate the fact the series steers clear of trauma mining or overdramatised contestant backstories, allowing them to speak through their work. All the contestants are pretty endearing, and their enthusiasm for their craft is infectious. My favourite teams include Cindy and Taylor, two twentysomethings who share a love of whimsy and an eye for design finesse; Rodolfo and Sara, a duo whose chilled, grounded vibe makes me feel instantly at ease; and Brandi and Menuka – she’s a bright, bubbly mother from Kentucky who loves baking things that are a bit weird, he’s an animatronic inventor originally from Sri Lanka who can often be spotted dancing around the kitchen laboratory. The casting also reveals the diversity of talent within both Stem disciplines and the pastry arts, which is nice to see. There are a few queers in the mix and roughly half the cast are people of colour. It’s not surprising, really, because surely the appreciation for a dessert that can walk itself right up to your mouth is universal.There is an old saying that disunity is death in politics and it appears that no one is immune to factional splits. In the federal seat of Hughes, in Sydney’s south, which is now held by Craig Kelly, there are now two independent candidates running, each backed by a different community organisation. Their platforms are similar: action on climate, better local representation and greater integrity in politics. But that’s where the camaraderie ends. The group We Are Hughes is running with its former president Linda Seymour, who announced her campaign last weekend. Seymour is an architectural design and communication specialist who lives with her husband, Ross, and two daughters, Ayla and Jessi, in Bonnet Bay. The group Hughes Deserves Better has decided to endorse Georgia Steele, who announced in mid-October she was running as a community independent. Steele is a corporate lawyer, who moved back to the Sutherland shire when she had children. She had initially been talking to We Are Hughes, but pulled out abruptly to go it alone. The two community groups in Hughes were born out of concerns that the former local Liberal member, Kelly, was failing to represent their values. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Kelly left the Liberal party in February after a string of controversies related to his comments on Covid vaccines and treatments and is now running for the United Australia party. Hughes Deserves Better describes itself as “a disrupter organisation”, which sprung into existence before the 2019 election to critique the behaviour and statements of Kelly. Kelly has since resigned and is running for Clive Palmer’s United Australia party. We Are Hughes is more in the style of the “Voices of” organisations, but was also alarmed by Kelly’s increasingly conservative stance. Many of the members overlapped but, as time has gone by, the groups have grown apart. The president of Hughes Deserves Better, Ali Grimison, said the decision to endorse Steele had been taken by a panel of four who had first drawn up criteria of what they wanted to see in a candidate and a member of parliament. There have been a number of concerns expressed about the selection process for Seymour, given she was president of We Are Hughes and initially on the selection panel. Seymour said she had been hopeful they would find the ideal candidate, but when people approached her asking her to run, she recused herself and then was put through a gruelling interview by the We Are Hughes panel, who selected her. The result is two independent candidates. Given that independents usually need to come second in the primary vote ahead of one of the major parties to be in the running, splitting the independent vote is unlikely to prove a winning strategy unless the two groups can ensure a tight flow of preferences. The Liberals are still to preselect a candidate, with the state MP for Holsworthy, Melanie Gibbons, indicating she will resign to contest the federal seat of Hughes which overlaps with her state seat. The Liberals’ polling in the byelection seats in the wake of Gladys Berejiklian’s departure has alarmed state strategists. Gibbons is understood to have the prime minister’s backing but the New South Wales Liberal factions are less enamoured of the move because it leaves premier Dominic Perrottet exposed to another byelection on top of Willoughby ( Berejiklian’s seat) Monaro (John Barilaro’s seat) and Bega (Andrew Constance’s seat). Kelly is also saying he will run, though many expect that he will pivot to running for the Senate, judging by his much broader focused campaign using full-page ads in major publications and nationwide spam texts. Insiders say he is polling single digits in Hughes.The Morrison government has used sweeping new powers to override state and territory government support for an international agreement to cut greenhouse gas emissions. The federal government has deployed recently passed laws to overturn the participation of five states and territories in the global Under 2 Coalition. In an email dated 23 November, an official with the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade told his counterpart in the Victorian government that its participation in the coalition was “no longer in operation”. The email warned the Victorian government that under the new Foreign Relations (States and Territories) Act 2020, sign up to the agreement was now illegitimate. The email said Victoria had 14 days to tell the global organisation it had “failed to properly classify” the state’s involvement in a 2015 Memorandum of Understanding. Two-hundred-and-sixty sub-national governments worldwide have signed up to the the Under 2 coalition, representing 1.75 billion people and 50% of the global economy. Members commit to keeping global temperature rises to well below 2C, with efforts to reach 1.5C. Thirty-five states and regions in the coalition have committed to reaching net zero emissions by 2050 or earlier. “[T]he MOU has also been invalidated for a number of other states and territories,” the official said, naming the ACT, Northern Territory, Queensland and South Australia. He did not cite NSW, which has lately signed up. Lily D’Ambrosio, Victoria’s energy, environment and climate change minister, said Dfat had used a technicality that was “illogical” to cancel her state’s participation. “It’s just a really ridiculous technicality,” D’Ambrosio said. “It’s egregious. They are vandals.” The move came less than a fortnight after the Glasgow climate summit ended. The Morrison government had weathered extensive criticism at the event for being among the few rich nations to avoid raising their 2030 emission reduction targets. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “This is going to be a global embarrassment, not for the Victorian government but the federal government that has already covered itself in ridicule on the climate change stage,” D’Ambrosio said. “Rather than addressing the urgency of climate change, they are actually putting forward more barriers.” A spokesperson for Foreign Affairs Minister Marise Payne said the Under 2 Coalition MOU had not come to the minister for a decision. “The MOU was not properly notified by the relevant states and territory under the Foreign Relations Act 2020 and was therefore automatically invalidated by operation of the Act,” the spokesperson said. Dfat was also approached for comment, as was energy minister Angus Taylor. The Dfat official suggested in the email if Victoria wanted to sign up to the Under 2 coalition’s 2021 MOU, his department would consider approving it. He also said Victoria should join with other jurisdictions to make a single submission. “Under what conditions would they be prepared to consider an application?” D’Ambrosio said. “Are they saying that if there’s one or two states that maybe hadn’t wanted to pursue it or have delayed it, then everyone else will be held up?” Meaghan Scanlon, Queensland’s minister for the environment and the Great Barrier Reef, said her state had also received the cancellation advice. “Clearly, the Morrison government aren’t content with their own failures on climate change, they’re now trying to stop the states from taking action.” she said. “Surely their time would be better spent funding renewable energy projects or delivering a credible policy on reducing emissions, than on playing silly bureaucratic games,” Scanlon said. Queensland intends to re-apply “because it is an important and useful coalition of like-minded sub-national governments that want to act on climate action”. Shane Rattenbury, the ACT’s climate change minister, said his government is yet to told of the cancellation, and continued to work with the global group, most recently this week on zero-emission vehicles. “The Under 2 coalition is a helpful network of sub-national governments to work together on climate action,” he said. NSW is understood to be discussing with Dfat the application of the new act on its involvement in the coalition. Chris Bowen, federal Labor’s climate spokesperson said the intervention would probably viewed internationally as another blow to Australia’s reputation. “The states are doing their best to fill the federal climate vacuum but this demonstrates the need for national leadership,” Bowen said. “It’s a blight on Scott Morrison that he hasn’t updated the medium-term targets the coalition government agreed to revisit,” he added. Polly Hemming, an adviser in the Australia Institute’s Climate and Energy Program, said local governments had played an important role in advancing climate action. Examples include California lifting its ambitions to cut emissions during the Trump years in the US, and in Australia where states have long led the way. “While the commonwealth government is the only level of government that can commit Australia to a foreign treaty, it’s the state governments that will face the full costs of climate change induced disasters,” she said. “The ACT legislative assembly and Sydney city council have endorsed a global fossil fuel non-proliferation treaty,” Hemming added. “We can only wonder if they will be getting emails from federal bureaucrats in the near future as well?”The descendants of people displaced by nuclear testing at Maralinga bought shares in a company planning to build a uranium mine on their country, in order to lodge an in-person objection to the project. The proposed Mulga Rock uranium mine, about 240km west of Kalgoorlie, is in an area of land subject to a native title claim by the Upurli Upurli Nguratja people. The mine is run by Perth-based Vimy Resources, which has just three weeks to convince the Western Australian government that it has met the threshold for substantially commencing development on the site before its environmental approval expires. The approval was granted five years ago, before the McGowan government was elected on a platform of opposing uranium mining in the state. Premier Mark McGowan has said his government will not approve any new uranium mines but will honour existing approvals. Mulga Rock’s environmental approval is due to expire on 16 December, unless it can prove it has substantially commenced work on the project. One uranium mine approved around the same time has already fallen over, and the deadline for two more mines is looming in January. The company received mining approval only in September and began ground clearing this month. It has yet to secure the US$255m (A$357m) required to build the project but filed a notice of substantial commencement with the WA government this week. Debbie Carmody, an Anangu Spinifex woman and registered Upurli Upurli Nguratjia (UUN) claimant, used shares in Vimy Resources – purchased on behalf of the claimants and environment groups – to gain a seat at the company’s annual general meeting on Perth on Friday and raise her people’s objection in person. The UUN had invited a representative from Vimy to meet with them earlier this month, but the company cancelled. They are strongly opposed to uranium mining, and wrote to the government this month to formally state their opposition to the proposal and disappointment in the lack of consultation. Carmody is a descendent of people displaced by the nuclear tests conducted at Maralinga in South Australia in the 1950s. She said Vimy Resources was trying to use competing native title claims over the area to divide traditional owners and avoid proper consultation. “The company is really happy to wedge our community between mining dollars and cultural heritage, so they have been very selective with who they consult with,” Carmody said. “They are supposed to consult with the registered group, not individuals. It’s important that everyone understands that consultation is not consent.” The UUN claim was filed on 2 December 2020, and the Kakarra Part B claim, which overlaps part of the claimed area, was filed two weeks later. An earlier native title claim by the Wongatha people was rejected by the federal court in 2007. The company has recognised the Nanataddjarra, Nangaanya-Ku and Wongatha people as stakeholders and recorded two meetings in the past five years. Carmody said: “After a decade of Vimy denying that there are any Aboriginal people with connection or knowledge of that country, it’s pretty hard to take them seriously when they have denied our existence for so long.” In a response to Guardian Australia, a spokeswoman for Vimy said the company was unable to attend the 4 November meeting with UUP with eight days’ notice, but had scheduled another meeting for Monday. The company said it had met with the UUN’s lawyers, the Central Desert Native Title Services, and engaged with the group through its own lawyers as a respondent to the native title claim. That was not consultation, Carmody said. Vimy also said it was awaiting the outcome of mediation on the issue of the competing native title claim. “Vimy understands the significance of engaging with Aboriginal people with knowledge of country at the Mulga Rock Project, and has done so since 2009,” the spokeswoman said. “We look forward to continuing to engage with the Upurli Upurli Nguratja claimants to ensure we meet the highest standards of engagement with all stakeholders.” The proposed development is near the Seven Sisters women’s dreaming. There are also four registered Aboriginal heritage sites on the project, which Vimy says it plans to avoid. “As caretakers we have a cultural responsibility to protect land that is near the Seven Sisters, a sacred site for women,” Carmody said. “The land is a special place for women – the beautiful, soft desert sands are healing sands. “Vimy don’t understand that a site is not just the immediate site but the whole area around it. That whole area is important.” The site is also home to the endangered sandhill dunnart. Developing a sandhill dunnart conservation plan is a condition of the mine’s federal and state environmental approvals, but the company told Guardian Australia the plan was “still in draft format”. Mia Pepper from the Conservation Council of Western Australia (CCWA) said beginning land clearing without having an approved conservation plan was a breach of the project’s federal approval under the Environment, Protection and Biodiversity Act. The CCWA wrote to the federal and state environment departments earlier this month alleging the company had breached the conditions of its approval and requesting an urgent investigation. The letter, seen by Guardian Australia, said the WA Department of Mines had informed the CCWA that Vimy had begun clearing to construct a new airstrip in an area recognised as prime sandhill dunnart habitat. The federal Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment said it was aware of the allegation and was “making a number of inquiries”. “The department routinely monitors compliance and is not in a position to comment further on this matter,” a spokesperson said. Vimy rejected the allegations and said it had not undertaken any clearing on the airstrip site and had not cleared outside the development envelope. It said it had “begun vegetation clearing and soil and growth medium stripping at Mulga Rock East mining area and the location of the accommodation village”. Pepper said the works undertaken so far should not meet the threshold for substantial commencement. The company is yet to secure export licences, a licence to hold radioactive material and a permit to establish a nuclear facility, which will be required to build a processing plant. It has also lost three senior executives in the past few months and is currently steered by an interim CEO. The project itself was subject to a hostile merger offer and is now under strategic review. “The company has not even made a final investment decision about whether to develop the proposal,” Pepper said. “It’s definitely a long way from where we are now to an established mine.”“Got it!” says my husband, wielding a tennis bat-like zapper in his PJs, as I blearily lie my head back on the pillow, praying the rest of the night will be free from incessant buzzing and bites. Our weapon of choice works well for us, once we find the elusive little vampires. Across the world, people use all manner of deterrents, from eating garlic and soaking cigarette butts in alcohol to burning animal dung, spraying diesel and Windex, or drinking gin and tonic. Then there are ultrasound wristbands, sonic plug-in emitters and carnivorous plants. These desperate measures aren’t just devised to avoid a pesky irritation. Some mosquitoes can transmit diseases, in Australia most commonly Ross River virus. This year’s wet spring and summer are tipped to produce extra fertile breeding conditions as La Niña weather patterns create more rainfall – particularly in the north and east. “This is probably the greatest risk I’ve seen for the 35 years I’ve been working on mosquitoes,” says Prof Stephen Doggett from Sydney’s Westmead hospital of the risk of mosquito-borne disease. “We’ve had two years running when it’s been extremely wet and it’s situations like that when we have a greater risk of the really nasty mosquito-borne viruses, especially for south-eastern Australia.” Mosquitoes need still pools of water to breed successfully, so their populations are impacted by weather and related conditions. But only a very small percentage of the 300 species in Australia – which has less than 10% of those found globally – transmit diseases. Dengue fever, one of the more serious mosquito-borne viruses, occasionally makes its way to northern Australia. Malaria, another notorious deadly illness transmitted by mosquitoes, was eradicated here in the 80s. Both diseases tend to occur in people who have picked them up overseas. However, some Australian mosquitoes do carry risk of serious disease. “You don’t want Ross River virus because you can be quite unwell,” says Prof Craig Williams, a mosquito expert from the University of South Australia. “But there is Murray Valley encephalitis, a mosquito-borne disease, and it’s lethal. And those it doesn’t kill, it neurologically affects them for the rest of their life.” This rare brain-affecting virus occurs mostly in northern Australia. But in some wetter years it can be found in central and southern Australia. “So that’s a worry,” says Williams. “It’s not that common in terms of human cases, but if you’re travelling, it’s just not worth getting bitten by a mosquito.” So, which of the myriad methods to avoid getting bitten actually work? And are there other safety concerns with those that do? Deet is considered the most effective and long-lasting topical repellent, although many people are concerned about toxicity. While some studies have shown potential health impacts from using it, Deet is generally considered safe when used correctly. The Royal Children’s hospital in Melbourne advises that products containing up to 10% Deet are suitable for children in areas with a low risk of mosquito-borne diseases, while products containing up to 19.5% Deet are suitable for children in high-risk areas. Other studies report varying levels of protection using plant-based repellents, which contain phytochemicals that plants evolved as a defence mechanism. Generally, more research is needed into their efficacy. A 2019 study in Nature showed how catnip, reported to be at least as effective as chemical repellents like Deet, repels mozzies by activating an irritant receptor. PMD from lemon eucalyptus extract also has demonstrated efficacy in preventing malaria, and is the only plant-based repellent advocated by the US Centers for Disease Control. An Australian study, from the University of Sydney and Westmead hospital, found that wristbands impregnated with botanicals could help deter some mosquito landings, but they were not as effective as Deet and would not protect your whole body. It is important to be vigilant and use the most reliable product possible if you’re in a risk area for mosquito-borne disease, says Doggett. He warns that ineffective methods or not reapplying repellents regularly can create a false sense of security. If you don’t suffer from asthma, Williams says citronella or sandalwood coils or burners can help as a second line of defence outside. “I set them up as a kind of boundary, a barrier around the back deck.” What about carnivorous plants? Sure, they might attack a few mosquitoes in the bedroom, “but if you’ve got 10,000 mosquitoes flying about, that’s not going to do much”, says Doggett. For inside the home, some plug-ins claim to repel mozzies using sound, but Williams says there’s no evidence to support their effectiveness. Other plug-in options include repellents that release odourless insecticides into the air. These are reportedly effective, but again, some may be concerned about health impacts. Outside of the home, Williams cautions against using insecticides that kill other beneficial insects such as pollinators. The humble household fan, on the other hand, is very helpful. “A fan will work because mosquitoes generally try to avoid the wind,” Williams says. “If you get above a certain wind speed they won’t be able to fly, so that will be an aid for sure.” Both Williams and Doggett also endorse the commonsense ways of avoiding bites: staying inside at dawn and dusk, if possible, especially in infested areas; wearing long-sleeved, loose clothing; ensuring screens are on windows and doors are kept shut; and making sure your garden is free from pools of still water (even in the bottom of pot plants). More broadly, concerned citizens are involved in a Mozzie Monitor public health initiative. “We’re really looking to safeguard Australia through a diverse and diffuse citizens’ surveillance network,” says Williams. The citizen science program aims to help make assessments of risk, detect changes in patterns of mosquitoes and enable rapid response if exotic disease-carrying species are detected. Being involved may even result in becoming enamoured by the little critters. “There’s a lot of incredibly extraordinary mosquitoes on this planet,” says Doggett, who is writing a book about the world’s weirdest species. “I want to look at the other side of mosquitoes, their amazing behaviour, the diversity. And some are extremely beautiful.” Williams agrees. “Some of them are very pretty,” he says, referring readers to photos on iNaturalist. “And there are ones that don’t feed on blood, they feed on nectar from flowers, and there are bright orange ones and little tiny black, silvery ones.” They also form a vital part of the food web, says Doggett. A world without mosquitoes would mean “there’s wholesale environmental damage”. “If we didn’t have them, the world would be screwed.” This article was amended on 6 December 2021 to correct a factual error. The piece previously described malaria as a virus, however the disease is caused by a parasite.That’s all for day three. Thanks as always for following along with us. Be sure check shortly for our full report here … “As the match goes along with each draw you get a bit more tense,” Carlsen says. “But I would say so far, it’s three games. And personally, as I’ve been black in two of them, I’m fairly satisfied. There’s a lot of time to create something, although obviously it’s not ever going to be easy against a very strong opponent.” Nepomniachtchi is asked what he will need to do to break through as white. “Whatever I am going to do, the trend will remain the same,” he says. “That’s not about my preparation or Magnus’s preparation. That’s about the current theory status.” Asked what the difference-maker will be in a match that’s been played on level terms so far, Carlsen says: “It’s three games in. There’s a lot of time to go and as you saw [on Saturday], it could have easily been a decisive result. Obviously, for each game the most likely result is a draw. Saying otherwise would be quite disingenuous. But any game could explode. Not today.” Nepomniachtchi says he’s experiencing “absolutely no frustration” after being unable to make meaningful headway in his first two games as white. “I guess it was a clean game and a very logical one,” he says at the post-game press conference. “Even in the endgame, if I would be given a couple of tempi I could have posed some problems in this bishops endgame. But especially once black’s king enters c5, there was never anything for white. This is the current status of the chess theory. It’s hard to find some advantage.” Adds Carlsen: “I was obviously making some fairly ugly moves but it seems all to work out reasonably well. At least I couldn’t see any concrete way to pose serious problems. I think it was a reasonably logical game.” Asked whether he feels as comfortable playing as black as it’s appeared from the outside, Carlsen is to the point: “I wouldn’t say very comfortable. I’ve been trying to equalize in both games without getting a lot of chances but it’s OK. It’s fairly normal procedure in these matches.” “I wasn’t thrilled to have this ending but I felt that it was generally well within the drawing range,” Carlsen says immediately after leaving the studio. “I was happy to liquidate this pure bishops ending because I get to centralize the king and push the pawn and create a barrier.” Carlsen says he satisfied with the positions he’s gotten so far playing with the black pieces, noting that today he “was trying to play a bit of a side line to try and get a game, but eventually I just had to try and liquidate, which I guess is what you normally end up doing in these positions anyway.” Asked whether 10 ... Re8 was part of that thinking, Carlsen expounds on his opening-stage surprise. “Yeah, Re8 is a really, really dumb move because usually you would try to go Re8 without d6,” he says. “But it turns out even here he was well prepared and he didn’t give me even slight chances to play.” He adds: “It’s good to get a rest day (on Monday). Now I’ve had two black games so far so the result is OK, but obviously I’ve got to create some chances at some point.” The players are breezing through their moves at this point: 33. Ke2 f5 34. Bc2 f4 35. Bb1 c5 36. Bc2 Bd7 37. f3 Kf6 38. h4 Ke5 39. Kf2 Kf6 40. Ke2 Ke5 41. Kf2. A draw is imminent ... and there it is! The players shake hands over the board, settling for a half-point apiece after two hours and 42 minutes. Carlsen, still ahead of his opponent on time, takes five minutes before playing 28. ... Rab8. A pair of quick-fire moves follows (29. Rb1 Kf6) and the rooks are off the board after 30. Rxb8 Rxb8 31. Rb1 Rxb1+ 32. Bxb1 Ke5. Carlsen’s advanced king is crucial in this position and all but snuffs out Nepomniachtchi’s winning chances. And Nepomniachtchi opts for 23. e5, bypassing the attack to threaten black’s knight. The engines indicate that Carlsen’s best response is taking white’s knight with 23. ... dxc4 and he plays it after a brief two-minute think. The simplification that follows augurs a peaceful result: an exchange of queens follows (24. Qxd8 Rexd8) before white recaptures the knight (25. exf6). After Nepomniachtchi plays 25. ... Bb4, an exchange of bishops and pawns follows (26. fxg7 Bxc3 27. bxc3 Kxg7). All of this points to a theoretical draw as Nepomniachtchi moves his king to a better square with 28. Kf1. Carlsen finds 22. ... d5 after more than eight minutes. That leaves Nepomniachtchi with two primary options: advance the e-pawn (e5) or capture black’s d-pawn (exd5). Carlsen spends exactly 17 minutes before opting for 21. ... c6. Nepomniachtchi responds with 22. Bc2. This effectively forces Carlsen to play d5, lest the challenger open a wide lead. The Norwegian supercomputer Sesse now evaluates the position as dead even. Nepomniachtchi settles on a modest pawn push (21. h3) after nearly a half hour of contemplation. A waiting move and the challenger’s facial expressions indicate he’s not overly happy with it. Carlsen’s best responses here by some distance are d5 or c6. Nepomniachtchi in deep thought. He’s just passed 25 minutes while contemplating his 21st move in response to Carlsen’s 20. ... Be6. That gives him 58 minutes (and counting) to make his next 20 moves until the extra hour under the classical format. Long thinks like this are hardly unique to world championship matches given the stratospheric stakes, but Nepomniachtchi will no doubt want to avoid the specter of time pressure. Nepomniachtchi makes a thematic central pawn break with 18. d4. A quick-fire exchange of pawns then knights follows (18. ... exd4 19. Nxd4 Nxd4 20. Qxd4). Carlsen ponders the position for a minute and a half before electing for 20. ... Be6, which is best. Nepomniachtchi is more than three minutes into his think now, eyes darting back and forward while shifting in his seat. Some uneasy body language from Carlsen as he thinks for more than 13 minutes before deciding on 15. ... a5, which is best. Any other move would have allowed Nepomniachtchi to occupy a5 himself with his pawn, knight or even bishop, forcing black into an uncomfortable struggle for space and control. Both step away from the board again and Nepomniachtchi returns first, playing 17. Bc3 after seven and a half minutes. A bit of commentary on the position from Nigel Short, the British grandmaster who famously challenged Garry Kasparov for the world title in 1993. The engines say Carlsen’s best move is for the light-squared bishop to return to its home square (Bc3), but that’s an awfully difficult move to find without the aid of computer study. But if anyone is capable of sussing it out ... ... and indeed Carlsen does, playing 17. ... Bc8 after a five-minute think. Carlsen chooses 15. ... Nc6 and Nepomniachtchi settles in for his longest think of the game so far. After more than five minutes, he goes with 16. Rc1. The engines say a5 is the best response for the champion, who’s been inspecting the position for the last six minutes (and counting). Nepomniachtchi plays 12. Bd2 in less than three minutes. Dutch grandmaster Anish Giri says the challenger’s pace suggests he still in his opening preparation. The next series of moves includes the first capture of the game (12. Bd2 Bf8 13. Ne3 Ne7 14. c4 bxc4) after which both players walk away from the board. After a brief spell, Nepomniachtchi and elects to recapture with his knight (15. Nxc4) Carlsen thinks for more than five minutes before settling on 10. ... Re8. Another rare move by the world champion! That’s the fifth most popular choice (after Na5, Nd7, Qd7 and h6). For the third straight game to open this world title tilt, Carlsen is the first player to mix things up with an unusual move. Nepomniachtchi takes more than four minutes before responding with 11. Nf1. Carlsen counters with 11. ... h6. Nepomniachtchi steps away from the board after the opening flurry. Carlsen takes about a minute before playing 8. ... Bb7. Following the next series of moves (9. d3 d6 10. Nbd2), Carlsen has pondered this position for the last three minutes (and counting). Nepomniachtchi playing with the white pieces opens with 1. e4. The players blitz out their following moves (1. ... e5 2. Nf3 Nc6 3. Bb5 a6 4. Ba4 Nf6 5. O-O Be7 6. Re1 b5 7. Bb3 O-O 8. a4). Same as Friday’s first game, it’s another anti-Marshall, a branch of the Ruy Lopez opening. A quick refresher on the format for this world championship match. It will consist of 14 classical games with each player awarded one point for a win and a half-point for a draw. Whoever reaches seven and a half points first will be declared the champion. (Both Carlsen and Nepomniachtchi are on one point after draws in Friday’s Game 1 and Saturday’s Game 2.) The time control for each game is 120 minutes for the first 40 moves, 60 minutes for the next 20 moves and then 15 minutes for the rest of the game plus an additional 30 seconds per move starting from move 61. If the match is tied after 14 games, tie-breaks will be played on the final day (16 December) in the following order: • Best of four rapid games with 25 minutes for each player with an increment of 10 seconds after each move. • If still tied, they will play up to five mini-matches of two blitz games (five minutes for each player with a three-second increment). • If all five mini-matches are drawn, one sudden-death ‘Armageddon’ match will be played where White receives five minutes and Black receives four minutes. Both players will receive a three-second increment after the 60th move. In the case of a draw, Black will be declared the winner. Notably, Carlsen’s second and third title defenses both came down to tiebreakers. But many believe the increased length of this year’s match (from 12 to 14 games) and the stylistic matchup at hand promises a decisive result in regulation. Hello and welcome back for Game 3 of the World Chess Championship. We’re back for a third straight day following a pair of draws in Game 1 and Game 2 that were notable for longtime champion Magnus Carlsen making early pawn sacrifices in exchange for long-term initiative. In either case, Ian Nepomniachtchi’s opening advantage ultimately didn’t hold up and he was forced to rely on precise endgame play to emerge with a result. The general consensus around today’s highly anticipated third encounter is that both Nepomniachtchi (who will be marshaling the white pieces) and Carlsen (playing with black) will have a real go at a decisive result before the first rest day of the match on Monday. For those of you just coming aboard, Carlsen, 30, has been at No 1 in the Fide rankings for 10 straight years and was considered the world’s best player even before he dethroned Viswanathan Anand for the title in 2013. Nepomniachtchi, 31, is ranked No 5, having earned his place at the table by winning the eight-man candidates tournament in April with a round to spare. It’s the culmination of a rivalry that started nearly two decades ago when they first met across the board as boys at the 2002 European Under-12 Championship in Peniscola, Spain. Notably, Nepomniachtchi enters the title tilt with a winning lifetime record against Carlsen in classical matches (four won, one lost and eight drawn). That makes him unique among today’s top players, even if two of those victories came in youth championships. The best-of-14-games match is scheduled to take place at the Dubai Exhibition Centre over the next three weeks, with the winner earning a 60% share of the €2m ($2.26m) prize fund if the match ends in regulation (or 55% if it’s decided by tie-break games). We’re a little more than a half hour from today’s first move, so not much longer now. In the meantime here’s our Sean Ingle’s interview with Carlsen from earlier this week. Bryan will be here shortly. In the meantime here’s Sean Ingle’s report from Saturday’s second game of the world championship match.For Brentford the final whistle provided a reason to celebrate and boy did they take it. A first victory in six league games ended with players and manager embracing on the pitch, supporters cheering wildly in the stands and the breaking-out of a light show accompanied by blaring music that was more akin to a rave than a football match. All of which provided stark contrast to what was happening at the far corner of the ground. Everton’s players had wandered over to salute the travelling fans, who greeted the gesture with clear displeasure. There were howls of fury and frustration as well as a fair few V-signs, and it was hard not to sympathise with those who had made the journey from Merseyside to west London on a bitterly cold day. For Everton, winter is well and truly here. It is now seven games without victory and a third without scoring for the visitors, and while they showed far more intent and character than was the case at Manchester City a week ago, they were still incredibly poor. Everton showed no clear sense of plan and created little of note either side of the goal that undid them – Ivan Toney’s typically cool penalty. Quite simply Everton look lost and things only look set to get worse for them given that their next game is against Liverpool at home on Wednesday night. It could be the most horrendous of reunions for Rafael Benítez, who insisted prior to this game that he maintains the full backing of the club’s majority shareholder, Farhad Moshiri. But the Spaniard could see that change if his former side run riot against his current one and turn Goodison Park into a hotbed of toxicity. The natives are restless, in person and on social media, with #RafaOut trending on Twitter not long after this game had concluded. “The connection between the fans and players last season wasn’t great but you could see it was better at the start of this season,” said Benítez. “To bring back this connection, the fans expect the players to give everything and they can’t complain today as the players gave everything. You could see how they were fighting to the last minute. They tried their best but they need to be more precise in the final third.” That was undeniably the case, with Salomón Rondón once again delivering a blunt display, failing to convert a close-range effort after Brentford had taken the lead and doing increasingly less thereafter, a late glancing header the best of his efforts. The Venezuelan was playing because Dominic Calvert-Lewin remains sidelined with a thigh injury and Richarlison was suspended, and with Yerry Mina also out injured there is little doubt that Benítez’s attempts to turn Everton’s fortunes around are being hampered by the absence of key players. Yet here he was able to call on the fit again Abdoulaye Doucouré, arguably Everton’s best performer this campaign, and put out a side that should have fared better against opponents also out of form and missing crucial personnel. Those in blue had 60% possession but most of that was wasted via aimless, clueless passes and it wasn’t until Demarai Gray came on as a 70th-minute substitute that Everton seriously threatened, the winger delivering a couple of excellent crosses into the area that Calvert-Lewin may well have converted had he been playing. But he wasn’t – Rondón was. The hosts survived those scares and in the end deserved the win, their first here since the opening-day triumph over Arsenal and one that takes them above Everton and into 12th. They showed great togetherness throughout and, crucially, seized the moment that led to the only goal of the game. It started with a Sergi Canós corner that Jordan Pickford scrambled clear to the edge of the area, where Andros Townsend looked to hook fully clear; instead, however, he kicked Frank Onyeka’s jaw as the Nigerian aimed to meet the ball with his head. The connection was accidental but firm, leaving Onyeka stricken on the turf. Play continued amid jeers from the home fans before the referee, Darren England, took the advice of his VAR, Jonathan Moss, and decided to review the incident on the pitchside monitor. A penalty was rightly awarded and Toney converted it, giving Pickford the eyes before sending the England goalkeeper the wrong way with a nonchalant side-foot finish for his fifth goal of the season. “I already said that he is the world’s best penalty taker and he proved that today,” said Thomas Frank. “I am very pleased with the result. Do not forget, we are a newly promoted club playing against an Everton side that has spent a lot of money in recent years. This is a massive win for us.”That, then, is us. Thanks for your company and ta-ra. And here’s Sachin Nakrani’s report from the Brentford Community Stadium... Here’s Peter Lansley’s report from the KP... Here’s Jamie Jackson’s report from the Etihad... Kári Tulinius is back: “This probably comes in too late but … PSG were set up really oddly. Honestly, it was a bit like 1958 Brazil’s 4-2-4. But it worked.” Yup, it should against most teams. I can’t see them winning big ears, but. And it turns out Lionel Messi is alright at football. Also today... You can follow that one properly, right here: Michael Carrick explains that he’s left out Ronaldo to freshen things up and because of his tactical plan; he says Ronaldo took the news well. He won’t reveal whether he’s playing three at the back or a diamond, but I assume the latter. City go above Liverpool and level on points with Chelsea, who play Man United in 28 minutes; West Ham stay fourth. West Ham enjoy decent possession down the left without looking threatening, but then Fernandinho dwells on the ball, Lanzini sneaks up behind, pokes it away, then once it bounces, he swivels to hammer a belting finish just inside the near post and in off the bar! Wow! “Deeney!” emails Ray. “Truly a wonderful clip. There’s nothing quite like an announcer getting caught up in a great moment and losing all abandon.” There isn’t. I’m not sure I’ve seen anything like that, in the 38 years I’ve been watching this thing of ours. Watford stay 16th, Leicester move up to ninth, Jamie Vardy is good. That settles it! City take a short corner, Mahrez waving feet over the ball, and though West Ham win it back, they lose it agains very quickly, Bernardo sending Jesus into the box, and he cuts back for Fernandinho to plant a low shot past Fabianski. Seven without a win now for Everton, who are now 14th, while Brentford move up to 12th. In the final minute of injury-time at Brenford, it’s the home side pushing for 2-0, rather than the visitors looking like saving themselves. Goodness me, Leicester v Watford has been going 93 minutes and I’ve still not posted this. Please accept my urgent apologies. At Leicester, we’re playing seven additional minutes. Watford aren’t out of this yet. Sky give Brentford’s Ivan Toney man of the match, and that seems fair from what I’ve seen. He’s been a constant threat, and the dismissive disregard of his penalty was to die for. Jamie Vardy is hat-trick hunting, leathering a shot that Cathcart blocks – inadvertently I think. We’re into the final minute, while at Brentford we’ve played one of five extra ones. At City, it’s seven to go. One of the advantages of being a possession team, as Man City are, is that they’re able to disappear time extremely effectively. West Ham just can’t build a head of steam. All this talk of toes and inside thighs; Soyuncu has just worn an Ndidi drive in the chopsHe spends a fair old while lying in the snurr, but he’s up and about now. Wissa is now on for Brentford, replacing Canos; it’s good to see him back. Back on the pitch, Everton are huffing and puffing, but that’s about it. Gray, on for Townsend, has just had a speculative cross cleared, but that’s about it. “As an Everton supporter,” emails Eric Peterson, “the biggest thing testing my patience is other Everton supporters either unable or just simply too lazy to look past Rafa Benitez as the cause of their distress. He has had virtually no funds to build the team in any way that suits him, leaving him with a hodgepodge of players and contracts signed by his many recent predecessors. He’s had to deal with not only the long list of injured players but also the response to it that led to him hiring a new medical director. What ails Everton goes far deeper than the face we see in the technical area on game day. Let’s look for Everton to solve the actual problems that face them rather than just vent our frustrations against a manager who happened to lead the club across town many years ago - who, by his track record, deserves much better from us.” This is all very rational and sensible ... which is polar opposite of English football. David Moyes sends on Bowen for Masuaku; he’s already replaced Cresswell and Benrahma with Coufal and Lanzini. Orange ball memories from my childhood. I’ve been a little disappointed with what I’ve seen of West Ham this afternoon. Obviously City are brutal to play against, but I thought they’d be caused more problems than has been the case. “Ranieri’s appointment at Watford is turning out to be a gift to the league,” emails Kári Tulinius. “Pretty much every game since he arrived has been great fun. His legacy didn’t need burnishing after 2016, but he’s certainly not doing it any harm at the moment.” I love how addicted he and his ilk are to the game. At Brentford, the home side have replaced Henry with Roerslev. Everton are looking more dangerous now. You can follow both buildup and game here, with Rob Smyth. Chelsea: Mendy, Chalobah, Silva, Rudiger, James, Alonso, Jorginho, Loftus-Cheek, Ziyech, Hudson-Odoi, Werner. Subs: Kepa, Christensen, Lukaku, Pulisic, Niguez, Barkley, Mount, Azpilicueta, Havertz. Man United: De Gea, Wan-Bissaka, Lindelof, Bailly, Telles, Fred, Matic, McTominay, Sancho, Fernandes, Rashford. Subs: Henderson, Jones, Ronaldo, Mata, Martial, Greenwood, Lingard, Dalot, Van de Beek. Or, put another way, Michael Carrick os having a laugh. First he leaves out Bruno and Rashford, now he’s leaving out Ronaldo and playing a diamond. He’s enjoying himself! “At full-strength Everton is a mid-table team,” reckons Mary Waltz, “possibly a Europa squad. Without DCL, Richarlison, and losing the player whose name cannot be spoken, they are so offensively challenged that expectations for this season are reduced to nothing. When you are counting on Rondon and Townsend for scoring you are in trouble.” Agree. I just imagine the hardcore are unreplete with patience for Benitez. Castagne wins a nasty challenge with Masina – he’ll do well to get away with that, imparting studs to foot and knee to midriff – then Barnes nips into the box and forces the ball square for Lookman, who taps home. Looking ahead to our later game, apparently Cristiano Ronaldo isn’t starting for Man United at Chelsea. There’s a ruckus at Brentford, everything that no one wants to see, not even all the people who’re desperate to see it. Canos goes in the back of Coleman Jansson is booked for scuffling with Rondon – that would be an extremely intriguing scrap. At Leicester, they’ve brought out machines to get rid of the snow on the lines. Jesus has just missed a really good chance to put City two-up, a very good counter ending with Sterling crossing low into his path. But just when he thinks he’s going to score, Fabianski gets to his feet and does enough to block. Dennis barges Castagne off the ball – the defender has to be stronger there – skids through and lifts a lovely finish over Schmeichel. There’s a check for a foul, but it looked an excellent challenge to me and the goal stands. West Ham are pushing at the Etihad, where Declan Rice is wearing short sleeves. Robert van Winkle will be proud. The liveliest stuff is now coming at Brentford, the least that way in the first half. In fairness, the snow is having its way elsewhere, and at Leicester Maddison shoots from distance, the ball skipping awkwardly off the surface and flying wide. “The players chugging around, passing the ball absentmindedly and having to keep warm outside in the freezing cold until their pitch is ready has a wonderful Sunday league feel to it,” says Hugo Molloy, and I couldn’t agree more. The best thing about being cold at the game is the hope that the players are colder. Everton have created very little at Brentford, and you get the feeling it won’t be long before things turn toxic if he can’t fashion a swift improvement. As I write that, though, Rondon has a shot blocked and Coleman crosses behind everyone, so perhaps they’re stepping it up. We’e back underway at the Etihad. “There’s not much happening so I did some more looking,” returns Dave Manby. “The Premier League’s rules are suitably vague enough to mean that clubs can get away without underfloot heating, should they not wish to go to the expense of getting it installed when there’s no guarantee that they’ll remain in the top-flight for very long. The English Football League’s rulebook states: ‘Each Home Club shall provide full pitch frost covers and/or under soil heating (the specification of which shall meet the reasonable satisfaction of The League) which shall be operated to the extent necessary to procure, so far as it is reasonably possible, that the pitch is playable on the occasion of each match’. The Premier League has similar wording in its rulebook, stating that pitches need undersoil heating or ‘some other adequate system of pitch protection to the reasonable satisfaction of the board’. But what exactly classes as an ‘adequate system’ is not something that is set in stone. Back in 2006 matches at Ewood Park and Bolton’s Reebok Stadium were abandoned after a heavy frost and a Premier League spokesman confirmed that the matter would be investigated as ‘It is a specific rule in the Premier League that clubs must have undersoil heating’. Yet when Blackpool had to abandon three matches in 2010 due to temperatures reaching minus nine overnight their club secretary said, ‘It is not a Premier League regulation [to have undersoil heating]’. However when Bournemouth gained promotion to the top-flight in 2015 they opted against developing parts of the ground and decided to install undersoil heating instead. This was because they felt the Premier League had ‘strict rules’ regarding such things. The wording may be vague but what does seem clear is that the Premier League rules seem to suggest it’s up to you what type of system you have in place but you better not need to call a game off because your pitch is frozen…” Thanks very much for that. I recall a game i was meant to be doing to, in December 2010, between Chelsea and Man United, that Chelsea got postponed a day or two in advance, though there was very little snow. They weren’t in great shape prior to that game, I seem to recall. Ohhhh maaaaate! Hernandez charges into the Leicester box, doing brilliantly to step inside Castagne and fashion a shooting opportunity. But no more than 10 yards out and with no one between him and the keeper, he opts to pass and Schmeichel closes the angle before whoever it is can capitalise. That’s a very poor decision. “Won’t the match officials think of the fans watching the game on a dodgy stream?” emails Ian Sargeant. “Crying out for an orange ball, can’t see this yellow one.” The Etihad pitch is almost back to how it started now, but at Leicester it’s now extremely snowy. We’re back under way at Brentford and Leicester, where Ranieri has removed Cleverley and Louza, sending on Pedro and Tufan. That should sort it. They’re trying to clear more snurr. Half-time email: “Playing in snow is actually not that bad compared to getting caught in a hailstorm with ice the size of marbles suddenly raining down out of the sky when I was 13 and playing for the school team,” recalls Rick Harris. “The game was on the farthest pitch from the changing rooms and on an exposed hill top so the master who was reffing the game shouted to everyone to take shelter behind a nearby hedge where we collectively shivered our proverbials off until one kid screamed his had disappeared.” Brentford 1-0 Everton Leicester 3-1 Watford Man City 1-0 West Ham It’s now snowing at Leicester, though not as fiercely as as City, where the pitch markings are no longer visible. Nor is the ball, but that might just be my stream. Neil Lavery sends in the musings of Chris Boden, a reporter with the Burnley Express: This is another jazzer of a Vardy finish! They win a corner down the left and he runs past the near post – someone should follow him – but the flick he imparts is a perfect one, sending the ball flying towards the far corner. As his team celebrate, Ndidi’s relief permeates through the screen. I’ve just seen a clearer angle, and Johnson defended that Jesus shot brilliantly. The ball was past Fabianski, but he first made the correct call in running covering behind his keeper, then was quick enough to extend the thigh that completed the block. He’s really growing into things. Leicester ought to be 3-1 in front, but Evans allows the ball to slide sideways off his forehead when in front of goal. A proper contact, and that was in. City are used to this now (from what I can see through the blizzard), Jesus, who you’d think would be effective in the snow, driving into the box down the right and drilling a low shot that Johnson blocks. Absolutely classic Vardz. A ball over the top sees him down the left side of the box. If Bachmann stays, he probably can’t score, but the keeper does what keepers are meant to do, racing out to narrow the angle, and suddenly Vardy doesn’t need to beat him, he needs to steer the ball away from, which he dies by flicking over the eventuating dive. That, my friends, is expertise. As I was saying, Masuaku gives it away and Cancelo smacks a terrific ball out to Mahrez down the right, and he picks out Gundogan with a hard, low pass, and the finish is a simple one from close range. I wonder if it’s in conditions like these that City suffer for Guardiola’s obsession with tricksy little attacking midfielders. Most of the time, possession is a match fir power, but they’ve been finding it hard so far. “I don’t know how many readers have played in snow,” says Benjamin Park, “but I remember doing it rather often growing up in Switzerland. It’s the toes, the toes are the worst in my opinion. You could put gloves in your hands, rub them, tuck them under your armpits, but when your toes got cold, you could do nothing. You tried rubbing your big toe against the adjacent one in the hope of creating some friction.” A ball slapped onto the inside thigh is also a good one. Watford have played pretty well so far and there’s no Ismaila Sarr to arse-up their spot-kicks, so King opens his body and power-punches hard to Schmeichel’s left. The keeper guesses right, but he’s never getting to it. First, a shot from someone, Louza I think, hits Soyuncu’s back and cannons the post, then Ndidi extends a leg as Bonaventure runs across him going nowhere, and that’s a very clear but very avoidable call for the ref. Silly behaviour. Eeesh! Rondon nearly equalises, than a magnificent challenge from Docoure denies Janelt a one-on-one inside the box, after Toney diddles Keane with some lovely footwork. “Your dad,” says Karen Brigden, “sounds like a top bloke.” He’s very humble. Ahahahahahaha! Toney stands a foot from the ball, ambles up to it, if one can amble one step, and spanks it bottom left because Pickford has even though about sorting his barnet moving. The disdain there, glorious. The ref consults the screen and does the only thing he can do. Onyeka is now up, but that was a right sair yin though I’m sure he’s pleased to have endured it. At Brentford, they’re investigating a potential penalty for the home team – Andros Townsend has just tried to clear, but Onyeka headed away from him and wore a boot in the coupon instead. I’m sure this’ll be given. “According to my dad, who was a Burnley fan in the 60s (and still is now),” confesses Rob McEvoy, “Burnley installed underfloor heating in the Cricket Field Stand behind the goals, as well as including a behind the goal directors box, changing rooms and more fancy add-ons. However, they stopped using it after the games as the cost was prohibitive because, and you will never believe this, the hot air escaped. Also, Northerners are hard and don’t need it. No idea why we don’t have undersoil heating.” It’s a strange one – surely the expense of postponing the game, never mind the aggravation, is worth sorting it. But really the league need to enforce. By far the quietest start has come at Brentford, where neither side has done loads. Garry Southgate is watching that one, presumably so he can get to Stamford Bridge for the 4.30 kick-off. At City, a poor kick from Fabianski is won by Sterling and he plays in Mahrez who shmices across the keeper into the far corner ... but went too early so the flag goes up. A long ball from the back, Troost-Ekong ducks underneath it though Maddison lurks behind him, and he clatters home. That is some majestically dreadful defending. West Ham are playing well, by the way, and contrary to what I thought, Masuaku is playing pretty high. It’s snowing pretty hard at City now, which I think is to West Ham’s advantage, turning the game into a struggle. And here they come, Fornals pouncing upon an error from Mahrez to send Antonio into the box. He gets to the line and powers along it, but Ederson stands up to see him away. Tangentially, my old fella – a teacher – told me that a parent once told him that his son could be cheeky, but never lied. “I’m sorry to tell you this,” responded my dad. “But your son is a teenage boy and i’ve had one of those. He lies to you all the time and possibly every day.” “I always though Burnley was the first club to install undersoil heating,” says Dave Manby, “but a quick trawl of the tinterweb reveals that Everton was and no mention of Burnley being an early adopter at Turf Moor. Hmmm, methinks my geography teacher (a fanatical Burnley fan) back in my youth (some 50+ years ago) lied to me!” I find that hard to believe – teachers are genetically incapable of lying. City move the ball across the face of the West Ham and box and Walker allows it across his body, lashing a nasty skidder that Fabianski slithers after, poking it around the post. “The Mason Mount comment reminds me of a Tony O’Reilly quote from years ago,” emails David Mitchell. “Recalling his Jesuit school childhood the Irish rugby player remembered being told that Jesuits are the tops in modesty.” At City, West Ham are looking sharp on the break, Benrahma unable to make the most of the most recent one. But then Watford go down the other end and Evans gets himself into trouble, letting a long ball bounce and leaving it for Schmeichel, but King can’t get around or over him to capitalise. And if there was any, Jamie Vardy might just’ve melted it, screeching down the right side of the box to crack a shot shoved away by Bachmann at his near post. Decent effort, and a warning for Watford. “It’s snowing in the Midlands,” informs Lisa H. “Let’s hope the Leicester game can get going before any settles on the pitch!” Yup, they’re away, and as yet, no snurr whatsoever. At City, there’s snurr on the pitch – not all over it, but it might make the pconditions a little heavier. And off we go! The teams are out at Brentford. It’s cold. “Really frustrated that Guardian and other journalists keep calling Man City, ‘City’,” says Eamonn Harrigan. Here at the King Power, Ndidi is in midfield for City. Are journalists biased towards Manchester? Seems that way to me.” Er, bias towards Manchester City isn’t something of which I’ve ever been accused, so that’s something. But what’s actually going is that Leicester, for example, are lucky enough to be referred to by their forename; City get their surname because Manchester won’t do on account of United’s existence. Let’s take a moment to think about the importance of the rainbow laces movement. Like the taking of a knee, as well as being a Marxist plot, the point of it is not just to say yeah, agree with that, but for us to use it as springboard to educate ourselves not just about the experiences of those most affected by it, by about how we can help. “That ‘in a good moment’ always sounded mega-awkward,” says Tom Boyle. “Probably of Germanic origin, maybe works in Italian or Spanish too. In German ‘in einem guten Moment’ could refer to having good momentum. And now Robert P. and ‘The Principle of Moments’...” Maybe this is what Bono was getting at. “What’s gone wrong at Burnley? asks Neil Tully, trying to provoke me into an essay. “I remember when they had central heating in the Stands, that was in Bob Lords day.” Chelsea have that too, these heaters sitting on the edge of the roof blowing hot air into your coupon.It’s more disconcerting than you’d think. “Can’t believe Sean Dyche has allowed the game to be called off,” emails Daniel Barnett. “My PE teacher back in the early 80s, Mr Jackson (who turned out for Wigan Rovers in their only season in the North West Counties League) would have been appalled. ‘A bit of snow? Good for the circulation, lad! Get out and run around!’ In the olden days (pre-Moyes), these conditions would have guaranteed a 5-1 shellacking for West Ham at City today, orange ball included, but this lot seem to made of sterner stuff (he says, tempting fate). Still, can’t see us getting anything this afternoon.” Mr Jackson knew. In my school, our swimming teacher, Mrs Briden, opened the doors, so we’d all be sat there shivering on the side, while the more comfortably upholstered kids struggled to get out of the pool – she’d forbidden them from using the steps and corners. City, meanwhile, will play their normal game. Their midfield of Rodri, Gundogan and Bernardo looks extremely competent and will, ultimately, probably be definitive in this game. Rodri is really starting to assert himself now, but it’s Bernardo who’s making them tick – he’s just so deft on the ball and so clever in his movement and touches. On which point, Mahrez is also in nick, and I imagine he and his mates will be looking for overloads out wide – though I’m not wondering if West Ham will play 5-4-1. Looking at our main game, I imagine West Ham will go five at the back with Fornals joining Rice and Soucek in midfield, leaving Benrahma to support Antonio. I guess Masuaku might play further forward, but if you’re doing that you may as well pick Bowen. “Dyche in shirtsleeves...in the snow,” emails Scott Blair on the subject of earworms. “See, I’ve got this stuck in my head now, so cheers for that.” Here’s mine over the last week or so. Talking of which, has there ever been a team to so utterly inhabit the “in a good moment” neologism as Chelsea? I’m old enough to remember the olden days, when “playing well” was sufficient. On Sky, Mason Mount – who I really enjoy listening to – has just informed us that Chelsea are “very humble” (even if he says so himself). “Hasn’t undersoil heating arrived in Burnley yet?” asks Norman Keane. “Highbury had it in the mid 70s.” It seems not, and I’ve not a clue why it’s not compulsory. Alternatively, get a few fans who went out last night under the pitch and see if they can give off enough heat to melt the snurr. “Dyche in shirtsleeves … in the snow,” emails Tony Barr. “He should get the three points purely for that piece of unconscious self-parody. Where’s a topless Magpies fan when you need one? Kieran Tierney must be gutted to have missed it. No doubt he’s in his front garden, sunbathing. Pep Guardiola makes three changes to the side that beat Everton last Sunday: John Stones, Cole Palmer and the injured Phil Foden miss out, replaced by Ruben Dias, Riyad Mahrez and Gabriel Jesus. David Moyes, meanwhile, makes just one change to his extremely settled XI and it’s a defensive one: Jarrod Bowen, an attacker, is replaced by Arthur Masuaku, a defender. At Leicester, Jonny Evans is fit enough to start, while Daniel Amartey loses his spot to Luke Thomas. In midfield, Marc Albrighton drops out with James Maddison coming in, while the front three of Ademola Lookman, Jamie Vardy and Harvey Barnes is the same as last week. Vardy was rested for the Europa League win over Legia Warsaw, and Patson Daka was again impressive in his stead – I don’t think Brendan Rodgers can be leaving him out for much longer. As for Watford, Ben Foster, Ismaila Sarr and Nicolas Nkoulou are absent injured, so Daniel Bachmann, William Ekong and Cucho Hernandez replace them. , so Daniel Following the shame of a 3-3 draw at Newcastle, Brentford make two changes: Saman Ghoddos and Mads Roerslev are left out, with Charlie Goode and Frank Onyeka replacing them. Yoane Wissa, meanwhile, has recovered from an ankle problem and takes his place on the bench. As for Everton, Allan is fit while Abdoulaye Doucouré returns, big news for them – he replaces Fabian Delph – while Alex Iwobi is in for Demarai Gray and Salomon Rondon replaces the suspended Richarlison. Brentford: Fernandez, Henry, Goode, Pinnock, Jansson, Onyeka, Norgaard, Janelt, Canos, Mbeumo, Toney. Subs: Cox, Thompson, Jensen, Forss, Wissa, Ghoddos, Baptiste, Sorensen, Roerslev. Everton: Pickford, Coleman, Digne, Keane, Godfrey, Allan, Doucoure, Iwobi, Gordon, Townsend, Rondon. Subs: Begovic, Kenny, Delph, Gray, Tosun, Gbamin, Branthwaite, Simms, Dobbin. ** Leicester City: Schmeichel, Castagne, Evans, Soyuncu, Thomas, Ndidi, Soumare, Barnes, Maddison, Lookman, Vardy. Subs: Ward, Albrighton, Iheanacho, Perez, Amartey, Choudhury, Dewsbury-Hall, Vestergaard, Daka. Watford: Bachmann, Femenia, Cathcart, Ekong, Masina, Louza, Sissoko, Cleverley, Dennis, King, Hernandez. Subs: Elliot, Ngakia, Rose, Pedro, Gosling, Fletcher, Tufan, Kabasele, Morris. ** Manchester City: Ederson, Walker, Dias, Laporte, Cancelo, Gundogan, Rodri, Bernardo Silva, Mahrez, Jesus, Sterling. Subs: Steffen, Carson, Stones, Ake, Zinchenko, Fernandinho, Palmer, McAtee. West Ham United: Fabianski, Johnson, Zouma, Dawson, Cresswell, Soucek, Rice, Fornals, Masuaku, Benrahma, Antonio. Subs: Areola, Coufal, Yarmolenko, Lanzini, Vlasic, Noble, Bowen, Diop, Kral. Or for those unfamiliar with pools coupons and classified results, Burnley v Spurs is OFF. Seriously, lads. Er, it seems like Burnley v Spurs is in jeopardy on account of the quantity of snow that’s falling in Lancashire. I don’t know I really don’t, just get out the orange Adidas Tango and don’t be soft. Manchester City are a peculiar construction. Watching them play Paris off the pitch on Wednesday night, it was hard not to think that they’re the best team in Europe. And yet, watching them play Paris off the pitch on Wednesday night, it was also hard not to see why their own league is topped by a more solid and ruthless side, and why they’ve still to win the Champions League: ultimately, their defence is still suspect and they now lack a reliable goalscorer. Nevertheless, if they play like that this afternoon, West Ham are in trouble ... and yet it’s not impossible to visualise a scenario in which they limit chances, survive a few missed sitters, and catch their hosts on the counter. Which is to say this is an intriguing fixture, and the one on which we’ll principally be focused. There are, though, three other encounters well worth a look-in. Without a win in six, Everton badly a result at Brentford who, after a decent start to Premier-League life, have lost four in a row. Similarly, Spurs have so far been poor under Antonio Conte, though he willpowered them to a comeback win last weekend, and must rebound from their hilarious disastrous loss to Mura – they could have hoped for an easier sop that Burnley away – while the Claudio Ranieri derby at the KP is another goodun. Kick-offs: 2pm GMTA third case of the Omicron Covid variant has been confirmed in the UK, officials have said, as Sajid Javid insisted the government is “nowhere near” having to reimpose mandatory social distancing and home working to mitigate the threat it poses. The person who tested positive was linked to previous travel in southern Africa and had left the UK before the result emerged, the UK Health Security Agency said. Targeted testing would take place where the person had been, it said, adding that this was Westminster, in central London, giving no further details. The news came after Javid, the health secretary, described rules announced by Boris Johnson to combat the variant, including compulsory masks on public transport and in shops, as “proportionate and balanced”. Speaking a day after the first UK cases of the new variant were reported, Javid told Sky’s Trevor Phillips on Sunday show that there were no plans for extra restrictions, such as social distancing, wearing masks in pubs or working from home. “We know now that those type of measures do carry a very heavy price, both economically, socially, in terms of non-Covid health outcomes such as the impact on mental health,” Javid said. “If one was to make decisions like that, they would have to be done very, very carefully. We’re not there yet. We’re nowhere near that.” In a subsequent interview with BBC One’s Andrew Marr Show, Javid said he would not advise people to work from home, even if possible, saying: “No, I don’t think that’s necessary.” Such moves would have “a really heavy cost on the economy, on people’s social lives, on their mental health”, he said. While there are concerns that the number of mutations in the Omicron variant might make it resist some Covid vaccines, Javid told Sky that even if this was the case, vaccines were still likely to give some protection. The booster jabs programme, currently limited to people aged 40 or over, or with health vulnerabilities, was to be extended, Javid said. The Joint Committee on Vaccines and Immunisation (JCVI), the government’s vaccines watchdog, had been asked to provide “very quick advice on broadening our booster programme, and I expect to get that advice imminently”, he said. It is understood that the JCVI held an emergency meeting on Saturday, and that officials may make an announcement on Monday. Javid said he was confident that the return of mandatory mask use in England from Tuesday would be respected, despite low compliance rates in places where it has remained compulsory, such as on London transport services. “Over the past few days, people would have been able to see and understand the concerns around this new variant,” he said. “I think that will encourage people to listen and think about some of the new measures, and take them very seriously.” However, the shadow foreign secretary said in an interview with Times Radio that she was concerned about levels of mask use, given the disinclination of Johnson and many other Conservatives to wear them. “You only have to walk around parliament to see the problem,” Lisa Nandy said. “Most Tory MPs don’t wear masks.” Ministers have also imposed travel restrictions since the variant was first identified in South Africa last week, with 10 countries on the red list, requiring mandatory hotel quarantine for people arriving in England, and other UK nations set to follow. Six countries were added to the list from midday on Friday: South Africa, Zimbabwe, Namibia, Lesotho, Botswana and Eswatini. Four more went on at 4am on Sunday: Angola, Malawi, Mozambique and Zambia. Asked if he could guarantee that people would be able to see families and other loved ones at Christmas, Javid said: “You ask me for guarantees and I think it’s fair to say that the nature of this pandemic is that it would be irresponsible to make guarantees. What I can tell you is that the actions we have taken, the proportionate and balanced actions, will buy us time. “It will give us the precious weeks our scientists need to assess this variant. I think people should continue with their plans as normal for Christmas. It’s going to be a great Christmas.” Speaking separately, in an interview with the Mail on Sunday, Javid said he hoped rules to be introduced in spring that will make Covid vaccinations mandatory for frontline NHS and care staff would not cause significant staff shortages. He said: “It’s hard to know. As a country we haven’t done anything like this before. “If I look at other countries ... France did something similar and in three or four months they went from, I think it was something like 70% vaccinated to 99.8% vaccinated. I hope we’ll have a similar response.”I too am disappointed that Grace Dent’s guests were not wooed by her comfort eats (They told me about childhood, class, love and more: what I’ve learned from Comfort Eating, 26 November). These two items will knock their epicurean socks off: toast spread with crunchy peanut butter and a thin layer of tomato ketchup; and Rubio truffle-flavoured crisps, made in Spain, or is it heaven? Jonathan Hauxwell Crosshills, North Yorkshire • The great sex guide takes up two pages in print (The secret to great sex? It’s not what you think …, 26 November), whereas Feast warrants more than 30 pages. Does this reflect readers’ priorities, or do we just need more help with cooking than sex? Toby Wood Peterborough, Cambridgeshire • I have to disagree with Rabbi Margaret Jacobi (Letters, 26 November). Ralph McTell recorded Streets of London about homelessness in 1969. I slept rough for two nights in 1966. Perhaps it wasn’t so visible then. Alan Short Colchester, Essex • Re the logbooks of the Aurora and the Terra Nova (Report, 24 November), they were unlikely to have been written with quill pens. Fountain pens were invented in the 19th century and were in common use at the time that Ernest Shackleton and Robert Falcon Scott were exploring the Antarctic. Madeline Weston Norwich • Despite the grandeur of homes with statement staircases (Fantasy house hunt, 26 November), my wife and I, both in our mid-70s, would appreciate a feature on homes with lifts. David and Anthea Collins Kidderminster, Worcestershire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I was delighted to read that some pregnant women may now be helped by progesterone injections (Women at higher risk of miscarriage to be offered hormone drug by NHS, 24 November). Almost exactly 50 years ago, in 1972, after I’d endured the heartbreak of four miscarriages, my empathetic consultant prescribed weekly progesterone injections. Aided by those injections, I went on to give birth to two healthy daughters. In 1978, after moving to Cambridge, I was pregnant again and, following minor bleeding, my GP willingly prescribed hormone injections. I was, however, roundly criticised by the hospital consultant on my first antenatal visit, because such injections supposedly hindered, rather than helped. I was told, starkly, that my baby was dead. That baby is now a healthy 6ft man. Molly Warrington Cambridge • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Zoe Williams is right about “Harper’s law” (PC Andrew Harper’s killing was appalling, but changing the law won’t protect key workers, 25 November). Like many former practitioners, I am for placing our trust in the experience and informed discretion of our judges to fashion the appropriate sentence, given all the circumstances of individual cases. It follows that I am against hobbling the court’s discretion by striving to ram square pegs into round holes – this is what happens when we pretend to identify categories of offending, where on a wiser appraisal there are always differences to be found. Indeed, once such a category of “public servant” were to be established, where would it end? The jury, understandably, faced with Andrew Harper’s violent death, found the defendants guilty of a dangerous and unlawful act resulting in a public servant’s death – of manslaughter rather than murder, with its mandatory life sentence. To deprive the judge of the exercise of assessing the just sentences to impose would distort the entire sentencing philosophy. The sentences imposed were significant despite the relative youth of the offenders and in keeping with sound sentencing practice. Tinkering with intricate sentencing frameworks on the basis of cases such as this one is decidedly counterproductive. Malcolm Fowler Former chair, criminal law committee, the Law Society • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In my 25 years of working with young offenders and young people at risk, I have seldom heard anything so crass as blaming female Doctor Whos for the increase in youth crime (Recasting male heroes as women risks driving boys to crime, claims Tory MP, 25 November). The causes of this are far more to do with austerity and the drastic cuts in youth and play provision, the reduction in community policing and the cuts in children’s services. Yes, the lack of positive role models has had something to do with this, but the critical role models used to be youth and play workers, who could engage with young men, providing real alternatives to gang culture. Don Macdonald London • I found Nick Fletcher’s comments intriguing. Clearly we would be in a bad place if the consequence of casting of women in traditionally male roles left only criminals as cultural role models, so who better for young males to look up to than a womanising, vodka-swilling maverick with a licence to kill? Tom Challenor Ealing, London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.The ugly truth behind the Channel deaths (Channel tragedy: ‘Smugglers tell their clients it’s just a lake – but it’s not’, 25 November) is a system of global governance that gives a few countries unequal power over international rules of trade, finance and security. Western governments prioritise their electorates, while the world’s majority are ignored. While our media spotlight desperate people on our shores, they ignore millions of refugees languishing in countries much poorer than ours. Until we address the structural issues of minority rule to create an inclusive and equitable system of global governance, western electorates will demand higher fences and more draconian measures to protect their borders. But the crisis will only deepen, as global heating drives more people from their homes. We need to focus on the structures that perpetuate global inequality. Kwame Anthony Appiah (A tale of two pandemics: the true cost of Covid in the global south, 23 November) makes the case for building an international community with “supple and inclusive global institutions”. Until we do, the tragedies will get worse. Titus Alexander Author, Unravelling Global Apartheid • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.With regard to tackling the Omicron variant (Omicron variant spreads to Europe as UK announces countermeasures, 26 November), closing our borders buys us a little time, nothing more. So what are we going to do with it? Dithering with the current laissez-faire, herd immunity, business-as-usual policies will swiftly turn into a disaster. The government needs to introduce stringent infection-suppression measures now, not wait until it is too late as usual. As a bare minimum we need green passes for all potential mass spreader events, mandatory mask wearing in all enclosed public spaces, and mandatory vaccination for all health, care, education and public-facing workers. The government should reintroduce working from home wherever possible, and we must ensure there is adequate ventilation and mask wearing in all schools and colleges. None of these measures should significantly impede economic or everyday life. Doing nothing will surely have a much greater impact. Des Senior Exeter • Kit Yates’s article (The new variant is worrying – but it doesn’t change how we tackle Covid, 26 November) is good, but only highlights individual and domestic responsibilities. Where is the coordinated world response to the Omicron variant? We’ve had almost two years of experience in dealing with this virus, and while the world has advanced in leaps and bounds scientifically, it seems it has stood still politically. Surely by this time, the world should have had a playbook for an event like this. It’s not as if we didn’t know that new variants were going to emerge. We set up the process to look for and identify them quickly – after that, nothing. The global community can get together for a coordinated effort to tackle the climate crisis, but hasn’t seemed to have even considered the more immediate problem. Instead, we still have individual countries running about doing their own thing, if not totally then almost totally, like headless chickens. Duncan McCallum Houston, Renfrewshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.On Saturday Gharib Ahmed spent five hours outside the police station in Calais, desperately waiting for news. “It was so cold. There was no answer,” he said. Ahmed was seeking confirmation that his brother-in-law Twana Mamand was one of 27 people who died in the Channel on Wednesday after the flimsy dinghy taking them to the UK sank. “I want to see his body. I have to understand,” Ahmed told the Guardian. Relatives of the mostly Iraqi Kurds who perished in the world’s busiest shipping lane spent the weekend in a state of anxiety and confusion. Ahmed said he last heard from his brother-in-law at 3am on Wednesday, around the time Twana set off in darkness from a beach near Dunkirk. After two days of silence, Ahmed travelled with his wife, Kale Mamand – Twana’s sister – from their home in London to northern France, arriving on Friday night. The bodies of those who died were taken to a basement mortuary inside Calais hospital on the outskirts of the port. According to Ahmed, French detectives told him it would not be possible to definitively identify Twana until 10am on Monday, when the hospital facility reopens. “They have done DNA tests. They explained that sometimes you don’t recognise, if you see a body, that faces can change or be bruised, and that DNA is better,” he said. Ahmed said he was unwilling for now to accept that Twana was gone. In the meantime, he was spending his hours on the phone, talking to family who live near the town of Ranya in Iraqi Kurdistan, and to Iraqi government officials who have offered to bring Twana’s body home, and to local refugee charities. “I don’t want to make anyone happy or sad until we know for sure,” he said. “There are six to eight families in the same situation.” Exactly what happened last week is unclear. Twana was part of a group that included his friend Harem Pirot, and another young Kurdish man, Muhammad Shekha. Also on the boat was a family of four from the Iraqi Kurdish town of Darbandikhan: Khazal Hussein, 45, and her children Haida, 22, son Mubin, 16, and younger daughter Hasti, seven. Shekha appears to be one of only two survivors. He and a Somali refugee were pulled from the water, suffering from hypothermia and exhaustion, after French fishers raised the alarm. Relatives said Shekha had decided to travel to the UK from Kurdistan to earn money for his sister, who needs medical help. The family is contemplating setting up a crowdfunding page. Shekha never made it to London and is in Calais hospital, recovering from his ordeal. His evidence is likely to be used in future prosecutions against the suspected Kurdish smugglers who arranged the ill-fated crossing, five of whom French authorities have arrested. It may also help answer the key question: what caused their rickety boat to sink? In the camp where Twana stayed near Dunkirk before setting off on a dinghy, there were further painful questions. Nassar Mustafapor, 27, said he was searching for information about his friend Sirwan Alipur, 23. “He’s missing. We don’t know what happened to him,” said Nasser, showing a photo of his friend. Alipur was among dozens of Iraqi Kurds who made the crossing on Wednesday night under what seemed like perfect conditions – a flat sea and clear sky. He could now be in the UK or in a morgue, Nassar said. Despite Wednesday’s tragedy, many of those in the camp in the suburb of Grande-Synthe said they intended to take a boat to Britain. The weather conditions are now terrible. Few dinghies seem to have launched in recent days. On Saturday evening torrential rain and heavy winds lashed the row of tents where the Iraqis – together with a handful of Afghans – are camping out, next to a canal and woods. There are no toilets or running water. It is a grim existence, made worse by the relentless cold and lack of news. Remarkably, residents seem to be stoical about their situation. They say they have no choice but to tough out the winter conditions until they can reach the UK. One group was busy building a makeshift restaurant from logs; friends who met each other in Turkey on the long overland journey to France were sitting around a bonfire, next to a disused railway track. There were a few families among the young men. A husband and wife had brought their two disabled children with them on an uncertain odyssey; their wheelchairs parked neatly next to a tent. “It’s too cold. We have to try to get to London,” said Amanj, a 20-year-old Kurdish political activist from Iran. He explained that smugglers would turn up in the camp when the French police were not there. They usually wore masks. “They come when the weather is good. You can’t see their faces. They will say if tomorrow is good [to go by boat] and ask if you want to come with them. If you say yes, they ask for your WhatsApp. And then they collect you in a van and take you to the beach.” Amanj said Twana’s friend Pirot had tried multiple times to cross the Channel before his attempt on Wednesday, which led to his death. Some of their group were now having second thoughts, he said. But he added that he still intended to cross. “I will do it,” he said.The House select committee investigating the Capitol attack is likely to decide this week whether to charge Mark Meadows, Donald Trump’s final White House chief of staff, with criminal contempt of Congress, a key panel member said. “I think we will probably make a decision this week on our course of conduct with that particular witness and maybe others,” Adam Schiff, a California Democrat and chair of the House intelligence committee, told CNN’s State of the Union. Schiff also said he was concerned about the Department of Justice, for a perceived lack of interest in investigating Trump’s own actions, including asking officials in Georgia to “find” votes which would overturn his defeat by Joe Biden. The 6 January committee is investigating the attack on the Capitol by supporters whom Trump told to “fight like hell” to overturn his defeat. Trump was impeached with support from 10 House Republicans but acquitted when only seven senators defected. The select committee contains only two Republicans, Adam Kinzinger and Liz Cheney, who broke with Trump over 6 January. “We tried to hold the former president accountable through impeachment,” Schiff said. “That’s the remedy that we have in Congress. We are now trying to expose the full facts of the former president’s misconduct as well as those around him.” Asked about Meadows – who is due to publish a memoir, The Chief’s Chief, on 7 December – Schiff said: “I can’t go into you know, communications that we’re having or haven’t had with particular witnesses. “But we are moving with alacrity with anyone who obstructs the committee, and that was really the case with Mr Bannon, it would be the case with Mr Meadows and Mr Clark or any others.” Steve Bannon, Trump’s former campaign chair and White House strategist, pleaded not guilty to a charge of criminal contempt, the first pursued by Congress and the DoJ since 1982. Facing a fine and jail time, on Thursday Bannon filed a request that all documents in his case be made public. Like Bannon and Meadows, Jeffrey Clark, a former Department of Justice official, has refused to co-operate with the House committee. Lawyers for Trump and his allies have claimed executive privilege, the doctrine which deals with the confidentiality of communications between a president and his aides. Many experts say executive privilege does not apply to former presidents. The Biden White House has waived it. “It varies witness to witness,” Schiff said, “but we discuss as a committee and with our legal counsel what’s the appropriate step to make sure the American people get the information. We intend to hold public hearings again soon to bring the public along with us and show what we’re learning in real time. But we’re going to make these decisions very soon.” Schiff said he could not “go into the evidence that we have gathered” about Trump’s role in the events of 6 January, around which five people died and during which the vice-president, Mike Pence, was hidden from a mob chanting for his hanging. “I think among the most important questions that we’re investigating,” Schiff said, “is the complete role of the former president. “That is, what did he know in advance about propensity for violence that day? Was this essentially the back-up plan for the failed [election] litigation around the country? Was this something that was anticipated? How was it funded, whether the funders know about what was likely to happen that day? And what was the president’s response as the attack was going on, as his own vice-president was being threatened? “I think among the most, the broadest category of unknowns are those surrounding the former president. And we are determined to get answers.” Schiff was also asked about suggestions, including from Amit Mehta, a judge overseeing cases against Capitol rioters, nearly 700 of whom have been charged, that the Department of Justice may seem to be letting Trump off the hook. Schiff said: “I am concerned that there does not appear to be an investigation, unless it’s being done very quietly by the justice department of … the former president on the phone with the Georgia secretary of state, asking him to find, really demanding he find 11,780 votes that don’t exist, the precise number he would need to overturn Joe Biden’s victory in that state. “I think if you or I were on that call and reported we’d be under investigation [or] indictment by now for a criminal effort to defraud the people in Georgia and the people in the country. “So that specifically I’m concerned about.”Prosecutors in New York could “indict Donald Trump tomorrow if they really wanted and be successful”, the ex-president’s former lawyer and fixer Michael Cohen said on Sunday, discussing investigations of Trump’s business affairs. Asked if he was “confident you did help Donald Trump commit crimes”, Cohen told NBC’s Meet the Press: “I can assure you that Donald Trump is guilty of his own crimes. Was I involved in much of the inflation and deflation of his assets? The answer to that is yes.” Cohen also repeated his contention that Trump will not run for the White House in 2024, because his huge fundraising success while hinting at such a run is too profitable a “grift” to give up. The Manhattan investigation of the Trump Organization, including whether Trump cheated on property valuations for tax purposes, is one of a number of sources of legal jeopardy for the former president. Trump denies all wrongdoing. Because the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus Vance Jr, leaves office at the end of the year, some think indictments may be imminent. Cohen, who has cooperated, said: “I really try not to talk about it because it’s their investigation, nor do I want to tip off Trump or the Trump Organization’s people about what is actually happening. “So I would rather just not answer that specific question, other than to say that you can bet your bottom dollar that Allen Weisselberg is not … the key to this. They are going after Donald. They’re going after Don Jr, Eric, Ivanka, a whole slew of individuals, family as well.” Cohen also said he was “not their only witness, and most importantly, what I gave to them are thousands and thousands of documents”. “I’m not asking anybody to believe me,” he said. “No different than when I testified before the House oversight committee. Every statement that I make, I’ve backed up with documentary evidence. I truly believe that they can indict Donald Trump tomorrow if they really wanted, and be successful.” Weisselberg, chief financial officer of the Trump Organization, was indicted on tax charges, a move most thought meant to induce him to turn on Trump. Cohen did so, after being convicted on charges including lying to Congress and facilitating a payoff to the porn star Stormy Daniels. He recently completed a three-year sentence, much of it served at home thanks to Covid. “They didn’t really do to Allen Weisselberg what they did to me,” Cohen said. “The threat against me was that they were going to file an 85-page indictment that was going to include my wife. They were going to say she was a co-conspirator to the hush money payment, which is absolutely nonsensical. “And, look, I’m married now 27 years. I’m with the same woman for 29 years. There was no chance in the world that I was going to put her at risk with these animals. The way they came down on me is nothing like what they’re doing to Weisselberg. “They should be squeezing right now [Allen’s son] Barry Weisselberg, who works for the Trump Organization, and they should be squeezing [another son] Jack Weisselberg, who is [with] one of only two organizations that made loans to the Trump Organization that we still know. “You know, when you talked about whether or not Donald Trump inflated or deflated his assets, every single word that I had said about that is 100% accurate.” Cohen suffered a setback earlier this month, when a judge in New York ruled the Trump Organization was not liable for legal fees he said it owed. He told NBC he wanted to ensure that others “become responsible for their dirty deeds. I should not be responsible for Donald Trump’s dirty deeds. “Donald Trump is the one who was involved with the campaign finance violation [the payment to Daniels], as was Allen Weisselberg, as was Don Trump Jr, Ivanka, Eric, you know, and several other individuals. They need to be held accountable. “And I, like everybody else, am waiting for both Cyrus Vance Jr’s district attorney case [and New York attorney general] Tish James’s civil case, to move forward, and start moving forward a little quicker.” Cohen was asked if he believed the Trump Organization was “a criminal enterprise”. “Let’s just say that they committed crimes,” he said.Magnus Carlsen and Ian Nepomniachtchi played to a third successive draw in the third game of their world championship showdown in Dubai as the Russian challenger weathered another atypical position before negotiating a bloodless result after 41 moves in 2hr 42min. Nepomniachtchi, playing as white, opened with 1 e4 and the action quickly followed the same anti-Marshall branch of the Ruy Lopez opening from Friday’s first encounter. Carlsen broke from familiar territory with the rare 10 … Re8, bypassing four more popular choices from the position, marking the third time in as many games that he was first to mix things up with an unusual move. “Re8 is a really, really dumb move because usually you would try to go Re8 without d6,” Carlsen said afterwards. “But it turns out even here he was well prepared and he didn’t give me even slight chances to play.” The tension continued to build until Nepomniachtchi made a thematic central pawn break with 18 d4. After a quickfire exchange of pawns, then knights (18 … exd4 19 Nxd4 Nxd4 20. Qxd4), Carlsen pondered the position for a minute and a half before electing for 20 … Be6. Nepomniachtchi then took nearly half an hour before settling on a modest pawn push (21 h3). Resolution came before very long, after the exchange of knights and queens prompted a rapid simplification. By the time the rooks came off the board after 30 Rxb8 Rxb8 31 Rb1 Rxb1+ 32 Bxb1 Ke5, Carlsen’s advanced king had all but snuffed out Nepomniachtchi’s winning chances. Carlsen, 30, has been ranked No 1 for more than a decade and was considered the world’s best player even before he defeated Viswanathanhy Anand for the title in 2013. He’s making his fourth defence of the world championship against the 31-year-old Nepomniachtchi, the world No 5. The overall score in their €2m showdown at the Dubai Exhibition Centre remains level at 1.5-1.5 ahead of Monday’s rest day. The proceedings will resumeon Tuesday – Carlsen’s 31st birthday – with the Norwegian controlling the white pieces. “It’s three games in,” Carlsen said. “There’s a lot of time to go and, as you saw [on Saturday], it could have easily been a decisive result. Obviously, for each game the most likely result is a draw. Saying otherwise would be quite disingenuous. But any game could explode. Not today.”The depth of Great Britain’s Davis Cup team was tested on Sunday afternoon when they stood a set away from defeat against a young and fearless Czech Republic team punching far above its weight. However, under the burden of Davis Cup finals pressure, they found a way with a 2-1 win to finish top of their group and reach the quarter-finals. After Dan Evans was brushed aside by the 21-year-old Tomas Machac, who secured a career-best 6-2, 7-5 victory, Cameron Norrie survived three turbulent sets to beat the 20-year-old Jiri Lehecka 6-1, 2-6, 6-1 and push the tie into a doubles rubber to decide the winner of their group. In their first deciding Davis Cup rubber together, Joe Salisbury and Neal Skupski produced a dominant doubles performance to steer Great Britain through with a 6-4, 6-2 win against Jiri Vesely and Machac. “Damn good, real good,” the captain, Leon Smith, said of his team’s performance. “I’m really, really proud of them. Doesn’t matter who wins or loses rubbers, everyone is in it together, everyone is supporting at the end. I thought Machac, who played Evo in the first match, played out of his skin. He was great. Then Cam plays another young guy who played out of his skin.“ As Radek Stepanek and Tomas Berdych, the stars of a Czech team that won the event in 2012 and 2013, have spent their past few days entertaining the Royal Albert Hall’s crowds at the Champions Tennis event, this week in Innsbruck has underlined that capable successors are coming through. Machac, the world No 143, had already defeated Richard Gasquet of France and against Evans he served extremely well, moved confidently to the net, and complemented his sweet backhand with flashes of showmanship, slam-dunking jumping forehand drive-volley winners. Despite showing fight, Evans was poor. His backhand slice was impotent in crosscourt exchanges against the Czech’s supreme two-hander and he sprayed forehand errors throughout. “It’s far from ideal,” Evans said afterwards. Even in a less popular format and in front of no fans, lower-ranked players continue to elevate themselves in this unique competition. Lehecka has risen quickly up the rankings this year and against Norrie, he demonstrated the potential of his vast weaponry, taking the second set 6-2 in a blaze of forehand winners. However, Norrie played with discipline in the third set, cutting out unforced errors and imposing his intensity on Lehecka. “It was obviously a big match, a must-win match for me, a must-win match for these boys here,” Norrie said. “I think it’s all very new for all of us, but we’ve all had great years. We all prepared as well as we could for this event. We were all ready for today’s challenge. All the preparation, all the hard work throughout the year paid off.” As the contest came down to the deciding doubles rubber, Salisbury and Skupski, ranked No 3 and No 20 respectively, left their mark on the tournament against Vesely and Machac. Salisbury snatched the first break at 4-4 with a typically assured backhand volley, and as they took control of the match, they soared. “We were confident we would come back stronger today,” said Salisbury, referring to their doubles loss in Saturday’s dead rubber against France. “Obviously going into it, knowing that we had to get the win, I think we kind of embraced that situation. I think it brought the best out of us.” Great Britain will face Germany on Tuesday afternoon in Innsbruck after Germany followed up their narrow win over Novak Djokovic’s Serbia by defeating Austria 2-1.The sister of Pte Sean Benton, who shot himself at Deepcut barracks, has accused the British army of treating victims’ families with contempt after it emerged that the military had failed to honour a pledge made at his inquest in 2018. Tracy Lewis said the coroner had been told that recruits would be informed they could report serious physical or sexual assaults to the police, a commitment intended to help tackle bullying and harassment in the ranks. But during follow-up inquiries made by Benton’s family this year, it emerged that the army had not acted as promised to the court, forcing the Ministry of Defence to apologise and belatedly rewrite its training materials. “The army promised my family that they would ensure that trainees and recruits in the army today fully understand that if something bad happens to them – like a serious sexual or physical assault – that they can report to the civilian police and don’t have to go to the military authorities,” Lewis said. “The evidence we heard at all the Deepcut inquests was that our young people just did not know they could do that and had nowhere to go for help. Now we learn, three years later, that the army did nothing. To our families, this feels like contempt.” The inquest concluded that Benton, 20, had killed himself at Deepcut barracks in Surrey in 1995. He had been found dead with five gunshot wounds to the chest. The inquest heard he had been repeatedly bullied. In one incident, he had told his sister that he had been “shackled and forced to parade around” a canteen. Brig Christopher Coles, the head of army personnel service group, had told the coroner Judge Peter Rook QC that “an instruction will be sent” to army training centres requiring them to tell recruits they could complain to civilian police if they felt they had been a victim of a serious crime. As a result of the public commitment, Rook said he would not make a formal prevention of future deaths report. The judge said he believed that the army had “relatively late in the day, recognised and addressed” the problem of recruits feeling they had nowhere to turn if they were assaulted. Earlier this year, in June, Benton’s family asked the MoD to share with them copies of the revised induction materials, only for the army to concede that they did not exist. Threatened with a judicial review, the MoD admitted this month it had made a mistake. “This is extremely regrettable and a matter for which the MoD would like to apologise to your client,” a government lawyer wrote. “I appreciate that this may not be much solace, but I can assure you that this was an oversight.” Training materials were being urgently rewritten, they added. Benton was one of four soldiers who died in disputed circumstances at Deepcut barracks between 1995 and 2002. Initial investigations were criticised as inadequate and a 2006 review concluded that recruits had experienced “harassment, discrimination and oppressive behaviour”. Earlier this month, Ben Wallace, the defence secretary, called a rare special meeting of the army’s management board in the aftermath of a series of bullying and harassment scandals and allegations that a Kenyan woman was killed in 2012 by a British soldier whose identity is known to several colleagues. But Lewis said the army’s failure in her brother’s case raised questions about whether it was serious about reform. “There is so much in the press at the moment about unacceptable behaviours and the army wants us to believe that it will change. But how can we believe that, when the army can’t even do what it promised the court it would do?” A Ministry of Defence spokesperson said: “We regret that we didn’t act quickly enough to make the changes to training we committed to, however, as part of basic training every recruit is now briefed on their right to report any issue to the civilian police.” In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.Pep Guardiola described as “fantasy” the idea that Manchester City can launch another long unbeaten run to match last season’s 28-match sequence following their 2-1 win against West Ham at the Etihad Stadium on Sunday. The victory featured goals from Ilkay Gündogan and Fernandinho, with Manuel Lanzini registering an added-time consolation for the visitors. City’s fifth consecutive win came almost 12 months after a 2-0 loss at Tottenham on 21 November last season proved to be City’s last defeat until losing 2-0 to Manchester United on 7 March. Guardiola was asked if he senses his players are in the same groove as this time last year. “I don’t know what is going to happen,” the manager said. “What we have done in the past is the past. We have to celebrate now and then we go to Birmingham to play Aston Villa [on Wednesday]. The rest is fantasy, to make wrong thoughts in your mind creates problems in the team.” The win takes City to 29 points and back up to second on an afternoon in which club staff had to work hard to clear the pitch from heavy snowfall. Guardiola praised them and his team. “I think the groundkeepers, the guys who took care of the pitch, were the man of the match,” he said. “They did an incredible job to make sure we played the game today. The chances we created - it could have been three or four. We cannot forget which opponent we played. They have everything. “We came from a tough game in midweek against PSG [winning 2-1 in the Champions League] and we know exactly which team we faced today. And the amount of chances we created especially in the first half in the conditions that we played, it’s a huge victory for us – for the effort, for the players, the performance in general. “We didn’t concede much [many chances], we defended set-pieces really well and the counter-attacks we controlled them. Maybe we could make another speed, another rhythm but the weather conditions didn’t allow us to do it. But a good performance from all of us. In these conditions you have to adapt. Don’t take risks. More short passes. But no, the same way.” David Moyes rued West Ham’s lack of quality in front of goal. “That’s the difference at the very top level,” he said. West Ham have now lost twice in a row since beating Liverpool before the international break.Before the road accident that changed his life at the age of 43, Frank Williams typified the breed of fast-living, almost pathologically competitive alpha males who had graduated from the mostly amateur world of postwar British motor racing to dominate the sport at its highest level. When Williams, who has died aged 79, lost the use of all four limbs after crashing a rental car while speeding from a circuit in southern France to a nearby airport one evening in the spring of 1986, his career as the driving force of a championship-winning Formula One team appeared to be over. For several days he hovered on the brink of death. But tetraplegia was to prove no match for the will of a man devoted to winning, often against the odds. Thirteen years later, having added seven more constructors’ world championships and five more drivers’ titles to the pair of each secured by his team before the accident, he was knighted for his services to motor sport. The men who won the world title at the wheel of his cars were Alan Jones, Keke Rosberg, Nelson Piquet, Nigel Mansell, Alain Prost, Damon Hill and Jacques Villeneuve. By that time his wheelchair, pushed by a carer, had become a familiar sight at the world’s racing circuits. Williams sat in the pits during the races and qualifying sessions, watching the computer screens that monitored his cars’ progress, his once expressive features now a largely inscrutable mask. The view of his rival team bosses was summed up in a remark attributed to one of them, Ron Dennis of McLaren, when it was announced that Williams would be returning to action despite the loss of physical functions: “Now he’s even more dangerous. All he can do with his time is think.” Like Enzo Ferrari, Williams designed not a single nut or bolt of the cars that bore his name. Instead he functioned as a motivator, a strategist and a hustler who enjoyed making a good deal for his team almost as much as he loved seeing them triumph on the track. Eventually, in 2012, after the last of their 114 grand prix victories, he stepped back, handing over the frontline duties to his daughter, Claire, who had studied her father’s style and methods at close quarters for many years. Williams was born in South Shields, now in Tyne and Wear, to Clare (nee McGrath), a teacher of children with special needs, and Owen Williams, who flew Wellington bombers in the RAF and left the family before his son was a year old. While his mother struggled to earn a living, much of the young Frank’s upbringing was consigned to his grandparents. He was enrolled at St Joseph’s college, a Roman Catholic boarding school in Dumfries, where he was good at languages but spent most of his time studying motoring magazines. His mother had taken a job as a headteacher at a school outside Nottingham, and during his holidays Frank would often stay with a schoolfriend in Newcastle whose father was a car dealer. He learned to drive in the grounds of his mother’s school, taking the wheel of her Morris Minor before he was old enough for a provisional licence. Earning a mere £3 10s a week in his first job, as a trainee with a vehicle distribution centre in Nottingham, he persuaded his mother to give him £80 to buy a hotted-up Austin A35 saloon with which, as a teenager, he entered his first races. It was while sitting on a trackside bank after rolling the car at Mallory Park that he struck up a conversation with Jonathan Williams, another young driver who had crashed at the same spot. Back in the paddock Jonathan introduced his new acquaintance to his friend Piers Courage, the Old Etonian son of the chairman of the Courage brewery. After hitting a lamp-post and writing off the car on the way to the next event, at Oulton Park, Frank fitted some of the undamaged components into another Austin, an A40, and carried on racing. Dismissed from his day job after failing to attend a course, he worked briefly as a filling station attendant and as a trainee sales rep for Campbell’s Soup, which required him to wear a bowler hat when visiting clients. His friendship with Courage and Williams drew him into a circle of ambitious young racers. Before long he was living at 283 Pinner Road in Harrow, north-west London, a house that had become a centre for their activities, where his penniless state meant that he frequently slept on a couch. The group, who included Courage, Charles Lucas, Anthony “Bubbles” Horsley and Charles Crichton-Stuart, the grandson of the 5th Marquess of Bute, spent their summers hauling their racing cars from one continental circuit to another behind a variety of dilapidated vehicles and surviving on the starting money picked up from race organisers. It was a picaresque apprenticeship in international motor sport, but Williams’s enthusiastic participation in the hedonistic life of the mid-1960s was balanced by an asceticism that encompassed his growing obsession with long-distance running and a lifelong avoidance of alcohol and tobacco. A gift for deal-making enabled him to earn a living from buying and selling components for racing cars, and eventually complete cars. The proceeds subsidised not only his racing activities but also the Curzon Street haircuts, cashmere sweaters and Dougie Hayward jackets that belied his general impecuniousness. In 1966 he drove a Brabham in European Formula Three races, without great success, while Courage, competing in the same category, finished the season with 12 wins. By the end of 1967 Williams’s business activities were turning a profit. Courage’s promising career, however, had stalled, and he was happy to accept his friend’s offer of a race at Brands Hatch in a prototype F3 Brabham. A win in their heat gave Williams his first victory as an entrant and established a partnership with Courage. The combination achieved respectable results the following year, although it was Jonathan Williams, taking over at Monza in Courage’s absence, who gave the team owner his first international win. In 1969 the team moved up to Formula One, running a Brabham with financial support from Dunlop and Castrol. Early in the season a second place behind Graham Hill’s Lotus in the Monaco Grand Prix earned them both prestige and $20,000 in prize money. That would be the season’s best performance, but by the end of the year Williams had made a deal to run Courage in a car built by the Argentinian wheeler-dealer Alejandro de Tomaso. After the car had performed poorly in the early races, Courage was in seventh place in the Dutch Grand Prix at Zandvoort when he ran wide in a fast bend and hit a bank. The car overturned and caught fire, trapping the driver, who died in the blaze. Badly affected by the death of a friend in a car that he had entered, Williams considered giving up the sport, but instead finished the season with other drivers. The next four years were a story of struggle and failure with a variety of cars, drivers and backers, the only bright note sounded when Jacques Laffite finished second in the 1975 German Grand Prix. To keep the team going, at a time when his telephone line was regularly cut off, Williams borrowed money from many sources, from Bernie Ecclestone – then the owner of the rival Brabham team – to his girlfriend, the former Virginia Berry, who had left her husband, another racing driver, to be with him. When Frank and Ginny were married at a register office in 1974, both were skint and a friend stumped up £8 for the licence. The loans from Ecclestone cemented a relationship that would prove useful to both men in later years. At the end of 1975 Williams entered into two partnerships. The shorter of them was with Walter Wolf, a Canadian with a fortune from the oil industry. The other, which would last several decades, was with Patrick Head, a young engineer. The new Wolf-Williams car, a modified Hesketh, was a disappointment, and Williams was humiliatingly eased aside. He decided to leave completely, taking Head with him to start afresh under the name Williams Grand Prix Engineering. So allergic to bankers that he hid when a man from Barclays came with what turned out to be the offer of a £30,000 loan and an overdraft, he raised similar funding from a representative of Saudi Arabia’s national airline; the slogan “Fly Saudia” on the rear wing of their March car represented the first significant incursion of Arab oil money into sport. Poor results did not deter the Saudis, and in 1978 the first Head-designed Williams, the FW06, made its debut in the hands of the team’s new driver, a pugnacious Australian named Alan Jones. The following year, renamed Albilad-Saudia, the team won five grands prix: the first at Silverstone, where the victorious FW07 was driven by Clay Regazzoni, followed by four for Jones. Starting the 1980 season with a win from pole position in Buenos Aires, Jones took four more victories in the FW08 on the way to becoming world champion, the team taking its first constructors’ title barely a couple of years after Williams had been dodging bank managers. A further constructors’ title came the following year, and in 1982 Rosberg became Williams’s second world champion driver. Once Williams had returned from his accident, Head and his assistants produced a stream of world-beating cars bristling with technical innovations. The active suspension, traction control and automated manual transmission of the Renault-engined FW14B – designed by Adrian Newey, a new addition to the technical team – allowed Mansell to become the first driver to win nine races in a single season on his way to the 1992 title. Williams was now the team every driver wanted to join. In 1994, having watched his great rival Prost cruise to the previous year’s title in the FW15, the triple champion Ayrton Senna switched over from McLaren. The Brazilian was leading his third race in the FW16, at Imola, when he left the track, hit a wall, and was killed. It would be several years, and a journey through the Italian legal system, before Williams and Head were cleared of blame for an accident that forced F1 to reconsider its attitude to safety. Williams and Head shared a view of drivers best summarised in the former’s words to the author Gerald Donaldson: “The best of them are driven, motivated, pushy, won’t-accept-second-best, immensely competitive people. This is what makes them good – because they’re bastards.” The no-nonsense Jones was their beau idéal, but their judgment was far from flawless. They gave Damon Hill, who had steadied the team after Senna’s death, his notice midway through 1996, the season in which he became champion, in order to replace him with the lacklustre Heinz-Harald Frentzen. Jacques Villeneuve’s 1997 title, won the year after the team moved to new headquarters in the Oxfordshire village of Grove, would prove to be their last. The rejection of Newey’s request for the technical director’s role and a stake in the company led to the departure of a brilliant man who went on to design title-winning cars for McLaren and Red Bull. That decision prefaced the team’s gradual competitive decline, although engineering collaborations with Renault, BMW and others bolstered the company’s finances. In August 2020 he bowed to the inevitable and sold the team to a US investment firm, Dorilton Capital, for $152m, effectively severing the family’s connection with the sport. Ginny died of cancer in 2013. While recovering from his accident, her husband had told her: “As I see it, Ginny, I’ve had 40 fantastic years of life. Now I shall have another 40 years of a different kind of life.” Williams is survived by their three children, Jonathan, Claire and Jaime, and three grandchildren, Ralph, Nathaniel and Celeste. • Francis Owen Garbutt Williams, grand prix team owner, born 16 April 1942; died 28 November 2021A minus 10C Arctic blast is forecast to follow the blizzards and close to 100mph winds of Storm Arwen which left half a million households temporarily without power at the weekend and killed three people. A cold weather alert issued by the UK Health Security Agency will remain in place until Monday after swathes of the north of England, Scotland, Wales, the south-west and the Midlands were left without electricity. Gales caused transport disruption and damage to buildings, while heavy snow led to lorries getting stuck and ploughs being used in a number of areas. The Met Office said that as the storm was clearing towards Europe temperatures would drop to the coldest of the season so far. “Even if you do live in a city, you can expect to be scraping frost, ice or even snow off your cars on Monday morning,” said forecaster Tom Morgan. Blizzards in the Yorkshire Dales left dozens of people trapped at the 17th-century Tan Hill Inn for a third night, with staff on Sunday preparing a karaoke evening to keep spirits up. Snow drifted so high that a tunnel had to be cut from the front door, but roads are impassable owing to fallen power cables. “They’ve formed quite a friendship,” said the pub’s general manager Nicola Townsend, 52. “Like a big family is the best way I can describe it. One lady actually said ‘I don’t want to leave.’” The guests slept on makeshift beds and have been entertained by an Oasis tribute band which had been booked to perform on Friday night. They also had a quiz, watched films shown on a projector and enjoyed a traditional Sunday lunch. The pub is 528m above sea level, the highest in the UK. A mountain rescuer managed to reach the pub to give medical attention to one guest with an ongoing condition. There were fatalities elsewhere. Over the weekend a headteacher in Northern Ireland died after a tree fell on his car, another man was hit by a falling tree in Cumbria, and a third died after his car was hit in Aberdeenshire. Rod Gardner, major incident manager at Northern Powergrid, which supplies electricity in the north-east and Yorkshire said the storm caused “damage of a scale and intensity not seen for 15 years”. “We worked into the night and did everything possible to restore as many supplies as we could. We have a lot of work still to do, but our dedicated teams will not stop until we complete all the work required.” About 180,000 homes have had power restored, he added. In the north-east of Scotland, hot food and drinks are being supplied to people who have spent two nights without power. In Northern Ireland, the Dark Hedges avenue of trees fell victim to the storm, with a beech tree uprooted at Bregagh Road near Armoy. The tourist attraction, made famous by the TV series Game of Thrones, was battered by gale force winds overnight. Contestants on I’m A Celebrity Get Me Out of Here! were taken off the set of the TV show at Gwrych Castle, near Abergele in north Wales because of the extreme weather. The weekend’s episodes of the show were cancelled.Above the portico columns of the Panthéon in Paris, which was completed the year after the storming of the Bastille, a solemn inscription reads, “To Great Men From a Grateful Nation”. Well over 200 years later, the famous mausoleum remains overwhelmingly the resting place of male heroes of the French nation, from Jean-Jacques Rousseau to Jean Moulin. But on Tuesday they will be joined by a black female dancer, singer and civil rights activist from Missouri, who spent her life breaking down barriers of exclusion. Emmanuel Macron’s timely decision to grant entry to Josephine Baker carries a potent symbolism, as currents of xenophobia course through the French body politic ahead of next spring’s presidential election. After enjoying an early rise in the polls, Éric Zemmour, the far-right television pundit and author, is expected to officially declare his candidacy next month. Mr Zemmour’s odious promotion of racial exclusivism has influenced the mainstream French right and is shaping the election campaign to a disturbing degree. The Élysée’s recognition of Baker – who fled segregated America for France in the 1920s – gestures towards a more generous, inclusive country. The admission of the first black woman into the Panthéon also offers an opportunity to reflect on one of the most remarkable figures of the 20th century. Having made her name as a vaudeville dancer in New York, Baker’s charisma and personality made her a sensation in Paris. At a time when French colonialism was generating a fascination with black art and culture, Baker made the most of freedoms not available in the United States. Within two years of arriving in France in 1925, she was reportedly the highest paid and most photographed woman in the world. Her unique rise was achieved mostly on her own terms: she subverted racial and sexual stereotypes on stage at the Folies Bergère, converted Parisians to jazz and never concealed her bisexuality. After becoming a French citizen in 1937, Baker risked her life working for the resistance during the second world war, smuggling documents between music sheets and using her fame to open doors and access information. After the war, she was the only woman to speak on the podium alongside Martin Luther King, during the March on Washington. Back in France, she devoted her energies to raising a “rainbow” family of 12 adopted orphans from different ethnic origins. Their lives would demonstrate, she hoped, that “racial hatred is not natural. It’s an invention of man.” The Élysée statement announcing Baker’s entry to the Panthéon noted that as a “resistance fighter and indefatigable anti-racist, she was in all the struggles which joined together people of goodwill in France and throughout the world”. Mr Macron has not always hit the right note when discussing multiculturalism and diversity. But as he seeks to galvanise liberal sentiment during a time when rightwing presidential candidates are calling for a moratorium on non-EU immigration, this is astute politics. It is also an appropriate way to honour a courageous and inspiring French citizen who was arguably as significant a figure in the history of black empowerment as Muhammad Ali.Joe Biden’s foreign policy doctrine views the future relationship between democracies and authoritarian regimes as a competitive one, accompanied by a battle of narratives. Nondemocratic regimes have become brazen in their repression and many democratic governments have regressed by adopting their tactics of restricting free speech and weakening the rule of law. The US, under Donald Trump, was not immune to such trends. One European thinktank warned last week that there remains a risk that the US could slip into authoritarianism. The Biden administration has announced the first of two virtual “summits for democracy” next month to bring together government, civil society and business leaders from more than 100 nations. This might seem a bit rich, given America’s history of befriending dictators and overthrowing elected leaders it did not like. Invitations have gone out to a group so broad it includes liberal democracies, weak democracies and states with authoritarian characteristics. Mr Biden deserves a cheer for seeking a renewal of democracy, asking attendees to reflect on their record of upholding human rights and fighting corruption. The world faces a return to great-power politics, where global rules take a backseat to historical spheres of influence. Russia’s menacing of Ukraine is a case in point. No one would choose this situation, but democracies have to face it. As the EU has noted, the high seas, space and the internet are increasingly contested domains. Mr Biden is a realist. He is prepared to cooperate with countries from Poland to the Philippines, where democracy has been going backward, to deter Moscow and Beijing. The world is also not black and white. India, a troubled democracy, watered down this month’s final Cop26 communique, backed by autocratic China. Beijing is the ghost at the US democracy-fest, a fact underlined by Mr Biden’s invite to Taiwan. Sino-US relations can be competitive, but not so fevered that neither can work together. Vaccine nationalism was a warning about how soft power could be weaponised. It’d be wrong to rationalise US actions by demonising its rivals. China’s alternative economic and political system does not make conflict inevitable, though Beijing’s sabre rattling and US defence spending makes it harder to dodge. This month’s videocall between US and Chinese presidents suggested their nations were lorries speeding along the highway of international relations and in need of a crash barrier. New rules of the road are essential in trade where Mr Biden has continued Mr Trump’s tariff hikes on Chinese exports. The US has seen a backlash to the economic upheaval induced by trade openness that should have been dealt with by redistributive policies. In their absence, the result was runaway US inequality and a richer, unequal China. Mr Biden argues he is making the economy work for ordinary Americans, and so helping recover their belief in democracy. Yet, without reform of global trade rules the benefits of higher US wages will flow largely to nations like China that suppress household income. In response, Mr Biden seeks coalitions with democratic allies to replace the current model of liberalisation. The Chinese historian Qin Hui contends that on the left globalisation is as popular in China as it is unpopular in the west. Prof Qin suggests that Chinese concern over growing inequality should be allayed by political reform so workers can strengthen their bargaining position. This seems a remote possibility. China has grown wealthy without becoming more democratic. Prof Qin’s views may resonate in Washington, but they strike the wrong note in Beijing, which has previously banned his work, and prefers instead slogans signalling a crackdown on high incomes. Mr Biden sees, both at home and abroad, democratic values under attack. The US president has identified the challenge. The hard part is to meet it.The Covid booster vaccination scheme could be significantly expanded as early as Monday as ministers try to combat the seemingly inevitable spread of the Omicron variant, with secondary school pupils being told to wear masks in communal areas. The government’s vaccines watchdog, the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) which held an emergency meeting over the weekend, is expected to advise the use of boosters for younger people, and could also recommend a cut in the current six-month wait between second and booster doses, it is understood. Ministers insisted on Sunday that they hoped restrictions imposed following the detection of the variant, which scientists fear could be highly transmissible and potentially evade some vaccine protections, would be limited and temporary, with the health secretary, Sajid Javid, promising “a great Christmas” next month. But health officials said on Sunday that a third case of the Omicron variant had been confirmed in the UK in someone linked to southern Africa, who had been staying in Westminster but left the UK before the test result emerged. Officials say they were in the central London borough, rather than specifically in parliament. However, it was also revealed that investigators looking into one of the two cases announced on Saturday were searching for potential contacts in Brentwood, Essex, as far back as nine days ago, raising questions over how long the new variant has been in the UK. Following the announcement of tough travel restrictions on 10 African nations and the reintroduction of mandatory mask use in England in shops and on public transport from Tuesday, the Department for Education has contacted English schools to say secondary-age students and teachers should again wear face coverings in communal areas. Javid, sent out for a round of interviews on Sunday morning, insisted the government was “nowhere near” considering a return to more stringent measures such as advising people to work from home or social distancing, arguing that the potential impact on the economy and people’s welfare would be disproportionate to the perceived risks. The health secretary described vaccines as “our first form of defence”, saying he expected news from the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation “imminently”. While it remains unclear what decisions the vaccines watchdog has reached, its deputy chairman, Prof Anthony Harnden, told the BBC that extending the booster age range – in healthy adults they are currently limited to those aged 40 or above – and reducing the delay before they were given was “a sensible strategy”. But ministers are set to come under intense pressure over whether they are being complacent about Omicron, which has a large number of mutations compared with previous variants, something that has alarmed scientists. Paul Whiteman, general secretary of the NAHT union, which represents school heads, warned that teachers, parents and students would be concerned about the variant, and would want clear and obvious guidance: “The pressure on schools is unrelenting. Any uncertainty will add to that sense of continuing jeopardy. The government needs to get advice out to schools fast.” Kevin Courtney, head of the NEU teaching union, said that while it welcomed the mask guidance, it thought ministers “should go further and encourage mask-wearing in secondary classrooms and also plan investment to improve ventilation and air filtration”. Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary for England, said: “We are taking targeted and proportionate action as a precaution while we find out more information about the new variant … We are working with education and childcare settings to enhance safety measures where needed, including introducing isolation for 10 days for close contacts of suspected Omicron cases.” With mask use on public transport having dropped significantly since it was made voluntary on most services in July, the RMT rail union called for extra police resources to deal with “angry passengers who refuse to comply”. And on international travel, Yvette Cooper, the Labour MP who chairs the Commons home affairs committee, called for an immediate reintroduction of the requirement for people coming to the UK to take a Covid test before they travel, rather than within two days of arrival. The requirement for the day two test has again been upgraded, meaning people have to take a laboratory-analysed PCR version, rather than the do-it-yourself lateral flow type, as has been the case since October While passenger locator forms were swiftly updated to say PCR tests would be needed from 4am on Tuesday, Javid was unclear, saying only the change would take place “as soon as possible”. The health department later confirmed the timing. Anyone who tests positive for Omicron will have to isolate for 10 days. Boris Johnson and his ministers will also face pressure from their own MPs to limit any new restrictions, especially before the threat posed by the variant is better known. Although the government does not need Commons approval to make the changes, it plans to arrange a vote. Javid stressed the government’s disinclination to move towards any mandates over distancing or home working, saying such measures “carry a very heavy price, both economically, socially, in terms of non-Covid health outcomes such as the impact on mental health”. Instead, he said, there was confidence that even if mutations in the Omicron variant allow it to resist some vaccines, they were still likely to give some protection. Some scientists backed the idea of expanding boosters and reducing the gap between doses. Danny Altmann, professor of Immunology at Imperial College London, said: “If you’ve got a glimmer of evidence, and I think we have, that the vaccines are still holding up to some extent, then it would be a good idea to get as many people boosted as quickly as possible to raise their level of protection.” Prof Paul Morgan, an immunologist at Cardiff University, said there was room for manoeuvre on the six-month gap, with booster invitations already cut to five months for some people. “If boosters are given too soon, then they’re not as effective,” he said. “But I think six months was more about pragmatism and availability than about immunity. From three to four months on, the immune response should be virtually as good as at six months.” • This article was amended on 20 January 2022. A previous version indicated that the six-month gap between second and booster doses had already been cut to five months for some people. Although invitations to pre-book jabs were being sent out after five months instead of six, at the time of writing the gap between jabs had not changed.It was a day when Manchester United defended in numbers, when they sacrificed all attacking ambition in pursuit of something – anything – to stop a rot that had claimed the former manager, Ole Gunnar Solskjær, and sent their Premier League season into meltdown. It was a long way from pretty but, watched from afar by Ralf Rangnick – the manager who is set to step in until the end of the season – the team got what they wanted. Michael Carrick, the interim to the interim, had started with Scott McTominay, Nemanja Matic and Fred in front of the back four and, with United entrenched in the deepest of blocks, it felt like a trick of the mind when Jadon Sancho suddenly streaked clear to put them in front at the start of the second half. The goal followed a terrible piece of control by Jorginho on halfway after Bruno Fernandes had punted clear and, briefly, an outlandish thought formed. It had looked as if United simply wanted to avoid another humiliation after those against Liverpool and Manchester City – the other title contenders – that had in effect done for Solskjær. Could they steal victory? Jorginho would disabuse them of the notion, atoning in part for his lapse when he converted from the penalty spot after Aaron Wan-Bissaka’s silly foul on Thiago Silva, and his goal was the prompt for a grandstand finish. Chelsea appeared addicted to living dangerously and they almost threw it away in the 88th minute when Édouard Mendy played a pass straight to Fred. The midfielder was entitled to go for the chip but he got it all wrong and Mendy collected. Thomas Tuchel had felt the frustration build, mainly because of his team’s profligacy, with Callum Hudson-Odoi and Timo Werner most culpable. He lost his cool when Cristiano Ronaldo, involved only as a 64th-minute substitute, wrongly avoided an offside flag to win a last-gasp corner. Tuchel was booked for his complaints. But the Chelsea manager was on his knees in the final seconds when Antonio Rüdiger blew the chance to win it. Ronaldo had failed to follow the run of Christian Pulisic, another substitute, and when he crossed Rüdiger was free just outside the six-yard box. He blazed high over the bar. And so Chelsea, who had entered with nine wins and a draw in 10 matches, felt the stab of regret. Their lead at the top of the table is down to one point and they have to hope that the two dropped here do not return to haunt them. The pattern of the game was consistent from start to finish, Chelsea hogging the ball and pressing on to the front foot, United defending desperately and trying to get something going on the counter. Chelsea bossed the shot count 24-3 and David de Gea, the United goalkeeper, said he felt “danger for nearly the whole game”. It was easy to wonder whether Rangnick had influenced the selection, which saw Carrick double down in midfield, using three screening players. Perhaps it was a reaction to being without three of the first-choice back four – Harry Maguire, Raphaël Varane and Luke Shaw – and it was always going to invite pressure. Chelsea started brightly, with Hakim Ziyech shooting at De Gea after being allowed to turn too easily inside the box and a big chance followed shortly afterwards. When Marcos Alonso headed back a high ball, Wan-Bissaka got himself into a tangle and Hudson-Odoi moved inside Victor Lindelöf. De Gea turned the winger’s shot past the far post. Where would United be this season without him? Chelsea were aggressive with their press, despite being without the injured N’Golo Kanté, but they were unable to create much more of note in the first half. A blast from Rüdiger on 31 minutes that rattled the crossbar stood out; it was unclear whether De Gea had brushed the ball with his fingertips. Carrick had insisted Ronaldo’s reaction to being named among the substitutes was “great” and that it was simply a cold-headed selection decision which did not “need any more drama than that”. All the best with that, Michael. He recalled Fernandes and played him as a false nine, demanding that the Portuguese led the press with intensity, which he tried to do. Fernandes was more visible in deeper areas and it was not his day. On 36 minutes he popped up at left-back and tried to ping a crossfield pass only to send it straight to Hudson-Odoi, who was five yards outside the area. Hudson-Odoi advanced but he could not muster power in the shot. United offered precious little as an attacking force before the interval and they seemed perfectly happy with 0-0, musing that maybe they could nick something on the counter. Then they did. Jorginho had been the last man back and he did not bother to chase Sancho after his aberration. He knew what was coming. Sancho used Marcus Rashford to his left as a decoy, shook his hips and rolled past Mendy. United flickered on the break and Chelsea’s anxiety rose, particularly as Werner shot wildly when in space after a corner. Chelsea needed a break and they got one when Wan-Bissaka went through Silva as he attempted to clear another corner. Werner, Ziyech and Ruben Loftus-Cheek would have half-chances and, after Fred failed to beat Mendy, Rüdiger’s sights were awry at the very last.David Hytner’s match report has landed, which is my cue to head off. Thanks for your company and emails - goodnight! The thoughts of David de Gea “They had the best chances, to be honest, but I’m proud of the effort of the team today. I felt danger almost the whole game. We defended well and they missed some big chances. It’s not enough to draw but we’re in a tough moment so it’s a good result. We are defending a bit better, we are fighting for every ball. I feel like we are a team, we are all together.” Chelsea had 24 attempts on goal to United’s three. That said, David de Gea didn’t have much to do in the second half. On the Sancho goal, it’s a good thing he didn’t pass to Rashford - I’ve only just realised that Rashford was offside. It wouldn’t surprise me if Sancho registered that, because at first it looked like he wanted to draw Mendy towards him and then give Rashford an open goal. If so that shows impressive awareness from Sancho, if not Rashford. Here’s the updated Premier League table. Two points separate the three best teams in England, arguably the three best teams in Europe. That’s a good result for United, not to mention Liverpool and Manchester City. Jadon Sancho gave them the lead against the run of play after a mistake from Jorginho, who then equalised from the penalty spot after an error from Aaron Wan-Bissaka. Peep peep! That was the last kick of the game, give or take. It wasn’t an easy chance - volleys never are - but he probably had time to take the ball down first and then shoot. 90+7 min: What a chance for Rudiger! A fine tackle from Rudiger on Lingard starts a Chelsea counter-attack. Eventually Mount and Ziyech combine with Pulisic, whose excellent deep cross is volleyed over the bar by Rudiger! 90+6 min And another: Bailly is booked for timewasting. 90+5 min A clever lobbed header from Fred finds van de Beek, who is cynically pulled back by Jorginho. Another yellow card. 90+4 min Telles’s corner is headed away. It would have been a scandal had that led to a goal. 90+4 min Tuchel is booked. Telles will take the corner... 90+3 min Ronaldo is clearly offside when Lingard puts him away down the left. Play continues and United win a corner, which prompts Thomas Tuchel to have an understandable meltdown. 90+2 min Ronaldo is booked for arguing over how play should resume following the McTominay injury. 90 min There will be a minimum of five added minutes. 89 min Bailly, hitherto flawless, is robbed by Mount on the right edge of the area. The ball is moved across to Ziyech on the edge of the area, and he whistles a shot that hits McTominay right in the kisser. That looked extremely painful, and there’s a break in play while he receives treatment. 89 min Bruno Fernandes is replaced by Donny van de Beek, who runs straight over to Fred and gives him a piece of paper. I hope he didn’t get it from Jackie Treehorn. 88 min: Oh, Fred! Mendy plays an awful pass, straight to Fred 25 yards from goal. Fred has Lingard and Ronaldo in support, but instead decides to float a lame chip straight into the arms of Mendy. 86 min Mount’s dangerous cross is headed away by Bailly, who has been at his frustrating best this afternoon. 86 min Jorginho plays a clever pass out to James on the left. He runs at Wan-Bissaka, then cuts back onto his right foot and flips a lovely cross that just evades the leaping Lukaku in the middle. Reece James has become a phenomenal player. 84 min Ziyech’s corner is shouldered over the bar by Loftus-Cheek. That was a pretty good chance, but he mistimed his attempted header and the ball hit his shoulder. 83 min Mount’s cross is belted behind by Bailly. Corner no14 (I think) for Chelsea... 83 min If it stays like this - and that’s an appreciable if with the way Chelsea are pressing - the top three will be separated by only two points. I know we’ve said this in the past and been let down, but it feels like we could have one of the great three-way title races this year. 82 min Chelsea bring on Romelu Lukaku, once of Man Utd, for Timo Werner. 80 min A crisp shot from Ziyech, 18 yards out, is too close to de Gea. 79 min: Great block from Wan-Bissaka! Ziyech pokes a short pass to Werner in the area. He lets it run across his body, losing Lindelof in the process, and hits a shot that is blocked by the stretching Wan-Bissaka. That almost certainly saved a goal. 78 min And now a double change for Chelsea: Christian Pulisic and Mason Mount replace Hudson-Odoi and Alonso. Reece James is now at left wing-back with Pulisic on the right. 77 min A United change: Jesse Lingard replaces Marcus Rashford. 76 min Fernandes is booked for a foul on Thiago. 76 min “Wan-Bissaka is our most out-of-form player,” says Christopher Faherty. “We’re nearly into December and he hasn’t played well in a single game all season, mistakes aplenty.” That’s a competitive field. I’d say Maguire and Shaw have been worse but I agree Wan-Bissaka has been poor. Rangnick’s appointment is bad news for him too. 75 min Telles’s corner is booted clear. 74 min Fred’s cross is put behind by Thiago SIlva, which gives United their first corner of the game. Chelsea have had 479. 73 min “I wouldn’t be surprised to see this as CR7’s long-term role,” says Eric Peterson. “He doesn’t need to pace himself for 90 minutes, he doesn’t need to empty his gas tank chasing the game, he just needs to do the hold-up work of a No. 9 and be ready to spring the occasional devastating counterattack. Yeah, I’ve painted him as a ridiculously well-decorated Olivier Giroud, but at this point of his career and for this team, it is what it is.” With his timing, mentality and instinct, I think he would be a brilliant impact sub. I’d give him the full sales pitch and highlight how much glory he could grab by coming on fresh for the last 20 minutes. 72 min Loftus-Cheek’s shot is blocked, then Ziyech volleys over with his right foot from James’ clever header. Chelsea look far more likely to win this now, although so did England against Romania in 1998. 70 min It’s not quite the full Tommy Hutchinson but it does feel like both goals belong to Jorginho. Jorginho scores with aplomb, sending de Gea the wrong way. United were fuming with the decision - I’ve no idea why - and there was a bit of pushing and shoving. Anyway, here’s Jorginho, who missed recently for Italy against Switzerland. 67 min Alonso’s outswinging corner hit Bailly on the back and dropped in front of Wan-Bissaka and Thiago Silva near the penalty spot. Wan-Bissaka tried to boot the ball clear - but Thiago got to it first and that meant Wan-Bissaka kicked through the back of his leg. It’s a clear penalty, and a daft piece of defending of Wan-Bissaka. 67 min: PENALTY TO CHELSEA! It’s all kicking off! 65 min Rashford has moved to the right, with Ronaldo playing from the left. 64 min A change for Manchester United: Cristiano Ronaldo replaces the goalscorer Jadon Sancho. 63 min James’ dangerous cross is put behind by Bailly, who then heads Alonso’s inswinger away. Bailly has played well today. 61 min Yet another Chelsea corner, their ninth of the game. But at the moment they’re a mixed blessing, because United are counter-attacking with such menace. This time Rashford leads the break but then takes too long on the ball. 59 min Rashford rolls Chalobah, who pulls him back and is lucky not to be booked. I think I missed a Reece James booking in the 53rd minute by the way. 58 min Chelsea have had a flurry of corners since going behind. The latest one falls for Werner, who swishes the bouncing ball wide of goal from 12 yards. It was a decent chance, though slightly tricky because the ball was slow to come down. 57 min United break three on three from a Chelsea corner. Chelsea do well to delay the attack, and eventually Fred’s cross drifts a few yards wide. 55 min Ziyech plays a lovely reverse pass to release Loftus-Cheek in the inside-right channel. He surges into space and then tries to find Werner with a low cross that is crucially cut out by a United defender. 53 min It was a bad mistake from Jorginho, though it was - as Jamie Carragher points out on Sky - a forced error. Sancho and Rashford were charging towards him, which led to the poor touch. James’s free-kick was half cleared and then volleyed over the halfway line by Fernandes. Jorginho, the last man, miscontrolled the dropping ball and was robbed by Sancho, who ran through on goal from the centre circle. He had Rashford in support, with no Chelsea defenders in the same postcode. Sancho dummied to pass to Rashford, slid the ball calmly past Mendy. Jadon Sancho scores after a howler from Jorginho! 50 min Chelsea have a free-kick 20 yards from goal on the right wing. Alonso and James are over it... 49 min Werner’s shot is blocked by Lindelof, and then Rashford is booked for a lunge at Chalobah. 46 min Peep peep! Manchester United begin the second half, with no changes on either side. Meanwhile Half-time reading Peep peep! A muted first half comes to an end. Chelsea were much the better side, and Antonio Rudiger hit the crossbar, but United made it through to half-time without conceding. Michael Carrick will be pleased with the scoreline, if not United’s attacking performance. 45+1 min James’ inswinging free-kick from the left almost sneaks in at the far post. It was probably going wide anyway, but de Gea took no chances and flapped it behind. 45 min McTominay is booked for pulling back Alonso. 44 min Fred nutmegs Rudiger in the area and then goes down. No penalty, though there is a brief exchange of views between Fred, Rudiger and Jorginho. 42 min That was an excellent chance for Sancho. He made a lovely run behind Thiago Silva, and with a better first touch he would have had a one-on-one with Mendy. 41 min: Chance for United! Fred plays a one-two with McTominay and lofts a good pass over the defence to release Sancho, but his chest control is poor and the ball runs through to Mendy. 39 min Chalobah robs Fred just outside the United area on the right. Ziyech picks up the loose ball and waves a low cross that is cleared by Wan-Bissaka. Actually, I did Fred a disservice there - he was put in trouble by a poor pass from Rashford. 38 min “This seems a very iffy tactic from United,” says Niall Mullen. “They do not look organised, or even fit, enough to keep Chelsea out for the full 90. They should at least think about occasionally attacking the Blues’ Carabao Cup side.” 36 min An awful crossfield pass from Fernandes goes straight to Hudson-Odoi, 25 yards from goalk. He runs to the edge of the area before hitting a tame, deflected shot that is comfortably saved to his right by de Gea. 35 min Successful passes in the final third: Chelsea 54-3 Man Utd. 34 min The corner is half cleared and then recycled to Werner, whose cross from the right is cleared desperately by a United defender. 33 min Hudson-Odoi’s short-range cross hits a United defender and goes behind for another corner. It’s all Chelsea. 33 min The corner is headed away at the near post. 32 min Werner’s shot from the edge of the area takes a deflection off Lindelof and goes behind for another Chelsea corner. 31 min: Rudiger hits the bar! Hudson-Odoi runs at Wan-Bissaka and plays the ball back to Rudiger, 30 yards from goal. He has a touch and hammers a shot that beats the diving de Gea and thumps off the crossbar. de Gea might have had it covered, I’d like to see it again, but it was a sizzling strike. 29 min United’s plan is clearly to take the game deep and then bring on Cristiano Ronaldo to score a last-minute winner. So far, so good, at least in terms of the scoreline. 28 min “Dear Rob, continuing the Krautrock theme so dear to my heart,” begins Russell Richardson. “What about a team which gives bursts of luminous melody, followed by abrupt cuts to a wolf howling into a tin pail, a passing train, an oompah band, a concrete mixer, then an acoustic guitar figure followed by churning drums and who knows, a bloke sitting on a bucket, glowering? Bielsa is Faust!” 27 min “On the subject of not much happening,” says Ian Copestake, “I developed a football chant in frustration at my attempt to put a pork Wellington together: ‘Posh sausage roll. You’re just a posh sausage roll ...’” See, you don’t get this anywhere else. 26 min James flashes a dangerous ball across the six-yard box. Alas for Chelsea, Romelu Lukaku is on the bench. 25 min Hudson-Odoi’s teasing cross is headed wide by Werner. It was fractionally too high, which meant Werner couldn’t get over the ball. 22 min A mistake from Bailly on the halfway line allows Chelsea to counter. James gets away down the right and lifts a deep cross that is missed by Wan-Bissaka before bouncing off Alonso and out for a goalkick. I think Alonso was surprised that Wan-Bissaka missed the ball, and he wouldn’t have been the only one. 21 min Bruno Fernandes drags a shot well wide from 25 yards. 20 min Jorginho plays a nice pass to release Alonso down the left, but he dithers and is tackled by Wan-Bissaka. 18 min Hudson-Odoi runs at Wan-Bissaka then feeds the ball back to Ziyech on the edge of the area. He sweeps a first-time shot over the bar. 17 min Possession percentages: Chelsea 72-28 Man Utd. 16 min Not much happening at the moment. Chelsea have been the better team, though United’s defence has settled down after a nervous start. 14 min “Apropos of not much Can,” writes Phil Podolsky, “I always wanted to see a Ronaldinho skills video (including that little wiggle before the goal at Stamford Bridge) set to this tune.” 13 min United haven’t yet got going as an attacking force. Sancho has had one or two nice touches, but that’s about it. 11 min “Evening Rob,” says Simon Toussaint. “Rangnick as Stockhausen feels very apt for the bloated vanity project that is Manchester United, given Stockhausen’s most infamous composition is the gargantuan seven-part opera cycle Licht, which features the Helicopter String Quartet (yes, 4 string players in 4 different helicopters) as one part of one opera.” If we’re not careful, this football blog could start to veer off-piste! 9 min Werner wins a corner off Wan-Bissaka. Even though they are missing maybe five or six of their best XI, Chelsea look so smooth and confident. Their squad depth is frightening. 8 min Lindelof, the senior man in United’s defence today, has made a very jittery start. 7 min Tactics update: Rashford left, Fernandes centre. 6 min United are pressing quite aggressively at times, though so far Chelsea have been able to play round it quite comfortably. 4 min: Another save from de Gea! Chelsea could be 2-0 up already. Thiago Silva’s long crosfield pass was headed infield by Alonso towards Hudson-Odoi on the edge of the area. Wan-Bissaka and Lindelof both missed the ball, as if paying tribute to the Maguire/ Shaw double act on the other side of the defence, and that allowed Hudson-Odoi to run through on goal. He coud have squared it to give Werner an open goal but instead sidefooted a close-range shot that was pushed behind by de Gea. That’s a really good save. 2 min Hudson-Odoi cuts inside from the left and plays a crafty pass to Ziyech into the area. He turns and sweeps a right-footed shot that takes a deflection and is saved to his left by de Gea. That was a pretty good chance. 2 min Bruno Fernandes is indeed playing as a false nine. It’s a 4-1-2-3 formation, really, with Matic a bit deeper than Fred and McTominay. 1 min Peep peep! Chelsea kick off from left to right. “Wouldn’t it be better to equate Rangnick to Karlheinz Stockhausen?” writes Joe Pearson. “A precursor to and influential on the later Krautrock movement? And where’s the love for Ash Ra Tempel and the mighty Tangerine Dream?” I’ll be honest, I’m out of my element here. But I like your suggestion: so Rangnick is Karlheinz Stockhausen, Klopp is Can, Tuchel is Neu!, and Kraftwerk are some unknown teenager who is going to rule the world one day. Talking of Scott Murray, this is a cracking piece from the archives. Thomas Tuchel’s pre-match thoughts “We only have one game with Michael Carrick [to analyse]. It’s not the first time we have played against a team with a new manager. When that happens you focus more on individual behaviour and connections on the field between two or three players. This is what we did. We tried to analyse the game against Villarreal and find thigns that will influence [the way we play]. “It looks like Bruno Fernandes will play as a false nine, or as a nine. Let’s see. We have some options to react. We don’t waste too much energy speculating about things we don’t know.” Pre-match reading This piece, from my colleague Tim de Lisle, is a shrewd and funny look at United’s decision to appoint Ralf Rangnick. The final scores in the 2pm games Brentford 1-0 Oh, Everton Leicester 4-2 Watford Man City 2-1 West Ham Scott Murray, who is to football liveblogs what Ralf Rangnick is to gegenpressing, has written in with more Krautrock news. “I read an interview (I think in Mojo) with Damo Suzuki in which he said he’s now a Liverpool fan, having previously been a Borussia Dortmund fan. He’s really a Klopp fan when it all comes down.” This analogy is getting really complicated now. “Both Tuchel and Klopp can’t be Kraftwerk,” says Bob Coyne. “Klopp is definitely more Faust.” I did think about Faust, and I was also tempted to slap Amon Düül II on the table, but I decided they weren’t famous enough to be Klopp. I’ll level with you: it was, at best, a half-arsed analogy, I didn’t give it that much thought. “Today’s team has a very Rangnick look to it…” says Nick Parmenter. “Any chance he’s already been on the phone to Carrick?” There’s plenty of speculation that Rangnick is behind the omission of Ronaldo. It’s possible, but I’m not sure this is a Rangnick team – for one thing it has seven defensive players. I suspect it’s Carrick’s choice, though I’m not basing that on any inside knowledge. Ralf won’t reply to my WhatsApps. Thomas Tuchel makes three changes from the team that thumped Juventus. Marcos Alonso and Ruben Loftus-Cheek replace the injured pair of Ben Chilwell and N’Golo Kante, and Timo Werner comes in for Christian Pulisic. Michael Carrick has picked a surprising team that has three defensive midfielders and no Cristiano Ronaldo. The decision to put Ronaldo on the bench has got the internet very excited. We’re not sure what formation United will play - it could be a diamond, a 4-3-3 or even a 3-4-2-1 with Nemanja Matic in defence. Overall there are four changes from the team that beat Villarreal - Matic, Eric Bailly, Bruno Fernandes and Marcus Rashford replace Harry Maguire (suspended), Donny van de Beek, Ronaldo and Anthony Martial. Chelsea (3-4-2-1) Mendy; Chalobah, Thiago, Rudiger; James, Loftus-Cheek, Jorginho, Alonso; Ziyech, Hudson-Odoi; Werner. Substitutes: Arrizabalaga, Christensen, Lukaku, Azpilicueta, Barkley, Mount, Saul, Pulisic, Havertz. Man Utd (possible 4-3-3) de Gea; Wan-Bissaka, Bailly, Lindelof, Telles; McTominay, Matic, Fred; Sancho, Fernandes, Rashford. Substitutes: Henderson, Jones, Dalot, Mata, Lingard, van de Beek, Ronaldo, Martial, Greenwood. Referee Anthony Taylor. There are three other Premier League games taking place just now - you can get the latest news with Daniel Harris. Manchester United finished above Chelsea last season. It’s fair to say their paths have diverged since then. Chelsea are European champions, league leaders – and even part of the inspiration for United’s latest reboot. German coaches are so damn hot right now, and Ralf Rangnick – the Can to Thomas Tuchel and Jurgen Klopp’s Kraftwerk - will become United’s interim manager as soon as he is granted a work permit. While Rangnick would love to be in charge today, it might not be the worst game to miss. Chelsea are formidable opponents, who have gone from wannabes to winners in record time. Let’s be honest, they have only two real strengths: they score loads of goals and barely concede any. A motivated United are dangerous, so Chelsea will take nothing for granted. But ultimately it’s an opportunity to make another statement of title-winning intent - and to move 15 points clear of United, already. Kick off 4.30pm.This month New Zealand artist Ayesha Green watched in surprise as one of her artworks fetched $48,000 at auction – $29,000 more than she sold it for just a year earlier. The hammer price was sizeable for an artist who describes herself as somewhere between emerging and mid-career, and if the country had a resale royalty scheme for artists in place, Green would have taken home a healthy paycheque to put towards her practice. But, like all local artists whose work sells at auction, Green gets nothing. New Zealand’s secondary art market is booming. In mid-November, Auckland’s Art + Object, where Green’s work sold, generated over $15m in sales – the highest grossing art auction in New Zealand history. Another new record was set with artist Michael Parekōwhai’s A Peak in Darien selling for $2,051,900, becoming the most expensive artwork by any artist sold in a New Zealand auction. New Zealand has toyed with the possibility of a resale royalty scheme, which pays a fee to artists when their work is sold on the secondary art market. It was introduced as an amendment to the Copyright Act in 2008 but was dropped when the government changed. Since then, 20 more countries have established a royalties scheme for artists, including Australia which entitles artists to 5% of the sale price of eligible artworks resold for $1,000 or more. If New Zealand had the same scheme, Green would have pocketed about $2,400. Green, who is of both Ngāti Kahungunu and Kai Tahu tribal descent, has nothing against art auction houses, but said there was a wider issue at play. “Being an artist in New Zealand is really difficult and artists are having to really fight for any type of money they can’t get and should rightly get. I believe there should be royalty.” Auction houses should think about their responsibility as part of the “art ecology,” she said. “If artists can’t produce works, then [the auction houses] are going to stop having things to sell and they’ll just keep selling the same stuff again and again.” ‘Not outlandish, and not unusual’ “There is a desire from artists to see change,” Dane Mitchell, an artist and co-founder of the Equity for Artists collective says. He recently established the collective alongside well-known artists Judy Darragh and Reuben Paterson, who is of Ngāti Rangitihi, Ngāi Tūhoe and Tūhourangi descent, to raise awareness for resale royalties, and the better implementation of copy-right licensing fees. Establishing and maintaining a career as an artist in New Zealand can be difficult. Income is precarious and opportunities are scant. Green adds that if artists are not given more support, it could lead to a very narrow art movement. A resale royalty is not intended to be a panacea, but would be an important tool in creating a more equitable industry, Mitchell said. “Artists struggle to put food on the table. This doesn’t go far to address that, but it’s a social, ethical and legal proposal to uplift artists.” Copyright licensing fees, for when artwork is used in promotional material, are also rarely paid out and is another area that must be addressed, he said. In the same way musicians and writers receive royalties for their work, visual artists should also continue to benefit from their intellectual property, Mitchell said, adding that the push for equity is not intended to be divisive. “Auction houses are a major part of our culture, our ecosystem, and this community, and I have great respect for them … There’s an incredible amount of work that they do to enliven the arts in this country, and yet, they are somehow disengaged from us as the artists, the producers of their culture.” Art + Object’s managing director Leigh Melville said a royalty scheme would be administratively complicated, and less-established artists would see very little return on sales. “Big gains are very unusual in our little market … for the most part, we’re not talking about large sums of money. This is the first time that we’ve seen multimillion dollar transactions in one auction and that won’t happen again for some time.” Artists frequently benefit from the flow-on effects of major art auctions because the auctions heighten interest in work, and unsuccessful bidders go on to seek out artists through dealers, Melville said. Ultimately, it will come down to the government to legislate on the issue, she said. Covid-19 slowed progress on a scheme, but the government remains committed to “assessing [its] merits”, the minister for arts, culture and heritage, Carmel Sepuloni, said. “We have heard from the sector that there is a high interest in an artist resale royalty scheme.” In order for artists to benefit from overseas auctions of their work, there must be a similar scheme in place in New Zealand. A resale royalty scheme has been agreed to in principle as part of the New Zealand and UK free trade agreement. “We will consider the issue of reciprocity for when New Zealand art is bought and sold in other countries, as part of the development of a potential artist resale royalty scheme,” Sepuloni said. What artists are asking for is “not outlandish, and not unusual”, Mitchell adds. “This actually pulls us into line with international standard practice. Being out of step in this way is actually a disadvantage to New Zealand artists working internationally.”Australia’s sovereign wealth fund, the Future Fund, has invested in a Chinese state-controlled weapons manufacturer that has sold combat aircraft to the Myanmar military, which is accused of crimes against humanity. A weapons company controlled by India is also among companies the fund has invested in that are linked with the Myanmar military, documents released under freedom of information laws show. Myanmar’s military seized control of the country in a coup in February and has since killed more than 1,200 civilians in a crackdown on pro-democracy protests. In total, Australia’s Future Fund has invested $157m in 14 publicly traded companies that have done business with the Myanmar military. The fund’s holdings include $4.9m invested in five subsidiaries of the Chinese arms conglomerate Aviation Industry Corporation of China (AVIC). It also has $17.8m invested in Bharat Electronics, a company controlled by the Indian government that has supplied materiel to the Myanmar military and was sanctioned between 1998 and 2001 by the US over allegations it was involved in developing nuclear weapons. The sanctions were lifted in 2001 due to India’s cooperation with the US in an anti-terrorism campaign. The Future Fund holds about $200bn in investments made on behalf of the Australian government. It is overseen by a board of guardians chaired by Peter Costello, who was treasurer in the Howard government. Myanmar’s military, known as the Tatmadaw, has faced international condemnation over its 2017 “clearance operations” – executed with “genocidal intent”, according to UN investigators – against the ethnic minority Rohingya in Rakhine state, which included mass killings, including of children, as well as gang rapes, arson and torture. More than 25,000 Rohingya were killed, and 700,000 driven over Myanmar’s border into Bangladesh. In 2019, a UN fact-finding mission said China was breaching international humanitarian law because of AVIC’s transfers of military supplies to the Tatmadaw. The bulk of Australia’s investment in AVIC is through subsidiary AviChina, in which it has invested $3.2m. AviChina manufactures the K-8 light combat aircraft, which have been used in military operations in the state of Kachin in Myanmar. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In 2015, the Myanmar military ordered 16 JF-17M combat aircraft from AVIC under a US$560m contract. The first four planes were commissioned in 2018, a year after the Myanmar military’s genocidal campaign against the Rohingya. AVIC also delivered 40 short-range PL-5E missiles and 24 longer-range PL-12 missiles, both of which can be fitted to the JF-17M aircraft, to the Myanmar military in 2018-19, according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute Arms Transfers Database. Bharat Electronics has continued to sell military supplies to the Tatmadaw since the coup. The company has supplied the Tatmadaw with radar, sonar, a coastal surveillance system and a remote-controlled weapons station, according to export data. The Justice For Myanmar spokesperson Yadanar Maung said that since the 1 February coup, the military had killed more than 1,200 civilians, including children, had tortured thousands, committed rape, torched villages and launched indiscriminate airstrikes on homes. “It is deplorable that Australia’s Future Fund is seeking to profit from companies arming the Myanmar military and effectively financing its campaign of terror. “In the name of Australia’s ‘future’, taxpayer funds are being invested in companies that supply the Myanmar military with fighter jets, missiles, radar and provide millions in annual revenue to war criminals. It is time Australia stops profiting at the expense of the lives of Myanmar people and Myanmar’s future.” Other companies in which the Future Fund has investments that have links to the regime include Sinotruk, which makes trucks used by the Tatmadaw but has denied selling the vehicles to the military. The fund has invested $4.4m in Sinotruk, which did not respond to Guardian Australia’s questions. The Future Fund’s largest Tatmadaw-linked investment is in Korean steel giant Posco, which operators the Shwe gas project, a major revenue earner for the Myanmar military. A Posco subsidiary also brokered the sale of a warship for the Myanmar navy. Posco has not responded to questions from the Guardian but Jeong Joon-sung, a Posco director, has previously said: “We don’t think that the gas field business is connected to the military junta.” The Future Fund has also invested $33m in Kirin, which is in joint venture with a Tatmadaw-controlled company in a brewery business in Myanmar. After the coup, Kirin suspended dividend payments to the Tatmadaw company, MEHL, and promised it would stop doing business with it. It has not yet done so and earlier this month MEHL applied to the courts in Myanmar to have the joint venture liquidated – a move Kirin said it opposed “because of doubts about the fairness and appropriateness of the liquidation process”. A Kirin spokesperson, Russell Roll, said the company “has made every effort to negotiate the termination of the joint venture with MEHL”. “However, MEHL has been uncooperative in the negotiations, effectively rejecting our proposals,” he said. “We have been and continue to be deeply concerned by the recent actions of the military in Myanmar, which are against our standards and human rights policy.” The Future Fund did not answer questions about its investments in companies linked to the Tatmadaw. In a statement, a spokesperson said: “In line with its mandate from government, the Future Fund has built a broadly diversified portfolio which includes passive investments through external investment managers in thousands of entities globally. “The fund has a well-established policy on environmental, social and governance matters and exclusions which takes account of its objectives, legislation, investment strategy, Australian law and the treaties that the Australian government has entered and ratified.”Formula One will endure but it will surely never see the like of Sir Frank Williams again. Williams forged a racing legend, a team like no other, and did so against the odds. Single-minded, determined and on occasion ruthless, Williams bent F1 and life to his will, overcoming the greatest challenges, enjoying huge success and tragic loss, professional and personal. His death is marked by great sadness across the sport because for so many Williams embodied the very spirit of racing. The tributes paid after Williams’ death, aged 79, on Sunday recognised with fondness and respect one of the most successful figures in F1 and one of most remarkable. The team he built from a warehouse in Didcot went on to win nine constructors’ and seven drivers’ titles. Only Ferrari have won more constructors’ titles and only Ferrari and McLaren have entered more races. Williams’ warehouse garagistas fashioned a place in the pantheon of the sport. Williams’ exceptional achievement was to build this mighty outfit from such inauspicious beginnings and take it to extraordinary heights. In 2017, long after the team’s 80s and 90s heyday, 35,000 fans came to Silverstone just to see Williams’s cars put in some laps on the 40th anniversary of the team’s formation. At the track that day former driver Damon Hill, who won the title with Williams in 1996, summed up why the team was so admired. “He has given his entire life to creating a team that every year tries to produce the best racing car,” said Hill. “That is his love and his passion and in that sense he is the closest we have to an Enzo Ferrari. Enzo was about the passion and the cars and Frank is absolutely as passionate.” That passion was palpable, it drove him. He was an astute businessman, but that was only to serve the end of going racing. After seven years of struggle with his first team, Frank Williams Racing Cars, he started from scratch with Williams Grand Prix Engineering in 1977. The stories of the hand-to-mouth existence of the team in its early days are made more romantic by the contrast to the corporate behemoths of modern F1. Williams confirmed later that he did conduct business from a public phone box after being cut off and his daughter Claire, who went on to take over the day-to-day running of team in 2013, remembered how, sent out for fish and chips, Williams returned instead with spark plugs. Ken Tyrell, who enjoyed huge success with his own team in the 1970s, recognised something special. “There’s no one in this paddock who wants to succeed more than he does,” he said in 1974. “And if he ever gets himself financially organised, watch out …” With the engineer Patrick Head on board as co-founder and a formidable designer, Williams proved him right. Alan Jones won their first title in 1980, followed by further constructors’ championships in 1982 and 1986. Having already defied the odds Williams would then do so again with much more at stake. In 1986, after the car accident in France that left him paralysed from the neck down, the doctors requested permission to switch off his life support machine. His wife Ginny refused, believing in her husband’s will to go on, and indeed he was far from finished. Undaunted, he would never allow his disability to prevent him from racing with the same fierce competitive drive. Six weeks after the accident he was with his team, in a wheelchair, at the British Grand Prix at Brands Hatch. The crowd gave him a standing ovation. Nigel Mansell was driving for them at the time and would go on to win the title for Williams in 1992. He recognised that what Williams had created went beyond mere machinery and money, here were people inspired by their leader and he credited that with the team managing to continue to compete after the accident. In those days the team struck a chord with a generation of F1 fans. They may not have been able to identify many team principals, but they all knew Williams. They also knew how uncompromising he was in pursuit of victory, not least with his drivers. Hill’s fondness remains despite being dropped by Williams after winning the title. “They’re only employees, after all,” Williams said of his drivers. “All I care about is Williams Grand Prix Engineering and the points we earn. I don’t care who scores them.” His daughter later said that Williams remained in constant pain after the accident. He also suffered great emotional tragedy through the death of his close friend, the driver Piers Courage, in an accident in 1970. Later, the death of Ayrton Senna in a Williams in 1994 was a burden Claire believes he carried for the rest of his life. Yet he endured, fought on and raced on. The family sold the team in 2020 but Williams’ legacy will live long. He was impossible not to admire. Even as age and coping with his disability weathered him, Williams was often still in the paddock. His sharp eyes would be scanning timing screens and data still searching for the edge with which he and his team had not only defined an era of F1 but in a fashion that will always be singularly Williams.This chapter opened with a monologue in which Jodie Whittaker’s Doctor talked rapidly, explaining everything to the audience while up against a CGI background of a million Weeping Angels, and my heart sank again. However, on the whole, I think chapter five of Flux went on to swerve the worst of that regular pitfall of the Chris Chibnall era, serving up multiple interesting threads, gradually bringing the characters together and hopefully setting us up nicely for the resolution next week. What you thought of the episode will depend very much on whether or not you care for the Timeless Child arc. We now know that Division started as a secret way for Time Lords to interfere in the development of the universe and has grown and spread to encompass more species and an ever-expanding mission – one they want to take to other universes, burning ours behind them as they leave. Barbara Flynn’s character was revealed to be Tecteun, the Gallifreyan who found the Timeless Child and stole its genetic secret of regeneration for the Time Lords. The scenes between the Doctor and Tecteun were tense, but neither we nor the Doctor know enough about this character – whom we have seen previously only in brief flashback sequences – for it to have real bite. I must confess, I wasn’t expecting to see Craig Parkinson’s Grand Serpent again – and certainly not on Earth, carefully manipulating Unit in the background throughout the organisation’s history, so that was a bolt from the blue. With Swarm and the Sontarans relegated to the end of this chapter, he was a delightful second villain of the piece behind Tecteun. There was lovely attention to detail in the depiction of Unit through the years (and the idea of getting into your car to find an alien assassin waiting for you has a long and noble history in Doctor Who). Jemma Redgrave was steely as ever as Unit’s boss, Kate Stewart. Sum it up in once sentence The Doctor met her adopted mother for the first time in a long time and found that Tecteun was planning the destruction of the universe. Life aboard the Tardis My favourite strand of the episode was the adventure of Yaz, Dan and Jericho in 1904. Like something out of Jules Verne, Indiana Jones or Tintin, their worldwide quest to decipher an ancient inscription gave us action as well as laughs. The hermit in Nepal issuing a string of dad jokes, and Karnavista’s exasperation after they went to all that trouble to get a message to him, were amusing – but these sequences also made it clear that Yaz (Mandip Gill) had taken charge of the team in the absence of the Doctor. The scene between Gill and Whittaker’s hologram message was touching, and Kevin McNally’s Jericho made a great foil for the dynamic between Yaz and Dan (John Bishop). One of the nice things about the story was the way it set up mixed double-acts for next week. Bel and Karvanista fighting Sontarans should be fun, while the combination of Vinder’s principled soldier and Di’s furious modern-Earth scouser immediately showed promise. Plus, finally, we found out how Joseph Williamson had been making his slightly irritating 19th-century gobbledegook cameos in different times and places throughout the story. Fear factor The monster of the week had a very human face: Tecteun, the Doctor’s own “mother”, willing to destroy the universe to cover up her actions. Tecteun tried to turn the tables on the Doctor, suggesting that her habit of picking up companions and friends and taking them on a journey was akin to a form of experimenting on them, just like Tecteun had experimented on the Timeless Child on Gallifrey all those lives ago. I know the Timeless Child arc has been divisive, but it works. It makes the first Doctor’s flight from Gallifrey instinctive – to get away from the abuse and misuse that had happened before their mind was wiped. We have been given so many different half-explanations of why the Doctor fled Gallifrey in the past 58 years. In many ways, this brings us closer to what William Hartnell told us in 1963 about him and Susan Foreman being exiles “cut off from our own planet, without friends or protection”, rather than the idea that the Doctor just got bored and wanted to see the stars. Mysteries and questions I am probably reading too much into it, but the tattoo of the snake on the wrist of the waiter who tried to kill Yaz and Jericho in their steamship bunks put me in mind of the 1982 Peter Davison story Kinda, in which the evil Mara disguised itself as a snake tattoo on the body of the people it had possessed. Unit having the 13th Doctor’s Tardis in their HQ in the 1960s is going to cause some timey-wimey problems isn’t it? It seemed odd to cast someone as brilliant as Barbara Flynn as Tecteun and then have her bumped off after just a few scenes opposite the Doctor. I wonder if we will learn that the Ravagers haven’t been killing the people they disintegrate, but sending them to another universe or dimension. Deeper into the vortex It was a delight to hear the tones of the late Nicholas Courtney in Doctor Who again. He first appeared as Bret Vyon in The Daleks’ Master Plan with Hartnell. He later played Colonel and then Brigadier Alistair Gordon Lethbridge-Stewart in Doctor Who, from 1968’s The Web of Fear to 1993’s Dimensions in Time, featuring in 24 stories alongside every Doctor from Patrick Troughton to Sylvester McCoy. His final television appearance in the role was in 2008 in the Sarah Jane Adventures episode Enemy of the Bane. Courtney died in 2011. The line Courtney says in the background – “Lethbridge-Stewart here; I want a call to the RAF, please” – is dialogue taken from part four of Terror of the Autons, broadcast on 23 January 1971. The reference to the Post Office Tower business was talking about 1966 Hartnell story The War Machines. Redgrave first appeared as the Brigadier’s daughter Kate Stewart in 2012’s The Power of Three. This was the seventh episode in which she has appeared to date. I should have pointed out last week that McNally has been in Doctor Who before – he played Hugo Lang in Colin Baker’s (generally poorly regarded) first story as the sixth Doctor, The Twin Dilemma. It is nice to see him given a brilliant character to play on the show. That was the last regular episode of the Jodie Whittaker era that isn’t a season finale or a special. How time flies. Next time That felt like a decent penultimate episode of a six-part story. Flux has been a bold and necessary shift of the programme’s format and is easily the best of Whittaker’s three seasons. But can Chibnall stick the landing? Will the Doctor end up saving Earth and her friends, resetting the universe, finding out who Bel’s baby is going to grow up to be, and restoring her lost memories? I would bet on at least two of those things happening, but the jury is still out on where the Timeless Child arc is going. We will find out in The Vanquishers.Fashion designer Virgil Abloh has died after suffering from cancer, it has been announced. The 41-year-old, who was the creative director for Louis Vuitton and Off-White, had cardiac angiosarcoma, a rare, aggressive form of the disease, according to an announcement on his official Instagram page. “We are devastated to announce the passing of our beloved Virgil Abloh,” it said. “He chose to endure his battle privately since his diagnosis in 2019, undergoing numerous challenging treatments, all while helming several significant institutions that span fashion, art, and culture. “Through it all, his work ethic, infinite curiosity, and optimism never wavered. Virgil was driven by his dedication to his craft and to his mission to open doors for others and create pathways for greater equality in art and design. He often said, ‘Everything I do is for the 17-year-old version of myself,’ believing deeply in the power of art to inspire future generations.” Abloh redefined the idea of the modern fashion designer, adding DJ, artist and furniture designer to his creative arsenal. After training as an architect, he started designing clothes in 2012. His first design, a screenprint on a Ralph Lauren rugby shirt, set the tone for his future work: a postmodern art stunt cum fashion piece. Collaborating with everyone from Nike to Ikea, Perrier and Mercedes-Benz, he took fashion into arenas where it had not gone before, cross-pollinating it with other fields. The fashion purists were not amused; he told the Observer in 2019, “When I was showing in fashion week, people were saying, ‘That’s not fashion.’” In 2013 he founded his own label, Off-White, and was appointed head of menswear design at Louis Vuitton in 2018. He was the first black designer at Vuitton and the most visible black designer in fashion. Abloh was also a hugely visible figure in rap, designing the album covers for Kanye West and Jay-Z’s joint album Watch the Throne, as well as West’s My Beautiful Dark Twisted Fantasy among others and covers for Pop Smoke, Westside Gunn, Octavian and Lil Uzi Vert. He worked closely with West before becoming a fashion designer. In an interview, the rapper had said of Abloh: “I have all these ideas and Virgil is able to architect them because he is an actual architect.” Gigi Hadid, Hailey Bieber and Justin Timberlake were among the stars paying tribute to the “once-in-a-generation creative mind”. Supermodel Hadid shared a string of photos of them together and wrote: “I am heartbroken by the loss of my dear friend, and a friend to the world, Virgil Abloh. He was 1 of 1 … You will continue to inspire me every day, V. I feel blessed and honoured by every moment.” Timberlake wrote: “What can you say when a force like Virgil Abloh is taken too soon? You gave the world so much, in so little time. And created with intensity … knowing better than the rest of us that life is short, but anything is possible. I’m honoured to have known you. Thank you for sharing your gift with us.” Bieber shared photos of herself with Abloh in the wedding dress he designed for her wedding to Justin Bieber. “He was someone who always brought life, charisma, love and fun to any situation, and every room he walked into. A once-in-a-generation creative mind that is so rare and I’ll never forget his impact. We love you, Virgil.” British Vogue editor Edward Enninful called Abloh “a giant among men”. He wrote: “Virgil Abloh changed the fashion industry. Famously prolific, he always worked for a greater cause than his own illustrious career: to open the door to art and fashion for future generations, so that they – unlike himself – would grow up in a creative world with people to mirror themselves in.” Bernard Arnault, chief executive of LVMH, owner of both Off-White and Louis Vuitton, said in a statement: “Virgil was not only a genius designer – a visionary – he was also a man with a beautiful soul and a great wisdom.” He is survived by his wife Shannon and his children Lowe and Grey.Emma Raducanu has spoken in glowing terms about the support and positive advice she has received from Lewis Hamilton since her US Open victory as she looks to move on and continue her growth as an athlete. “He’s just been really cool in helping me,” Raducanu said. “He said: ‘Be patient, you’ve just got to ride the wave. It’s all good. Don’t worry.’ Good reassurance. He’s a really cool guy.” Having competed in motor sports throughout her youth, Raducanu is a big Formula One fan and she says she is cheering on Hamilton. She remains unconvinced by suggestions she could beat him to win BBC’s Sports Personality of the Year: “I just don’t even think about it,” she said. “For me, it’s something that’s so far out of the realms of possibility that I just don’t even understand how it could be a possibility.” Raducanu was speaking after she defeated Elena-Gabriela Ruse 6-3, 7-6 (3) in an exhibition match at the Champions Tennis event at the Royal Albert Hall. The match marked the first time Raducanu has played in front of a home crowd since becoming US Open champion in September. An exhibition match in front of a full, supportive crowd that only came to see Raducanu was another of the many new experiences for her since her US Open title. Ruse is one of Raducanu’s good friends on the tour and as the older, more extroverted personality, she took the lead by joking with the crowd and conversing with the ballkids throughout. Afterwards, Raducanu said that it was one of the first times she has picked up a racket since her season ended at the beginning of the month. After recently returning from a break in the Caribbean, her first holiday in seven years, Raducanu has now shifted to pre-season training where she is currently enduring five hour fitness blocks each day with no tennis as she looks to address her goal of closing the physical gap between herself and the grown, supreme athletes on tour. “You can ask my trainer, I feel like I start the day on a high and then by the fourth hour I’m really feeling it,” she said, laughing after being asked how much she is enjoying her work. “I know that gives me confidence that I’m putting the work in and I feel like I take that as a mentor you know, like your strength and advantage.” From next week, Raducanu will join up with her new coach, Torben Beltz, the experienced former coach of Angelique Kerber, as she returns to full training on the court. Her next competition will be another exhibition at the Mubadala World Tennis Championships in Abu Dhabi on 16 December and then she will complete her off-season in the Middle East before heading to Australia to begin her season in January. “For me, my expectations of myself are to keep improving, I want to look back at the end of the year and see that I made gains in different areas. I know it will take a lot of patience to get to where I want to be and smooth out that consistency. It’s all about building robustness physically,” she said. Another glimpse into Raducanu’s popularity came right after the match as she remained on-court for an interview and she encouraged Ruse to join her in front of the mic. However, the interviewer harshly made it clear that he was only interested in speaking with Raducanu. Asked once again about how she is handling such attention, she responded immediately. “For me, I am just going about my business. I’m taking the train in [to training] sometimes and doing the same journeys I used to. I feel like I am the exact same person and I’m just going to go about everything I used to do, I don’t see why I should change things that got me that title. I am still enjoying it.”And that’s it for another Strictly weekend! Thank you so much for joining in – next week is the QUARTER-FINAL, so please join me back here at 6.40pm for the official shortest show of the season. We get change from an hour, so we should probably go to the pub afterwards. See you then! Tilly confirms she’s made a best friend for life (DRINK) and thanks Nikita for ‘the best couple of weeks’. What happened in the other eight? Meanwhile Nikita thanks production, costume, make-up, cast, the other professionals, and also Tilly. They take to the floor for their final dance to ‘Daydream Believer’ by The Monkees. All the judges save Rhys and Nancy, which means TILLY AND NIKITA are leaving Strictly. The curse of the Samba strikes again. Should have kept your shirt on, Nikita, you’d still be going home but at least you’d be warmer. Now it’s Tilly and Nikita’s turn. This is a fiendishly difficult dance, and Tilly never looks entirely comfortable in the role of Latin party goddess. But I salute the effort – she’s come a really long way since Week One. Nikita appears to have lost his shirt, which I’m assuming is a wardrobe malfunction rather than a desperate last-ditch attempt to win a dance off. Can somebody introduce him to buttons? They’re old technology but surprisingly effective. Rhys and Nancy are up first, and I still think this is a gorgeous song and one of my favourite dances from Rhys this year. If he goes tonight, it will be on a high. Also this Dave Arch singer is doing an incredible job of Whitney. Applause all round, very happy to watch that again. Not sure if I’ve ever mentioned this before, but Giovanni and I have the same sun tattoo, just in different places. More breaking news as it happens. Based on last night’s performance, it should be Tilly going home tonight – I thought Rhys did a pretty decent job of that Waltz, even though Craig didn’t like it much. But both have room for improvement, so who knows? So who’s joining Rhys and Nancy in the bottom two? Tilly and Nikita, surely? AJ and Kai are safe, along with Rose and Giovanni, which means TILLY AND NIKITA in the dance-off. Time for a musical interlude, courtesy of Years &amp; Years, which used to be a band but is now Olly Alexander’s solo project. I’m a huge fan of Olly’s music and his acting – if you haven’t watched Channel 4’s It’s A Sin yet, I can’t recommend highly enough. Olly’s singing his new single Sweet Talker, which I’ve been listening to on repeat for the past few days and can confirm is an absolute BOP. Also very much enjoying Olly’s Argyle pattern golf suit and Luba and Karen living their best dancefloor life. 100% would go to this party. Next week JoJo are dancing the Salsa to ‘We Are Family’ by Sister Sledge. LOVE IT. I’m not sure why anyone’s surprised at Dan being saved, he’s the much-loved underdog. He’s this year’s Chris Ramsay; and just like Chris Ramsay, he’ll go home in the semi-final. On the upside, we don’t have to watch that Rumba again. EVERY CLOUD. So who’s safely through to next week’s quarter-final? Dan and Nadiya are safe, along with John and Johannes. First couple in the dance-off: RHYS AND NANCY. Last night on Strictly: a fun show marred by wildly inconsistent scoring (see above). Highlights: Beethoven’s Filth Argentine, outstanding fringing, banging Dave Arch tunes. Lowlights: The ongoing infantilisation of Rhys, the Curse of the Samba and invasive levels of audience booing. Also Dan’s Rumba hip action, which was so subtle it couldn’t be observed by science. Dan’s hips have now been referred to CERN, where the Large Hadron Collider will be analysing them for weakly interacting particles #darkmatter. Tess in a black boob tube topped with a spiky fringing, presumably to stop pigeons gathering. Claudia in a black tux. And we’re off! Tonight’s opening pro dance has a futuristic twist, like this year’s Lidl Christmas ad, but to a soundtrack of ‘The Model’ by Kraftwerk and ‘Don’t Go’ by Yazoo. Which are both from the early 80s, so simultaneously futuristic AND retro. Evidently there are no breathable fabrics in the future. Just reflecting on last night’s show, here’s what I reckon. IF you’re going to give Dan (a non-dancer) high scores for not being as bad as you’d expected in a basic routine, it really isn’t fair to punish AJ (also a non-dancer) for not delivering perfection in an incredibly complex one. So here’s my suggestion - pick a judging criteria each week – prowess, progress, just showing up and putting one foot in front of the other, I don’t care – then apply it to everyone. Otherwise you just look like twats. Thanks for coming to my TED Talk. Evening all, and welcome back to this week’s Sunday Results Show! By the end of this evening six couples will become five, and we’ll have our line-up for next Saturday’s quarter-final. Who will it be? Common sense says Tilly and Dan in the dance-off, but we already know Dan’s got a lot of voting support out there, so I won’t be remotely surprised if he’s dodged it once again. Is there a name for Dan Walker fans? Danfans? Danfastics? Walker Worshippers? Suggestions in the comment box please - I’ll see you at 7.20pm. And that’s me done for the Saturday show – thank you so much for swinging by and letting off your glitter cannons in the comment box, it’s much appreciated. I’ll be back tomorrow at 7.20pm for the results show, so please join me then. Enjoy the rest of your Saturday! Hx Well that was quick; how time flies when there are only six couples left and considerably less faffing about. The voting lines are now open – who are you voting for this week? John and Johannes are at the top of the leaderboard, with Tilly and Nikita and Dan and Nadiya in the danger zone for the dance off. I can’t see the public vote changing that, but I suspect it may be Tilly on the way out rather Dan. Loving the message from Mary Berry on Zoom. It’s like getting a letter from the queen. Scores: 9,10,10,10 - a total of 39 for John and Johannes. Goodness, it’s warm in here. Anton thought it was as good as their Week 3 Paso, and Craig thought it was great to see the Argentine Tango done in its original form with two men, he absolutely loved it. Cynthia loved the intensity, it was gorgeous. Shirley thought it was fab-u-lous, and the way John handled Johannes was perfect. I’m LOVING the drama of this - it all gets quite intense when they get into close hold, foreheads pressed together, and I love the gancho sequence at the end. An incredibly hard routine, but they did a great job. Beethoven’s Fifth? Beethoven’s Filth, more like. This is exactly what the doctor ordered on a pretty bleak day. This week they’re dancing the Argentine Tango to ‘The 5th’ by David Garrett, which is a rock violin version of Beethoven’s Fifth Symphony played by a man with very lustrous hair. Anyone else a tiny bit excited about this? I feel like it’s been a while since we saw a properly dramatic and sexy Argentine, so maybe this is the one. Scores: 7,7,8,8 - a total of 30 for Tilly and Nikita. Shirley thought it needed tidying up in the arms and there were a couple of bits that lost the timing at one point, but she loved the shimmy. Anton thought it wasn’t bad, but Tilly needed to turn her feet out. Craig though it was a bit awkward and disconnected, he knows Tilly can do better. Cynthia wants Tilly to let her sexiness come out, Tilly is overthinking it. Loving Tilly’s rainbow fringing, and she’s giving this Samba plenty of party energy. Her footwork is a little heavy and I feel like her knees need to be softer, but you can’t fault the shimmy. Gets a bit untidy towards the end, but good fun. This week they’re dancing the Samba to ‘Levitating’ by Dua Lipa. Tilly’s had mixed results with Latin – her Halloween Cha Cha was great, but she has a tendency to be a bit polite. If ever there was a time to knock back three Jagerbombs in the Student Union bar and let her hair down, now would be it. Scores: 7,9,10,9 - a total of 35 for Rhys and Nancy. The scoring is MAD this evening. I mean it’s mad most weeks, but this week is properly bonkers. Cynthia loved the connection between Rhys and Nancy, but she wants him to breathe more. Shirley was astounded by Rhys’s performance, it had grace and charm and she felt his emotion. Anton loved Rhys’s arms and the shaping was gorgeous. Craig thought Rhys was following and not leading this dance - it lacked drive and had no swing and sway, but it was still a beautiful dance. ‘Are you having a little cry?’ asks Tess. He’s still 28, Tess. Loving the fairy light tree and this is gorgeously romantic from Rhys and Nancy. A really controlled and elegant performance from Rhys, with nice rise and fall and poise. Good changes of pace too, and some solid heel leads. Definitely my favourite dance of theirs, really enjoyed that. This week they’re dancing the Waltz to ‘You Light Up My Life’ by Whitney Houston. The 1977 Debbie Boone version of this song came out when I was four years old, and singing along to it is one of my earliest memories. So I’m a bit teary already, thanks for that Strictly. Scores: 9,8,10,9 - a total of 36 for AJ and Kai. Can we just take a moment to acknowledge that Cynthia just gave that dance from AJ fewer points than Dan’s Rumba. I love her and she’s a great addition to the judging panel, but absolutely NOT. Craig thought AJ did brilliantly - the routine was SO difficult. There were some messy bits but he loved it. Cynthia was so proud of AJ and she did an amazing job. Shirley loved the fearlessness and commitment, it was an ultimate performance. Anton thought it was a really strong dance, well done. OK this is right up my street - bit of jazz, bit of street, bags of attitude, amazing lifts, sexy as hell. LOVED that. This week they’re dancing Couple’s Choice to ‘Make Me Feel’ by Janelle Monáe. In my head this is a celebration of their whirlwind romance through the medium of a massive pop banger, but actually it’s probably not that literal. Bit dusty in here. Scores: 6,9,8,8 - a total of 31 for Dan and Nadiya. I can’t believe Cynthia gave that more than Rose and Giovanni. Brutal. Anton loved it, because Anton is unhinged. Craig thought it was jolty, there was no hip action and Dan’s feet were velcroed to the floor. HOWEVER, it was better than he expected and he’s giving Dan an extra point for involvement. Cynthia loved how relaxed Dan was, it was gorgeous. Shirley completely disagrees with Craig, and Dan was as cool as a very tall cucumber. Dan’s hip action was subtle, but it was there. I mean, was it? WAS IT THOUGH? Maybe it was viral hip action. Even though you can’t see it, it’s definitely there. Hands face space, Dan. I mean Nadiya’s definitely doing a Rumba, so that’s nice. But Dan has no Rumba hips or shaping, so from his side it’s just a nice slow dance. Not unpleasant or offensive, but not technically a Rumba either. To shamelessly misquote this song, my prison is watching Dan walk through this non-Rumba all alone. This week they’re dancing the Rumba to ‘Desperado’ by Eagles, and honestly I don’t know what to think about this. It could go one of two ways – a) Dan mooching about a bit and providing a pole for Nadiya to dance around, or b) Dan discovering his inner Latin sex god and giving it full Rumba hips. Neither of these things are on my Christmas list, if I’m honest. Scores: 8,8,8,9 - a total of 33 for Rose and Giovanni. Shirley thought Rose was a class act and it had some great shaping, despite the stumble at the end. Anton thought it was marvellous and he loved the intensity at the beginning, but Rose’s line could be more finished. Craig though it was a bit upright and stiff and there was too much forward and back; he didn’t feel Rose powered around the floor but he loved Rose playing the femme fatale. Cynthia loved the power and the tension, well done Rose. Very much enjoying the drama of this, and Rose is doing some nice fan work in the opening solo section. Great intent and nice timing from Rose, and love the Flamenco section in the middle, but would have liked a bit more power - it feels a bit soft in places. Great start to the show though, really enjoyed that. Their Week Ten dance is the Paso Doble to ‘California Dreamin’ by Sia. This is essentially a shouty version of the Mamas &amp; The Papas original, so it could work really well as a Paso. Rose does brilliant characterisation and storytelling, so I have high hopes for this. Out come the judges! Cynthia got the Motsi dress code brief and has gone for scarlet sequins with a top half that looks a bit like a wetsuit. Great work at such short notice. Out come the stars! Fringing ahoy this week, and am loving JoJo in Argentine mode. BRING IT. Tess in spray-on scarlet with midriff staples, Claudia in a Sandy from Grease catsuit and a pearly queen jacket. I think Tess’s dress might be my favourite of the season. It looks FABULOUS. Actually both of them look amazing, good work. And we’re off! Only six couples left, and only three are going to make it to the Grand Final. They all love the training room. I haven’t mentioned this so far this season, but I love the focus on training room footage over dubious comedy VTs. I like to think we moaned about it long enough to kill it off, even though it took years. Celebrity Hit List is quite dramatic, isn’t it? Also they’re not very good at it, which is making me QUITE VOCAL. But not as vocal as Joanne Clifton; only dogs can hear her now. Take a sip of your first Mint Baileys of the year for any occurrence of the following: “It’s been such a journey” “I’m so proud” “That’s your best dance so far” “I’m feeling quite emotional” “The Rumba is a difficult dance for a man” So we’ve got six couples left, and if general dancing prowess/consistency of performance is anything to go by (and that’s by no means a given in these strange judging times), it still looks like AJ, John and Rose for the Grand Final. In some ways it’s a shame that Robert left the show and it isn’t a four-way final, because I think the battle for the fourth place would have been very hard fought between Dan, Rhys and Tilly. Also worth noting that AJ has her Couple’s Choice tonight, which just leaves John and Johannes who haven’t played that particularly joker. Next week, maybe? So who’s going tonight? Dan’s got a Rumba, which in any other year would be an exit through a trapdoor in the Strictly dancefloor. But Rhys has a Waltz and he’s not at his best in hold, and Tilly has a Samba of Doom, so anything could happen. I’m not ruling out a HUGE upset - there’s definitely still time. EXCITING (and also quite stressful). It’s a Strictly special on The Hit List tonight, which makes it 400% more watchable (although we’re starting from a very low base). Evening all, and welcome to this week’s Strictly Come Dancing Liveblog! Today we’ve been battered by Storm Anwen from the north and the Omnicron variant from the south, but thankfully we call all opt out of the madness for an hour and immerse ourselves in a communal Strictly glitterbath. Who’s in? It’s week ten, we’ve got six couples left and four shows to go, and the pressure is ON to pull something special out of the bag this weekend and grab a coveted place in next week’s quarter-final. No themes this week, which means it would usually be the shortest show of the contest before we up the stakes to TWO DANCES next week. But looking at the schedule, two dances appears to is just the semi-final this year, so next week’s show is even shorter. PRAISE BE. Craig is back on the judging panel this week, but now Motsi is off because she’s been in contact with someone with a positive Covid test and isn’t being exempt from isolation because she had her jabs in Germany. So Cynthia Erivo is back for another week as supply judge, and I hope someone’s made it clear that taking Motsi’s seat comes with its own special dress code. Kick off tonight is 6.55pm, so gather family, pets and cheesy nibbles and I’ll see you then!Good morning. Omicron is here in Australia as it spreads across the globe. The federal government is set to introduce some of the toughest “anti-troll” legislation in the world. And EU ministers meet to discuss the tragedy on the Channel. Two international travellers in NSW quarantine have tested positive to the new Omicron Covid variant, becoming the first cases in Australia. The travellers, who arrived from southern Africa and landed in Australia on a Qatar Airways flight from Doha on Saturday, are both fully vaccinated and asymptomatic. They are in isolation in special health accomodation. Here is what you need to know about Omicron. Australia is the latest country to detect it. Three cases have been found in the UK, the Netherlands has at least 13 and Israel has banned foreign visitors amid surges in cases. EU ministers are meeting in Calais to discuss how to stop people crossing the Channel in small boats, but without the UK home secretary, Priti Patel, whose invitation was rescinded after a diplomatic row with France. France has invited representatives from Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands and the European Commission to the meeting, which was called last week after 27 people hoping to claim asylum in the UK died making the perilous crossing. Meanwhile, in northern France, friends and relatives of those who died are desperate for answers. The Australian government is set to introduce some of the toughest “anti-troll” legislation in the world but experts say its focus on defamation will not help curb the rates of online bullying or cyberhate. Yesterday Scott Morrison announced that his government would introduce legislation to parliament this week that would make social media companies reveal the identities of anonymous trolling accounts and offer a pathway to sue those people for defamation. With the government divided over voter ID, integrity and religious discrimination legislation, as Katharine Murphy writes, this is a bill everyone can get behind. The laws would require social media companies to collect personal details of users, and allow courts to access their identities to launch defamation cases. It is unclear what personal data would be collected, but there are indications it would include a phone number, email address and user’s contact name. In a huge overhaul, the legislation would also change who is responsible for defamatory posts, from organisations that run the pages – such as news organisations – to the social media companies themselves. Australia The Morrison government has used sweeping new powers to override state and territory government support for an international agreement to cut greenhouse gas emissions. The federal government has deployed newly passed laws to overturn the participation of five states and territories in the global Under 2 Coalition. The descendants of people displaced by nuclear testing at Maralinga bought out shares in a company that is planning to build a uranium mine on their country to lodge an in-person objection to the project, after the company allegedly refused to meet with them. Scott Morrison enters the final parliamentary sitting week of the year facing fresh questions about the Coalition’s record of administering discretionary grants to government electorates. New analysis has found that since 2013 the bulk of government grant money has gone to government-held seats. The world Prosecutors in New York could “indict Donald Trump tomorrow if they really wanted and be successful”, the ex-president’s former lawyer and fixer Michael Cohen said on Sunday. Talks between world powers and Iran on salvaging the 2015 nuclear deal will resume in Vienna on Monday after a five-month hiatus but expectations of a breakthrough are low. The talks could liberate Iran from hundreds of western economic sanctions or lead to a tightening of the economic noose and the intensified threat of military attacks by Israel. As attacks on Palestinians worsen, the Guardian speaks to farmers, settlers, Israeli human rights activists and the mother of a three-year-old boy left injured in a raid. The Israeli human rights agency B’Tselem claimed this month that the state has “harnessed settler violence to promote its policy of taking over Palestinian land for Jewish use”. Recommended reads In the new film House of Gucci, Lady Gaga rules in Ridley Scott’s at-times ridiculous drama based on the true-life sagas of the Italian fashion dynasty, according to film critic Mark Kermode . “House of Gucci is a little too well behaved to become a cult classic,” Kermode says. “But Gaga deserves a gong for steering a steely path through the madness – for richer, not poorer; in kitschness and in wealth.” After overcoming personal tragedy, the rapper Baarka has clawed her way back – with a politically potent debut EP dedicated to First Nations women. “I just want to represent my sisters because we’ve been so underrepresented, especially in hip-hop,” Baarka says. “If somebody who can come from ice addiction, jail, motherhood and poverty [can do it, then they] can do it too.” Tag, conkers, Simon says and hide and seek are not just for children, there are adults who take them very competitively, too. Amelia Tait meets the competitors for whom kids’ games have become a career. Listen In less than a year, millions of football fans will descend on Qatar to cheer on their favourite teams in the 2022 World Cup. They’ll be greeted by dozens of shiny new hotels, restaurants, roadways and seven glistening new football stadiums. It will be a proud moment for Qatar, and for the entire region, which has never previously hosted a World Cup. Pete Pattisson, who has been reporting on the preparations for nearly a decade, says this new infrastructure has come at a cost. Pattisson’s reporting shows 6,500 migrant workers from India, Pakistan, Nepal, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka have died in the course of World Cup preparations – many from sudden, unexplained causes. Pattison tells Michael Safi about some of the workers who have lost their lives, and why the wage and labour changes introduced by Qatar’s government fall short. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Roll up, roll up, ladies and gentlemen, for the greatest travelling roadshow the A-League Men has to offer. Touring until 15 January, your favourite team from Western Australia, Perth Glory, will be bringing their purple-powered wares to a ground near you. Don’t miss out on a chance to see Bruno Fornaroli, Brandon O’Neill and special marquee attraction Daniel Sturridge across nine different dates. Media roundup Hotel quarantine could be back on the table as Omicron arrives in Australia, the Sydney Morning Herald reports. There are concerns the religious discrimination laws will allow women who use IVF or surrogacy to be refused employment ($) by religious bodies, according to the Australian. And the Herald Sun says potential Liberal candidates now have to disclose their sexual history, links to dating websites and drug and alcohol habits as part of the party’s vetting process. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday from 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.The challenge of international netball is having the combinations to counter whatever the rest of the world has to throw at you. England’s Roses opened their three-Test series against Jamaica with a 55-45 victory after a storming comeback. Jess Thirlby’s side trailed 26-25 before the introduction of Eleanor Cardwell tipped the game in their favour after an uncharacteristically slow start. The urgency to produce something for fans who had not seen their side since January 2020 was painted across the faces of the Roses but at every step, pivot and turn there had been a link missing in a usually reliable lineup. England’s attacking backbone featuring the famed ‘H-cubed’ combination of Jo Harten, Helen Housby and Natalie Haythornthwaite – members of the 2018 Commonwealth Games gold-winning squad – lacked their usual fluidity against Jamaica’s lethal defensive combination of Super Netball’s Kadie Ann-Dehaney, Shamera Sterling and Latanya Wilson. At the other end the Roses’ defence began their 60-minute-long gruelling task of blunting Jamaica’s attack fronted by their greatest weapon, the 1.96m tall Jhaniele Fowler. Solving a problem like Fowler is not achieved by glory intercepts but through work done off the ball, at phase zero. It is unglamorous but twice the Roses were rewarded as long feeds aimed at Fowler went over the backline. After they started the second quarter trailing by a point, it took only a few minutes before Thirlby made the call for change. On for the uncertain Housby came Cardwell, a homegrown player who shone in England’s most recent series win in New Zealand. The Manchester Thunder player’s physical presence and ability to draw the defence gave the Sunshine Girls something new to chew, but with such a late injection she did little to affect the scoreboard immediately, allowing Jamaica to hold the lead at the break. What a coach says to players at half-time will always be one of the sport’s great mysteries. “It took us too long to adapt,” Thirlby said afterwards. But the Roses who took to court were a class apart from those that started. Sterling’s waning influence over Cardwell along with Eboni Usoro-Brown’s switch to goalkeeper helped the Roses to rid themselves of their earlier rustiness. With England’s cap centurion Usoro-Brown anchoring the defensive end, Layla Guscoth and Beth Cobden were given freedom to roam, and the intercepts soon flooded down, duly swinging momentum in the hosts’ favour. A run of goals flipped the score, putting England firmly in the driving seat at 41-35 heading into the final quarter. With the wind well and truly in their sails, England soared. Like a master puppeteer, Usoro-Brown continued to pull the strings of the Guscoth-Cobden axis, who disrupted any attempts by the Jamaicans to mount a comeback. The hooter sounded, signalling that England had survived a first Test. Game two will see the teams relocate to Nottingham, and on the agenda for Thirlby will be starting stronger: “We’re way off what I know we’re capable of,” she said. “But to be in the position where you know you haven’t reached anywhere near the potential of this group and still beat a team like Jamaica by 10, it’s a great place to be.”The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, has said British ministers including his counterpart, Priti Patel, should stop saying one thing in private while insulting his country in public if there is to be a solution to the crisis in the Channel. In an interview with the Guardian, Darmanin strongly criticised what he called “double talk” coming out of London and said France was not a “vassal” of the UK. “Relations are good when we speak in private. Every week I have my British counterpart on the telephone and when we have personal meetings and exchange messages we see the UK has a serious approach and we have things in common,” Darmanin said. “Then as soon as it’s something said in public, in the House of Commons or on social media and the press, there’s a difference of tone that becomes strongly unfriendly … and is often different, even diametrically the opposite of what has been said in private. “The more France is used as a punching bag for British domestic politics, and we hear provocative statements like ‘France has to take back all the immigrants’, the harder it becomes to find a solution. It’s not only insulting it’s totally unrealistic.” Darmanin was speaking after France convened a meeting of ministers responsible for immigration from Germany, Holland, Belgium as well as the European commissioner for internal affairs. Representatives from the EU’s agency for law enforcement cooperation, Europol, and Frontex, the EU’s border management agency, were also invited to the hastily arranged summit in Calais on Sunday. The meeting was called after 27 people died in the Channel on Wednesday, a tragedy that shocked both sides of the Channel and has sparked a blame game between London and Paris. Patel’s invitation to the meeting was rescinded on Friday after Boris Johnson published a letter to Emmanuel Macron calling on France to do more to stop Channel crossings including allowing British forces to patrol French coastal areas – which France has refused citing concerns about sovereignty – and to accept refugees being returned. Darmanin said he had “a cordial relationship based on trust” with Patel, but expressed growing French frustration at the mixed and contradictory messages heard from Boris Johnson’s government. This frustration was voiced by Macron on Friday when he accused the UK of a lack of seriousness over the Channel crisis. The president was furious that Johnson had published a letter to him on Twitter, calling on France to take back migrants and questioning the country’s refusal to allow British forces to join patrols on France’s northern coast. Darmanin reiterated that frustration. “When it comes to the British government in general, it’s very difficult to work in a calm manner. Relations are fine with ministers … but unfortunately as soon as there’s a camera or they’re in parliament we seem to hear them say something very different,” he said. “I say again: France is not a subsidiary of the UK, we are a free and equal country with Great Britain and we want to be treated as such, treated as allies not vassals and not be hostages to British domestic politics.” He was incredulous at Patel’s suggestions that Britain could send naval ships or forces to turn back refugee boats mid-Channel. “We do not imagine for a single instant that Britain could just ignore all the international conventions and maritime law to put warships in the 30km between Britain and France to turn back boats when it will mean dozens of people, pregnant women, children, the elderly, who will die. We cannot imagine for one second that this could enter a British head,” he said. The question of people crossing from France to the UK has poisoned relations between London and Paris for decades. Tightened security around ferry ports and the Channel tunnel have driven refugees camped out along France’s northern coast to increasingly desperate measures. French police tear up makeshift refugee camps, destroying tents and bussing people elsewhere in France where they are encouraged to apply for asylum in France. Within weeks, the majority return to the Calais area. Darmanin repeated that France would not accept British forces in France. “What would the British say if we suggested having French troops on the English coast? They would say, quite understandably, that they are a free country and they want their sovereignty respected and we say the same thing. There’s nothing extraordinary in that,” he said. “It’s better that the British ask themselves why so many migrants want to go to the UK. This is first because the labour market of your country works in part with clandestine immigrants because in your country you can work and even pay taxes without having any identity papers or be in any kind of regular situation. “If there was a change in the labour law in Britain tomorrow there would be a lot fewer migrants who would want to cross over. Second, unfortunately, the British government today no longer allows any legal way for people to access their territory as immigrants.” The UK government disputes Darmanin’s characterisation of the UK labour market, saying people have to prove their immigration status to work or rent a property. A Whitehall source said: “We will this week have more talks with counterparts on how we can work together to resolve this Europe-wide crisis. Priti’s nationality and borders bill is the first step in addressing the broken asylum system and the pull factors it creates.” Darmanin confirmed the UK had paid France €17m of the €67m (£57m) agreed in July to police its northern coast, but added: “Sometimes I read in the British press that you pay us to intervene, but this costs us €250m a year. Of course €67m helps, but it cost us a lot more.” The minister said he would be reporting to Macron on Monday and had a series of meetings scheduled for next week on the crisis and specifically how to clamp down on smuggling networks. On the question of returning refugees in return for Britain accepting unaccompanied minors – a proposal Patel outlined in parliament last week – Darmanin said this would have to be agreed at European level. “If we could send minors to the UK you think we would refuse? No, we would accompany them all the way. We are ready to consider minors going to the UK in return for migrants being returned to Belgium, France or Germany or the Netherlands … as long as it is one for one. … The British say they want to return a number of migrants for one,” he said. Darmanin said screaming headlines in the British press attacking French police and gendarmes were “insulting”. “It’s an insult to France and the French police who risk their lives every day. It’s terrible to hear things like that from the English side because not only are we guarding the border for the English, we are suffering the political consequences of this decision. “That’s enough. It has become extremely insulting. We have to stop the slogans, work seriously.” Asked if he was planning to speak to Patel in the next few days, he replied: “There’s no meeting foreseen but she has my mobile number and I have hers. I tell you again, I respect her and know her well. All I ask is for the same respect from the UK so we can talk on the basis of equality and France is not the considered subservient to the UK. “From the moment we are treated normally we can discuss things seriously and everyone will make an effort to try to understand and try to advance the discussion. At the moment we have the impression that only France is making an effort.”• An article about the tactics of climate action opponents said a Pfizer plant in Sandwich closed in 2011. While the pharmaceutical company scaled back its operations, it did not close the plant (The rise of the ‘inactivists’, 11 November, Journal, page 5). • The constituency name is Old Bexley and Sidcup, not Bexley and Old Sidcup as an article said (Ministers defend PM as No 10 downplays rift with Treasury, 25 November, page 17). • Other recently amended articles include: Russell Hill and Carol Clay: 55-year-old man charged with murders of Victorian campers Artworks to highlight air pollution’s role in death of London girl ‘I’ll try to get across’: people camped out in Dunkirk still hope to reach UK Historic Photographer of the Year awards 2021 – in picturesAs Cristiano Ronaldo prepared to come on to the pitch with an hour gone at Stamford Bridge, having already performed a dutiful kind of warm-up, idling along the touchline like a venerable old don taking a stroll on the chamomile lawns, a large book of laminated diagrams was waved in front of his nose. Ronaldo, to his credit, made a decent show of having a look. Two decades into one of the great elite level careers, CR7 is not too proud for your diagrams. But there might have been a temptation to grab that folder and scour the hand written notes, to look for a sign, a prognosis of his own future in this mid-season revolution. The appointment of Ralf Rangnick as Manchester United’s interim manager is of course a mouthwatering plot twist. From a certain angle it even makes sense. Here is a team that doesn’t run enough. Here is a set-up that has lacks a pattern, a unity of purpose, an intellectual validity. Bring on the iron fist, the footballer-as-machine-for-winning aesthetic of Dr Gegenpress. It might feel like a wild leap to the opposite extreme. But something has to change around here. And on this occasion it was Ronaldo, who was dropped, not rested, for the first time since his return. It would be hard not to see the hand of Ralf in that decision, whether directly or by osmosis through a coaching team eager to please the new man. Either way Ronaldo’s role is central to what happens to this team now. Not just in terms of patterns of play, but in drilling down into how serious United really are about bending to the will of their 63-year-old troubleshooter. Scan back through Rangnick’s’ own laminated binder and pretty much every significant public utterance feels like a case being made for the removal of Ronaldo, or Ronaldo-equivalent, as the focal point of his team. Rangnick loves youth and energy. Suffering, abasement to the collective: this is his schtick. Rangnick hates star players. “The idea is a team without individuals,” he has said. Ah. About that. Rangnick also hates complacency, a fixed culture, the feeling of being stuck. How’s that one going to play out? Welcome, Ralf, to a club and a team still haunted by a manager who was appointed in 1986. Quite what this means for United’s one-man rescue act of the last few months is hardly black and white. Ronaldo knows how to play that game and will run for the team. But the last six years have seen him pare his own role back to a razor edge. He’s 36 years old. Frankly it is hard to think of a player Rangnick would have been less inclined to sign for his own United team. It would also be foolish to draw any firm conclusion from a single game against a sub-par Chelsea, who had 21 shots to United’s two but didn’t really deserve much more than a 1-1 draw. This was a poor afternoon for Thomas Tuchel. Picking Timo Werner as a starting attacker against a team sitting this deep is one thing. Keeping him on the pitch after a full 80 minutes spent haring about like a startled cat: this seemed pretty weird. As did the decision to leave Romelu Lukaku on the bench as cross after cross wanged its way across the United penalty area. But something had changed, with a sense of new terms, fresh semesters, a little starchiness in the air. Stand straight. Fold your hands. The professor is in town. At times there was a comedy to this whole set-up. Every lung-busting run felt like an audition, a message to the giant robot brain watching on his private monitor. But United didn’t really press here much. They sat deep and tried to break. This was in effect the Ole-ball team of last year, the phase when they would sit back and break quickly against better teams, a tactic that worked well at times. Michael Carrick picked a three-man midfield bolt of Fred-McTominay-Matic, and that trio formed the bedrock of a gristly, committed, all-for-one performance. Early on Callum Hudson-Odoi walked through Aaron Wan-Bissaka like a man easing his way through a particularly limp beaded curtain, and hit David de Gea from 10 yards when he should have scored. But Chelsea’s pressure was diffuse and they were made to pay just after half-time. Ronaldo’s absence had made space in the team for Jadon Sancho and Marcus Rashford, two players who stand to gain most from some kind of Rangnick defibrillation. Those in the know say that Sancho’s success in Dortmund was based around some very clear tactical instructions, a willingness to fulfil a brief. He already looks on an upward curve, and he scored an extraordinary goal, seizing on Jorginho’s terrible touch and haring off with nothing in front of him except open green space. Stepping to his right, he rolled the ball past Édouard Mendy. Chelsea levelled from the spot. And that was pretty much that for this game. Already the ground has begun to shift just a little bit. Some will say it was Ronaldo’s arrival that hobbled the Solskjær era, a solid counter-attacking team re-geared around a single celebrity sniper. This is hard for Ronaldo’s fans to digest. How can the player with the goal tally be the problem? How can the famous, winning man be bad? The other view is that Ronaldo has been the lone bright spot this season. The man whose view really matters is yet to enter the stadium. But this was a fascinating first act.Michael Carrick said after Manchester United held Chelsea to a 1-1 draw at Stamford Bridge that Ralf Rangnick had no influence on his decision to name Cristiano Ronaldo on the bench. Rangnick is set to take over at Old Trafford on an interim basis this week, with a consultancy role to follow from June 2022, but Carrick insisted that the German had no say in his team selection against Chelsea. The caretaker opted for a counterpunching approach against the league leaders and he was quick to play down Gary Neville’s suggestion that the idea to leave Ronaldo out came from United’s incoming manager. “That’s not the case, no,” Carrick said. “We came here with a plan. I kind of knew how Chelsea would play and we wanted to stop the passes through to Jorginho and Ruben Loftus-Cheek. There were a few changes to freshen it up and it’s what we decided to go with today. We almost pulled it off.” Carrick, who stepped in as caretaker after Ole Gunnar Solskjær was sacked last week, is unsure whether Rangnick will be in charge when United host Arsenal on Thursday. “I haven’t got any more news for you,” he said. “I was focused on the game. I’m sure I’ll be updated and we’ll see what happens in the next few days.” United, who are languishing in eighth place, produced a disciplined display after a difficult week. Carrick was pleased with their effort and he was happy with Jadon Sancho, who gave the visitors the lead after Jorginho failed to deal with a long punt from Bruno Fernandes. Chelsea rallied when Aaron Wan-Bissaka gave away a penalty with a foul on Thiago Silva – Carrick questioned whether the referee, Anthony Taylor, was right to point to the spot – and Thomas Tuchel praised Jorginho for making up for his mistake by scoring from 12 yards. “It’s very unusual, a mistake like this, and for us in general to concede a goal like this,” Chelsea’s manager said. “Especially with Jorgi. He misjudged the situation and was heavily disturbed from the lights and did not see the ball in the end. It takes a lot of courage and personality not to be affected in the match and to have the courage to take the penalty for the equaliser.” Chelsea’s lead over Manchester City is down to one point, but Tuchel was happy with their display. “It’s hard to imagine you can drop points because we were the better team,” the German said. “We’re disappointed, but we have no regrets. I told the team I was happy with the performance.”Boston Celtics center Enes Kanter is changing his name to “Enes Kanter Freedom” as he prepares to become a US citizen. Kanter’s manager, Hank Fetic, told the Associated Press that Kanter will have his citizenship oath ceremony on Monday afternoon and at the same time will complete his legal name change. Kanter grew up in Turkey before moving to the US as a teenager to pursue a basketball career. He is an an outspoken critic of Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan. Kanter has said his passport was revoked by his homeland in 2017 due to his activism. “Turkey could have been the bridge between Islam and the West but because of all the stuff happening now, that is almost impossible. I love my country and I love my people,” Kanter told the Guardian in 2020. “That’s why I want things to change. And just because I talk about democracy, human rights and freedom, the Turkish government calls me a terrorist. It is the craziest thing. “The only thing I terrorize is the basketball ring.” The 2011 first-round draft pick has also taken to social media to support Tibetan independence and criticize Chinese treatment of the Uyghur people. During games, he has worn shoes decorated to say “Free Tibet” and has argued for a boycott of the 2022 Beijing Olympics.Chelsea (3-4-2-1) Édouard Mendy The goalkeeper was helpless when United broke after Jorginho’s calamitous error in the second half. Sancho gave him no chance with a cool finish. 6/10 Trevoh Chalobah The youngster’s form was rewarded with another start and he did not look out of place. He was not overawed by going up against Rashford. 7 Thiago Silva The Brazilian oozed class. His positioning was spot on, his reading of the game was superb and his alertness won Chelsea’s penalty. 7 Antonio Rüdiger The German’s quest for a goal from long range almost ended, only for his effort to crash off the bar. He later missed a glaring chance to win it right at the death. Defended solidly. 7 Reece James The wing-back went close with an inswinging free-kick just before half-time, but he was unable to find space on the right flank. Booked. 6 Jorginho The midfielder is not the kind of player who gets rid. That proved a problem when he was the last man and his failure to deal with Fernandes’s punt gifted Sancho the opener. He made amends by rescuing a point from the spot. 6 Ruben Loftus-Cheek He dwelled on the ball too much and infuriated Thomas Tuchel when he failed to release Werner in the 55th minute. There were some driving runs but it was not his day. 6 Marcos Alonso The Spaniard was ineffective after coming in for the injured Ben Chilwell. His lack of pace was a problem, allowing United to squeeze Chelsea’s left flank. 6 Hakim Ziyech The Moroccan had a fitful game, too often allowing United to muscle him off the ball. His decision-making left much to be desired. 5 Callum Hudson-Odoi The winger was wasteful with two good chances in the first half. He needed to be braver with his dribbling and was eventually taken off. 6 Timo Werner It did not feel like a game for the German. United stopped him using his pace on the break and he missed a great chance to equalise. 4 Substitutes: Mason Mount (for Alonso 78) The midfielder was roared on to the pitch, but he could not find a killer pass, 6; Christian Pulisic (for Hudson-Odoi 78) The American was dangerous after coming on to play at right wing-back, 6; Romelu Lukaku (for Werner 82) The striker was unable to make the difference against his old team, 6. Manchester United (4-3-3) David de Gea He came to United’s rescue during the first half, denying Hudson-Odoi, Rüdiger and James. Could not do anything about Chelsea’s equaliser from the spot. 7 Aaron Wan-Bissaka The right-back’s awful defending gifted Hudson-Odoi an early chance and he gave away Chelsea’s penalty with a clumsy foul. Made a good block on Werner. 5 Eric Bailly The centre-back focused on doing the simple things well. He cleared his lines, got in the way of crosses and did not make any major errors. 7 Victor Lindelöf He was far too soft when Hudson-Odoi broke through early on but Chelsea could not do enough to test him. Had a competent game overall. 6 Alex Telles Did not let the side down after stepping in for the injured Luke Shaw. He defended well and made sure that James was unable to get into dangerous positions. 7 Nemanjc Matic The midfielder’s experience proved vital. He was an efficient screen in front of his back four and he used his strength to shackle Ziyech. 7 Fred The Brazilian was average on the ball, but his energy was useful and he irritated Chelsea at times. Had a penalty appeal waved away in the first half. 6 Scott McTominay The Scotland international offered bite in midfield but there was not much quality in possession. Booked for a silly foul on Alonso. 6 Jadon Sancho The winger worked hard despite seeing little of the ball and he was cool when his moment arrived, ruthlessly punishing Jorginho’s mistake. 7 Bruno Fernandes Ineffective in an unfamiliar role up front. He struggled to create anything and almost gave away a goal with a dreadful pass to Hudson-Odoi. 4 Marcus Rashford The forward looked threatening on the break but he lacked support and often made the wrong choice. 5 Substitutes: Cristiano Ronaldo (for Sancho 64) It was a surprise to see the forward on the bench, but he did not make much of an impact after coming on, 6; Jesse Lingard (for Rashford 77) The midfielder came on too late to make a difference, 6; Donny van de Beek (for Fernandes 89) The Dutchman came on in the dying stages, 6.Jaylen Waddle had nine catches for a season-best 137 yards and a touchdown, and the Miami Dolphins forced Cam Newton into one of the worst statistical days of his career on the way to beating the Carolina Panthers 33-10 on Sunday. Myles Gaskin had two short rushing scores for Miami (5-7), who became the sixth team in NFL history to immediately follow a 1-7 start with four consecutive wins. Duke Riley blocked a punt that led to a score for Miami. The quarterback matchup was one-sided. Miami’s Tua Tagovailoa completed 27 of 31 passes for 230 yards and a score. Newton was pulled in the fourth quarter after completing just five of 21 passes for the Panthers (5-7), who lost for the seventh time in their past nine games. Newton finished with 92 yards passing, no touchdowns and two interceptions. It all added up to a quarterback rating of 5.8, by far the worst of his career. He did have Carolina’s lone touchdown, a one-yard spin in the first quarter. Cleveland Browns 10–16 Baltimore Ravens Lamar Jackson threw four interceptions but was still able to pull off enough magic to give the Baltimore Ravens victory on Sunday Night Football. The Browns were unable to get their running game going in order to profit from Jackson’s mistakes. The victory solidified the Ravens’ lead in the AFC North. Los Angeles Rams 28–36 Green Bay Packers Aaron Rodgers withstood pain from a toe injury, threw two touchdown passes and also ran for a score in the Green Bay Packers’ 36-28 victory over the Los Angeles Rams. The Rams outscored Green Bay 11-0 in the fourth quarter, but their comeback attempt ended when Adrian Amos recovered an onside kick with 17 seconds left. Rodgers went 28 of 45 for 307 yards as the Packers bounced back from a 34-31 loss at Minnesota. The reigning MVP threw touchdown passes to Randall Cobb and AJ Dillon. Tennessee Titans 13–36 New England Patriots Mac Jones threw two touchdown passes, New England’s defense forced four turnovers and the Patriots earned their sixth straight win, rolling past the Tennessee Titans. The victory snapped New England’s two-game losing skid against the Titans. The Patriots hadn’t beaten Tennessee since former Patriots linebacker Mike Vrabel took over as coach in 2018. New England (8-4) improved to 6-1 against AFC opponents this season. Jones completed 23 of 32 passes for 310 yards. Kendrick Bourne had both of the Patriots’ TD receptions, finishing with five catches for 61 yards. The Titans (8-4) stayed close early, but couldn’t survive a bevy of errors that included three fumbles by their running backs and an interception by Ryan Tannehill. He finished 11 of 21 for 93 yards and a touchdown. Tampa Bay Buccaneers 38-31 Indianapolis Colts Leonard Fournette’s fourth touchdown of the game, a 28-yard run with 20 seconds left, lifted the Tampa Bay Buccaneers to a 38-31 win over the host Indianapolis Colts on Sunday. Fournette, who rushed for 100 yards on 17 carries, plowed off the left tackle with Tampa Bay (8-3) trying to set up Ryan Succop for a potential game-winning field goal. He ran through a couple of arm tackles and tumbled into the end zone to complete his huge game. The Colts (6-6) had a final chance after Isaiah Rodgers returned the kickoff 72 yards to the Buccaneers’ 32-yard line. But Carson Wentz’s pass on the final play was intercepted by Pierre Desir at the two-yard line to end it. Los Angeles Chargers 7–28 Denver Broncos Rookie Patrick Surtain II picked off Justin Herbert twice, returning the second one 70 yards for a touchdown and sparking the Denver Broncos’ win over the Los Angeles Chargers. The Broncos’ big win sets up a showdown for the AFC West lead next weekend in Kansas City, where the game between Denver (6-5) and the Chiefs (7-4) already was flexed to Sunday night. Surtain’s first interception came in the end zone on a pass intended for tight end Jared Cook early in the fourth quarter. The Broncos converted that takeaway into a touchdown when Teddy Bridgewater hit tight end Eric Saubert from nine yards to make it 21-7. Minnesota Vikings 26–34 San Francisco 49ers Deebo Samuel ran for two touchdowns before leaving with an injury and Elijah Mitchell ran for 133 yards and a score, leading the San Francisco 49ers to victory over the Minnesota Vikings. The matchup between two .500 teams fighting for wildcard spots was a highly entertaining one with six scores in the third quarter alone, including a 99-yard kickoff return score by Minnesota’s Kene Nwangwu. But the 49ers (6-5) made just enough plays, including a fourth-down stop near the goal line midway through the fourth quarter to win their third straight following a stretch of five losses in six games. New York Jets 21–14 Houston Texans Zach Wilson threw for 145 yards and ran for a touchdown in his return from a sprained knee, helping the New York Jets to snap a three-game skid. Wilson, the No 2 overall pick in April who missed the last four games, was woeful early in the game and threw an interception but put the Jets (3-8) on top with a four-yard scamper in the third quarter. The Texans (2-9) hoped to build on an upset of Tennessee last week that ended an eight-game skid and looked good early. Tyrod Taylor threw two touchdown passes in the second quarter to give Houston 14-3 lead, but the Texans couldn’t do anything offensively after that. Pittsburgh Steelers 10–41 Cincinnati Bengals Proving the first meeting this season wasn’t a fluke, the Cincinnati Bengals walloped the visiting Pittsburgh Steelers behind a career day by Joe Mixon. Mixon rushed for a career-high 165 yards and punched in a pair of one-yard touchdowns as the Bengals (7-4) swept the regular-season series from the Steelers (5-5-1) for the first time since 2009. Cincinnati have won three straight against their AFC North rivals, their longest streak since winning six in a row from 1988-90. Philadelphia Eagles 7-13 New York Giants The New York Giants’ defense rose up to intercept Jalen Hurts three times and held Philadelphia to a season-low in points in beating the error-prone Eagles. Daniel Jones hit Philadelphia native Chris Myarick with a one-yard score and Graham Gano kicked field goals of 35 and 39 yards as the Giants (4-7) somewhat responded to the firing of offensive coordinator Jason Garrett by ending the Eagles’ two-game winning streak. The Eagles (5-7) were their own worst enemy. They had four turnovers. Atlanta Falcons 21–14 Jacksonville Jaguars Cordarrelle Patterson scored twice in his return from an ankle injury, and the Atlanta Falcons found the end zone and the win column for the first time in three weeks in a 21-14 victory over woeful Jacksonville. The Falcons (5-6) managed just a field goal in their previous two games, lopsided losses to Dallas and New England in which they turned over the ball a combined seven times and failed to score a touchdown in consecutive games for the first time since 1987.More than nine in 10 people who have faced protest charges in Hong Kong are too young to access a UK visa scheme dedicated to helping Hongkongers flee to Britain, according to advocates and MPs calling for new laws to assist them. The release of the figures on Sunday by the advocacy group Hong Kong Watch comes before a parliamentary debate this week on proposed migration law amendments that would widen the pathway for people with British national (overseas) (BNO) status to resettle in the UK. More than 10,000 people were arrested during or after the mass protests that swept Hong Kong in 2019. The data found that 93% of more than 1,000 who had been tried by July this year were under the age of 25. Another 49 people arrested under the national security law were also under the age of 25. Last week the 20-year-old student activist Tony Chung was jailed for 43 months on charges relating to pro-independence social media posts. In the wake of the crackdown on protesters and pro-democracy figures that sent people fleeing overseas, the UK launched its BNO visa scheme, allowing holders of BNO status and their immediate families – estimated at the time to be about 5 million people – to apply for dedicated entry visas with a pathway to full citizenship. Tens of thousands applied in the first few months, but there has been long-running concern that people born after 1997, when Hong Kong was handed back to China, are not eligible to move to the UK under the scheme unless accompanied by a parent with BNO status. Hong Kong Watch said the scheme in its current form has “left behind” young people, and called for the adoption of a borders bill amendment that was proposed by Damian Green and has the support of at least 12 Conservative MPs including the chair of the foreign affairs select committee, Tom Tugendhat, and the former Tory party leader Iain Duncan Smith. The amendment would see the home secretary expand the BNO visa scheme to Hongkongers who have a BNO status-holding parent and are aged between 18 and 25. “The BNO scheme is a great success story which the government should take credit for, but sadly the current scheme does not cover many of the brave young activists in Hong Kong,” said Duncan Smith. “Many of these pro-democracy campaigners are in danger of being prosecuted by the intolerant Chinese Communist party and its representatives in Hong Kong. I urge the government to think carefully about helping these people too.” Green, a former immigration minister, said his amendment would also relieve pressure on Britain’s refugee processing. “My amendment would mandate a simple rule change that would ensure our immigration system offers a lifeline to the young people who need it most,” he said. “If we do not rationalise the policy in this way, many of these people will inevitably end up claiming asylum because they face political prosecution.” Hong Kong Watch said a recent survey of 24 Hong Kong asylum seekers who were waiting to have their applications processed in the UK found that half had at least one BNO status-holding parent.Ministers would be barred from lobbying or other paid work connected to their government roles for five years after they leave office under a Labour plan to set up a new, independent watchdog for potential conflicts of interest. The proposals, being set out by the party’s deputy leader, Angela Rayner, in a speech on Monday, would establish a new organisation to enforce such rules that could also sanction ministers who breached wider regulations. The planned integrity and ethics commission would replace several elements of the existing system, and would also have more powers, for example the ability to independently open investigations into suspected breaches of the ministerial code, the official rulebook for ministers. It would replace the Advisory Committee on Business Appointments, which decides on rules for ministers taking new jobs. However, Acoba cannot impose punishments, which are up to ministers. Last week the Cabinet Office said it was taking no action against Philip Hammond, the Conservative former chancellor, who is now a peer, despite him being reprimanded by Acoba for using his government connections to help a bank he is paid to advise. The new commission would also replace the independent adviser on ministers’ interests, a role currently occupied by the crossbench peer Christopher Geidt. He can only open investigations into suspected ministerial wrongdoing with the permission of Downing Street. The adviser also has no power to mandate punishment for breaches of the ministerial code. In November last year, Geidt’s predecessor in the job Sir Alex Allan resigned after Boris Johnson declined to sack Priti Patel despite a formal investigation finding evidence that she bullied civil servants, a breach of the ministerial code. Labour’s proposed new body could set binding sanctions, and former ministers would be obliged to apply to the commission before taking paid roles after they left office. It could also recommend changes to the ministerial code. The body would also enforce rules banning former ministers from lobbying, consultancy or any other paid work linked to their former role for at least five years, ending what Labour termed “the revolving door” between government jobs and the private sector. The plan is part of a wider Labour push on ethical issues following controversy about lobbying by former ministers and serving MPs, prompted by Johnson’s abortive attempt to stop the Tory backbencher Owen Paterson from being punished for breaking lobbying rules by rewriting the entire MPs’ disciplinary code. Labour has already said that in office it would ban all second jobs for MPs, aside from limited exemptions for people such as medical staff or military and police reservists, and introduce stricter political funding rules, including on donations from opaque shell companies. In her speech, Rayner will say: “The current system does not work and it has failed. “It only works where there is respect for the rules and there are consequences for breaking them. “If you break the rules there should be clear consequences. Our democracy cannot hinge on gentleman’s agreements; it needs independent and robust protection from Conservative corruption. “Labour’s independent integrity and ethics commission will stamp out Conservative corruption and restore trust in public office.”Gross domestic product as a measure of welfare is like exam results as a measure of intelligence. Neither is especially good. However both are widely cited and heavily relied upon. Why? They’re not great – but they’re the best we’ve got. GDP is effectively an accounting measure. There are three ways it can be calculated – as how much we produce, how much we spend, or how much we earn. The net result is the same; a dollar value of everything we produce for use. Like other accounting measures, there are well established rules on how it should be calculated and disclosed. Great bedtime reading. Prescriptiveness provides consistency, which allows comparison. Naplan scores can be compared across schools and time. GDP figures, likewise, can be compared over time (accounting for inflation) and across countries (accounting for currency differences). This means we can say that Australia’s economy is larger than New Zealand’s, as well as being bigger today than it was a decade ago. It also provides relativity – we know not just that California’s economy is bigger than Australia’s, but that it’s almost triple the size. These features are precisely why, like exam results, we are so fond of GDP as a measure. Fine. Until we start thinking GDP is something it’s not. Too often, politicians and pundits interpret GDP as a measure of welfare. Somehow, we’ve started assuming that GDP per capita is a great way of assessing how well-off we are. Official GDP figures say that we managed the “V” recovery, and are well and truly back on track. Sure, fewer year 9 students are meeting minimum national standards on literacy and numeracy, gambling has skyrocketed, 14% of young people feel lonely most or all of the time, and we have more hazardous waste than ever before. But we have more GDP per person today than we did before Covid. So we’re objectively better off, right? GDP as a measure of welfare is flawed for a number of reasons. Perhaps the biggest one is the implication that things mean happiness. Since when was the monetary value of the stuff we consume equivalent to the fullness of our lives? It’s a dangerous view which has led us to narrow, short-term decision-making. If you need evidence, look no further than Cop26. Despite decades of science from international experts, the world is currently not on track to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees. Why? Well, we’re busy trying to fuel the economy by encouraging more production and consumption of things. Printer ink, as an example, is often more expensive than printers themselves. With instant asset write-offs, small businesses are better off buying a new printer every time the ink runs dry, and throwing out the old one. While we’re at it, how about encouraging some more traffic jams? Traffic jams mean using more petrol, which means spending more money – which may be good for GDP in the short-term. Except that nobody would argue that time stuck on the road is good for our wellbeing. It’s also bad for productivity – less time is available to spend on creating and consuming. It certainly doesn’t help global warming. Even if you do believe that the consumption of things is a good measure of our wellbeing, GDP has flaws. There’s a lot which goes in to making the GDP sausage, and behind the curtain, the process isn’t pretty. It doesn’t account, for example, for changes in quality. Today, you can buy a bigger, better and more energy efficient TV for less than you would have spent on a TV five years ago. Clearly this is good for welfare. Yet GDP would have been larger if we had spent more money buying worse TVs. It also doesn’t include things which have value, but not prices. If you pay someone to mow your lawn (and they declare the income), that value is included in GDP. If you mow it yourself, it is not. Likewise, caring for children or the elderly only counts if you outsource. None of this is anything new. Nobel laureates in economics have been advocating for change for decades. However, because GDP gets measured, it continues to be at the forefront of what gets managed. The decisions that policy makers and individuals make depend on what we measure, how good our measurements are, and how well we interpret them. We should not give up on GDP – but it’s important to acknowledge its limitations. Economics is the study of trade-offs, and a single-minded focus on increasing GDP risks undermining the long-term wellbeing and welfare that we truly seek. Jessica Mizrahi is an economic consultant and commentator. She has taught, researched and applied economics for over a decadeHere’s a recap of Sunday’s Omicron developments as the new strain continues to panic world leaders. Authorities in the Netherlands detected at least 13 cases of the Omicron variant from recent flights into Amsterdam from South Africa. Botswana, which borders South Africa, said it has recorded a total 19 Omicron cases. The UK said it has detected three total Omicron infections in Nottingham, Essex and the London borough of Westminster, with targeted PCR testing being stepped up. The World Health Organisation urged countries not to impose blanket travel restrictions on southern African countires, amid fears of the economic toll and that the science behind the decisions is not yet certain without further studies. South Africa’s president Cyril Ramaphos said the new variant is a “wake-up call” for global vaccine inequality and criticised travel bans for their economic fallout. European Commission president Ursula von der Leyen warned of global “race against time” against Omicron, urging people to practice social distancing and get vaccinated so scientists have time to understand the new variant’s transmissibility and severity. The health ministers of the G7 will hold an emergency meeting on Monday to discuss the Omicron variant. The 194 member states of the World Health Organization agreed to launch pandemic treaty negotiations as the world prepares to learn the lessons of Covid for the next pandemic. The US chief medical adviser Anthony Fauci warned of a potential “fifth wave” of Covid in America, as the US vaccination rate slows, cases rise and the Omicron variant looms on the horizon. The UK reported 37,681 new Covid cases and 51 deaths, with the government vaccine watchdog suggesting the vaccine booster drive could be accelerated as soon as Monday to suppress cases. Secondary school pupils and teachers in England will wear once again face coverings in communal areas. Israel suspended all flights into the country on Sunday at 10pm GMT after detecting its first Omicron infection on Friday, just four weeks after it fully opened its skies to vaccinated travellers. Morocco said it will stop all incoming flights for two weeks starting Monday to prevent spread of the new strain. That’s all from me, Jem Bartholomew, here in London as Helen Livingstone in Australia takes over the blog. Interesting comment piece here from Devi Sridhar, chair of global public health at the University of Edinburgh, on the three pieces of data needed to reveal Omicron’s danger to the UK. Infectiousness – can it overtake the Delta variant to gain a foothold as the dominant strain? Disease severity – what’s the impact on hospitalisations and deaths, what does this mean for hospital capacity and therefore lockdowns? Vaccine disruption – are existing vaccines less effective against this strain, and do they need to be tweaked? (BioNTech said it could change its Covid vaccine in 100 days if needed.) So what does this mean for each of us? Right now, we need to continue to do all the things we should already be doing to get through the harsh winter months: getting vaccinated, and boosted, to protect ourselves; using the free home-testing kits to ensure we’re not infecting others, whether in friends’ homes or in pubs and restaurants; wearing masks in crowded places such as public transport and shops; and being attentive to how many close contacts we have. Botswana has detected a total 19 cases of the new Covid variant, Omicron, the health minister said on Sunday. “As of today we have recorded a total of 19 cases of the variant,” health minister Edwin Dikoloti said. Botswana shares a 1,223-mile border with South Africa, where Omicron was first sequenced. Botswana said on Friday the first cases of Omicron came from four foreign nationals who arrived on 7 November on a diplomatic mission. “We are concerned that there seem to have been attempts to stigmatise the country where it was detected,” Dikoloti added, criticising derogatory reports of a so-called “Botswana variant”. Canada has confirmed two cases of the Omicron variant in federal capital Ottawa, the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation reports. Both cases were recent arrivals from Nigeria and are Canada’s first from the new variant. Canada banned travellers who had visited southern Africa countries in the past two weeks in a ban which came into effect on Friday. “Today, the province of Ontario has confirmed two cases of the Omicron variant of Covid-19 in Ottawa, both of which were reported in individuals with recent travel from Nigeria. Ottawa Public Health is conducting case and contact management and the patients are in isolation,” the Ontario government said. The health minister, Christine Elliott, and chief medical officer, Kieran Moore, said in a statement: “The best defence against the Omicron variant is stopping it at our border. In addition to the measures recently announced, we continue to urge the federal government to take the necessary steps to mandate point-of-arrival testing for all travellers irrespective of where they’re coming from to further protect against the spread of this new variant.” Morocco will suspend all incoming flights for two weeks over the new Omicron variant starting Monday, state media reported. Israel shut its borders to all travellers on Sunday at 10pm GMT, in moves which are more severe but less discriminatory than other flight bans imposed by other countries. The European Central Bank president, Christine Lagarde, said the euro zone is better equipped to face the economic impact of a new wave of Covid infections or the Omicron variant. “There is an obvious concern about the economic recovery [of the euro zone] in 2022, but I believe we have learnt a lot. We now know our enemy and what measures to take. We are all better equipped to respond to a risk of a fifth wave or the Omicron variant”, Lagarde told Italian broadcaster RAI on Sunday. Member states of the World Health Organization agreed to launch pandemic treaty negotiations on Sunday, as the world prepares to learn the lessons of Covid for the next pandemic. From Monday to Wednesday the World Health Assembly – WHO’s decision-making body of 194 member states – meets in Geneva, Switzerland. The negotiations will discuss how to establish an intergovernmental body to boost international co-operation in preparing, preventing and responding to the next pandemic. The goal is to reduce the devastating economic consequences and catastrophic loss of life witnessed during the Covid pandemic. A stumbling block to agreement had been the US’s refusal of language that would have been any such treaty legally binding, but the US has partly relented for now, helping produce an agreement. “WHO member states today informally agreed to start negotiations on a pandemic treaty. Now the resolution needs to be formally adopted tomorrow by world leaders,” said the European Union’s diplomatic mission in Geneva. It added: “The events of the last weeks demonstrate more than ever the need for global solidarity and leadership. We look forward to world leaders demonstrating their joint commitment tomorrow. The momentum is there – the planet must be better prepared.” South Africa’s president, Cyril Ramaphosa, said the new Omicron Covid strain is a “wake-up call” for global vaccine inequality. Roughly 10% of people in Africa have been inoculated with at least one vaccine shot, the New York Times estimates, compared with 62% of people in Europe and 64% in North America. Ramaphosa said he will not be imposing further restrictions at this time, saying this phase of the pandemic differs due to the availability of vaccines. Just under one-quarter of people in South Africa are double-vaccinated. Ramaphosa opposes travel bans announced on southern African countries in recent days, amid fears of the economic toll. The World Health Organization echoed Ramaphosa’s concern on Sunday and called for borders to remain open, citing uncertainty over the transmissibility, severity and vaccine disruption from Omicron. The UK’s Covid booster vaccine rollout could be significantly expanded as early as Monday in efforts to prevent spread of the Omicron strain. The government’s vaccines watchdog, which held an emergency meeting over the weekend, could advise the use of boosters for younger people, as well as a cut in the current six-month wait between second and booster doses, The Guardian understands. The UK has administered 46.3 million second vaccine doses, 69% of the total population, but only 17.6 million booster or third doses, 26.2% of the total population. Secondary school pupils will also be told to wear masks in communal areas, and from Tuesday measures will come into effect mandating face coverings in shops and on public transport, as ministers step up suppression tactics. My colleagues Peter Walker and Linda Geddes have the full story here. Plans to identify positive Omicron infections have been activated in Northern Ireland, UK. “Using passenger locator data, the Public Health Agency is identifying and contacting individuals who have recently arrived in Northern Ireland from red list countries,” Stormont health minister Robin Swann said on Sunday. He added: “They and their household members will be asked to self-isolate and undertake PCR tests. If any positive cases are detected, the sample will then undergo whole genome sequencing to determine the variant type.” No Omicron cases are confirmed in Northern Ireland but England has recorded three infections so far. Swann urged the public to follow the steps to beat back infections, such as: Getting vaccinated, including booster jabs Wearing face coverings Ventilating rooms or meeting outdoors Working from home if possible Washing hands regularly. Scientists are already scrambling to understand the new Omicron variant. They are assessing its transmissibility, whether its mutations spell greater disease severity and how it impacts existing vaccines. The strain was identified as a “variant of concern” by the World Health Organization on 26 November – due to mutations to the virus’s spike protein that appear to boost its transmissibility – which is a more serious designation than “variant of interest”. Researchers at Bambino Gesu hospital in Rome, Italy, on Sunday released a three-dimensional image of the variant. The researchers said in a statement: We can clearly see that the Omicron variant presents many more mutations than the Delta variant, concentrated above all in one area of the protein that interacts with human cells. This does not automatically mean that these variations are more dangerous, just that the virus has further adapted to the human species by generating another variant. Other studies will tell us if this adaptation is neutral, less dangerous or more dangerous. Rwanda suspended direct flights to and from southern Africa on Sunday to prevent the new Omicron Covid strain’s spread, the prime minister’s office said. It comes after the landlocked east African country reimposed a 24-hour quarantine on Friday, coming into effect Sunday, for all arriving travellers. Prime minister Édouard Ngirente’s office also said it would now be compulsory to be fully vaccinated and tested at events such as conferences and concerts. But the World Health Organization’s regional director for Africa, Matshidiso Moeti, urged countries on Sunday to avoid travel bans, as the transmissibility and severity of the new variant are still being investigated and such a policy “attacks global solidarity”. (See my earlier post for more details.) The Czech president Miloš Zeman carried out the prime minister’s inauguration ceremony from a glass perspex cubicle on Sunday, after becoming the latest in a long tally of world leaders to test positive for Covid. Zeman sat in a wheelchair and wore a face covering while appointing Petr Fiala, of the centre-right Civic Democratic party, as prime minister at the Lány Chateau near Prague. He was accompanied by a medic in full protective gear. Leaders such as the French president, Emmanuel Macron, former US president Donald Trump, Brazilian president, Jair Bolsonaro, and UK prime minister, Boris Johnson, who became critically ill with the disease, have all tested positive for the virus. Fiala ousted incumbent Andrej Babiš, whose offshore financial arrangements were spotlighted by The Guardian’s Pandora Papers investigation published last month. The new Czech government’s agenda includes suppressing a new wave of Covid infections threatening to overwhelm hospitals, with Czech positive tests surging to 27,793 on Friday from 5,842 four weeks before on 29 October. The Czech government declared a 30-day state of emergency on Friday, introducing new restrictions such as banning Christmas markets and imposing a 10pm curfew on restaraunts, bars and nightclubs. The head of the World Health Organization in Africa on Sunday urged countries to keep borders open, saying banning flights over the potentially more transmissable Omicron strain “attacks global solidarity.” “With the Omicron variant now detected in several regions of the world, putting in place travel bans that target Africa attacks global solidarity,” said WHO regional director for Africa, Matshidiso Moet, AFP reported. The WHO said in a statement it stands with African nations and calls for borders to remain open, after a spate of travel bans were announced on Sunday. “Travel restrictions may play a role in slightly reducing the spread of Covid-19 but place a heavy burden on lives and livelihoods,” the UN agency’s statement said. “If restrictions are implemented, they should not be unnecessarily invasive or intrusive, and should be scientifically based.” Moet’s comments come after Cyril Ramaphosa, president of South Africa, where Omicron was first sequencesd on 24 November, called on countries to “urgently” reverse “scientifically unjustified” flight bans. “The only thing the prohibition on travel will do is to further damage the economies of the affected countries and undermine their ability to respond to, and recover from, the pandemic,” he added, urging South Africans to get vaccinated. The WHO and other researchers are still assessing the virulence and severity of the strain and whether it could evade existing vaccines – with preliminary research showing more than 30 mutations to the virus spike protein. G7 health ministers will hold an urgent meeting on Monday to discuss the Omicron variant. The G7 is made up of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the UK and US, and currently the UK holds presidency. The meeting follows a flurry of positive Omicron test results in the UK, Germany and Italy, with the French health minister saying on Sunday that the strain is likely to also be circulating in France. “There is no identification yet, but it’s a matter of hours,” Olivier Veran said. “Under the UK presidency an urgent meeting of G7 health ministers will also be convened on Monday 29 November to discuss the developments on Omicron,” the Department of Health and Social Care said on Sunday. Here’s the latest UK Covid data visualised, showing new daily cases largely above 35,000 since October. Health secretary Sajid Javid told Sky it “would be irresponsible to make guarantees” over potential holiday restrictions, but said: “I think people should continue with their plans as normal for Christmas, I think it’s going to be a great Christmas.” Anthony Fauci, US President Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, said on Sunday the US could face a potential Covid “fifth wave” amid rising cases, stagnating vaccination rates and the “troubling” Omicron variant. “Right now we have the window into the mutations that are in this new variant,” Fauci told NBC’s Meet the Press, “and they are troublesome in the fact that there are about 32 or more variants in that very important spike protein of the virus, which is the business end of the virus. “In other words, the profile of the mutations strongly suggest that it’s going to have an advantage in transmissibility and that it might evade immune protection that you would get, for example, from the monoclonal antibody or from the convalescent serum after a person’s been infected and possibly even against some of the vaccine-induced antibodies. “So it’s not necessarily that that’s going to happen, but it’s a strong indication that we really need to be prepared for that.” The US has not yet recorded an Omicron variant infection, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said. Fauci urged the 62 million eligible Americans who are not yet vaccinated to get jabbed. My colleague Victoria Bekiempis in New York has the full story here. Stricter lockdown measures came into effect in the Netherlands on Sunday, as the country sees climbing Covid rates and at least 13 infections of the new Omicron variant. The Netherlands recorded 22,031 new Covid infections on Saturday, up from 13,848 new cases two weeks beforehand. At least 13 travellers flying into Amsterdam on Friday tested positive for the new Omicron strain, which the World Health Organization has labelled a “variant of concern” for its high transmissibility. Public places such as restaraunts, bars, non-essential shops, theatres and cinemas must close between 5pm and 5am amid new curfew measures. The Dutch government has said all non-urgent surgeries, such as hip replacements, will be postponted to free up intensive care beds, after Dutch hospitals warned ICU units could be overwhelmed by the end of the week. Students at schools and colleges in England will need to wear masks again, after the Department for Education told principals and headteachers that face coverings should now be worn in communal areas by staff, visitors and students in year 7 and above. Year 7 is for children aged 11 and is the first year of state secondary school in England. Students and staff who are “suspected or confirmed close contacts of the Omicron variant” will be asked to self-isolate for 10 days regardless of vaccination status or age. Currently only confirmed cases need to isolate. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said: “It appears that the Omicron variant may result in more staff and pupil absence thereby worsening an already very grave situation. “It is therefore imperative that the government provides workforce funding to schools and colleges to help with the cost of supply cover for absent staff. “Schools and colleges are in a position of having to provide in-class teaching for some groups of students, and remote education for other groups of students, at the same time as experiencing Covid-related staff absence. They simply cannot sustain the ongoing costs of the supply cover that is required. “The government must also promote a public campaign to encourage twice-weekly home Covid testing among eligible pupils in order to reduce the risk of transmission. “We have made these calls on many occasions. It is clear that this crisis is not going away, and we once again call upon the government to give the sector the backing that it needs.” Nadhim Zahawi, the education secretary for England, said: “We are taking targeted and proportionate action as a precaution while we find out more information about the new variant.” Zahawi added: “We are working with education and childcare settings to enhance safety measures where needed, including introducing isolation for 10 days for close contacts of suspected Omicron cases.” The UK steps up targeted testing in Brentwood, Essex, one of three places alongside Nottingham and Westminster to record Omicron variant cases. Targeted testing is now underway across Essex, with two locations stressed by authorities. Essex County Council said churchgoers and staff who attended Trinity Church in Pilgrims Hatch on 21 November should take a PCR test, PA reports. The council also said customers, staff and delivery couriers who visited KFC on Brentwood High Street on 19 November between 1pm and 5pm whould take a PCR test. People who tested positive, plus all members of their households, are being re-tested and told to isolate, said the Department of Health &amp; Social Care. Targeted testing is now underway across Essex. Prime minister Boris Johnson said on Saturday that anyone coming into contact with an Omicron-positive person must self-isolate at home for 10 days – whether they are vaccinated or not. Voters in Switzerland firmly backed Covid passes on Sunday. A referendum resulted in 62% approval for the Covid certificate, which requires people to have had a vaccination or antibodies to enter restaurants and other indoor spaces, based on a high 65% turnout. The restrictions have been in place since September. The highest referendum support came from Basel City and Zurich. The result comes after a divisive campaign and rising Covid cases. Switzerland reported 8,033 new Covid cases on Friday, climbing from 3,297 on 25 October, and 15 new deaths. Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European Commission, said the world faces a “race against time” to understand Omicron and potentially combat the new variant. “We know we are now in a race against time,” von der Leyen said on Sunday, AFP reported. She called for the public to take precautions now – so scientists have time to understand Omicron and chart a path forward. “The scientists and manufacturers need two to three weeks to have a full picture about the quality of the mutations of this Omicron variant,” she said. It comes after BioNTech said it could tweak its Covid vaccine, made with Pfizer, in 100 days if needed. “We need to buy time,” she said – urging people to get vaccinated, wear masks and socially distance. What exactly is the Omicron variant? The New York Times has this helpful explainer. Each coronavirus contains nearly 30,000 letters of RNA. This genetic information allows the virus to infect cells and hijack them to make new viruses. Omicron carries about 50 mutations not seen in combination before, including more than 30 mutations on the spike protein that the coronavirus uses to attach to cells. The spike protein has several mutations found in other variants of concern, including D614G, N501Y, K417N and E484A, which lies at the same location as E484K, the “Eek” mutation. More research is needed to determine whether Omicron’s collection of mutations will give the variant an advantage over widely circulating variants like Delta, or cause more severe disease. The UK reported 37,681 new Covid infections in the past 24 hours, down from the 49,344 new positive tests on Friday. The seven-day average is now 43,228 new cases a day. A further 51 Covid-related deaths were reported on Sunday, down from 131 on Saturday and 160 on Friday. (Reported figures tend to be lower at weekends.) In efforts to suppress the virus and stamp out new Omicron cases, the UK will re-introduce temporary measures from Tuesday for compulsory mask-wearing on public transport and in shops. The UK has recorded its third case of the new Omicron variant. The UK Health Security Agency said the individual, who has since left the UK, had travelled to southern Africa. “Our advanced sequencing capabilities enable us to find variants and take rapid action to limit onward spread,” Jenny Harries, chief executive of UKHSA, said in a statement. “It is very likely that we will find more cases over the coming days as we are seeing in other countries globally and as we increase case detection through focused contact tracing.” The Sun’s political editor, Harry Cole, tweets that a big contact tracing operation is under way in the London borough of Westminster, where the individual visited. It’s me, Jem Bartholomew, taking control of the blog from my colleague Charlie Moloney from here. I will be handing over blogging duties very soon. These are the main developments in the pandemic in the past few hours: Authorities in the Netherlands confirmed that 13 people who arrived on flights from South Africa on Friday have so far tested positive for the new omicron coronavirus variant, AP reports. The 61 people who tested positive for the virus on Friday were immediately put into isolation while sequencing was carried out to establish if they had the new variant. Under-40s in the UK “should expect” to get the booster earlier than previously thought. The deputy chair of the the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI ), said there was a “strong argument” for raising immunity in the whole community. The UK health secretary has said there is a reason to think that the Omicron variant may make the current vaccines “less effective”. Sajid Javid said that mandatory mask wearing on public transport and in shops would come into force on Tuesday in a “temporary” measure in response to the new strain. Morocco is suspending all incoming air travel from around the world, starting on Monday, for two weeks because of the rapid spread of the new Omicron variant of coronavirus, its foreign ministry has announced. The ministry tweeted that the decision was taken to “preserve the achievements realised by Morocco in the fight against the pandemic, and to protect the health of citizens”. It noted the spread of Omicron in Africa and Europe, AP reports. Morocco kept its borders closed for months in 2020 because of the pandemic, fearing that its health system would not be able to manage the surges of patients seen in Europe. The kingdom in north Africa has had one of Africa’s highest rates of confirmed infections, but is also at the forefront of the continent’s vaccination effort, with 66% of its population having received at least one dose. Several thousand people protested in Prague against anti-coronavirus restrictions on Sunday as many Czech hospitals halted non-urgent procedures in the face of one of the world’s fastest rates of new infections. Gathered in a park overlooking the Czech capital’s centre, protesters waved national flags and carried signs with slogans such as: “Get vaccinated? Over your dead bodies”. The outgoing government toughened measures on Thursday, including a ban on Christmas markets, which was one of the main themes at Sunday’s rally. “I am here to fight for freedom. I am here because I don’t agree with what is happening today,” Jiri Hulec told Reuters. Czech hospitals, including the largest one, Prague’s Motol, have ceased planned operations and limited other care in the past days as the number of patients with Covid-19 has doubled to around 6,000 over the past three weeks. The top US infectious disease official said Americans should be prepared to fight the spread of the new Covid-19 variant Omicron, but it is too soon to say what actions are needed, including possible mandates or lockdowns. Dr Anthony Fauci told ABC News on Sunday that the United States must do “anything and everything” amid likely cases of the variant, but it was “too early to say” whether new lockdowns or mandates were needed, Reuters reports. He said it was possible that the new variant was already in the United States, although no official case has been confirmed. Germany said on Sunday it had detected a total of three cases of the new Omicron coronavirus variant after a suspected infection in the western state of Hesse was confirmed. “The sequencing has confirmed the result - the suspected case which was made public yesterday morning is the Omicron variant,” Kai Klose, social affairs minister in the state of Hesse tweeted. On Saturday, he said a suspected Omicron case had been found in a passenger arriving from South Africa in Hesse, home to Frankfurt airport, one of Europe’s busiest air hubs. On Saturday, health officials in the southern state of Bavaria detected two cases of the Omicron variant, Reuters reports. Restrictions on air travel from South Africa took effect on Sunday after it was classified as a virus-variant area. This means airlines can fly only Germans to Germany from South Africa and even those who are vaccinated must spend 14 days in quarantine. The expert whose modelling helped instigate the first UK lockdown welcomed the new measures to slow the spread of the Omicron variant of coronavirus but said all options should be kept on the table in case it spreads very rapidly. Prof Neil Ferguson, a member of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage), said he expects to see “substantially larger numbers” of the Omicron variant in the coming days in the UK. He told BBC Radio 4’s The World This Weekend programme: “We together with the Netherlands ... we’re the two European countries with the largest number of passenger flights to and from South Africa, so it’s likely we’ll detect quite a lot more cases in the coming days.” He said he backs the new measures announced by the government as “proportionate” to slow the spread of the new variant during the “waiting game” over the next two weeks as scientists analyse its properties. Craig Revel Horwood said he “hated it” when he could not appear on Strictly Come Dancing last weekend because of a positive Covid test. The judge was absent from the panel for musical week on 20 and 21 November, when he was replaced by Cynthia Erivo. Erivo was back on the panel again the following weekend, when she filled in for Motsi Mabuse, who was unable to travel back to the UK after close contact with someone with a positive test. Revel Horwood told Hello! magazine: “My work ethic is, unless you’re dead you go on stage and Dr Footlights takes care of the rest. “Even when I had my hip replaced, I was back at work on the Saturday. So I just hated it when they said I couldn’t go in.” The Dutch public health authority confirmed on Sunday that 13 people who arrived in the Netherlands on flights from South Africa on Friday have so far tested positive for the new omicron coronavirus variant, AP reports. The 61 people who tested positive for the virus on Friday after arriving on the last two flights to Amsterdam’s Schiphol airport before a flight ban was put in place were immediately put into isolation while sequencing was carried out to establish if they had the new variant. The public health institute said in a statement that testing was continuing on the samples. Most of the 61 people who tested positive were put into isolation at a hotel near the airport, while a small number were allowed to sit out their quarantine at home under strict conditions. “The Omicron variant has so far been identified in 13 of the positive tests. The investigation has not yet been completed. The new variant may be found in more test samples,” the National Institute for Public Health (RIVM) said in a statement. The UK government has confirmed that PCR tests will not be required for any passengers travelling from Ireland, the isle of Man or Channel Islands. Travel will remain free of the new restrictions in the common travel areas. The British embassy in Dublin confirmed the development this morning. The confirmation will be a relief to all the Irish families planning their first Christmas in Ireland in two or three years who may otherwise have reviewed or cancelled trips because of onerous cost of tests. Economics viewpoint: Mandatory face masks are back in England. The fear factor has returned. After months of assuming the Covid-19 pandemic was all but over, the UK government has imposed new restrictions in an attempt to curb the spread of the new Omicron variant of the coronavirus. Financial markets didn’t wait for the announcement from Downing Street. It is far too early to know how big a threat the new strain poses but investors assumed the worst as soon as the reports arrived from southern Africa. Share prices fell heavily, with airline stocks the hardest hit as travel bans were re-introduced. Toughening up restrictions in the west in response to Omicron is a classic case of shutting the stable door after the horse has bolted, because for months the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank have been warning rich developed countries that an end to the pandemic requires poor people as well as rich to be vaccinated. In the UK the deputy chair of the The Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI ), said under-40s “should expect” to get the booster earlier than previously thought because of the Omicron variant. When asked if those aged 18-39 should brace for an extension to the booster programme on Radio 4’s Broadcasting House, Professor Anthony Harnden said: “I think there’s a very good, strong argument for raising the antibody level in the whole of the community. “So, accelerating the booster programme, both by extending the age range and by reducing the interval between the second dose and the booster dose, will be an acceptable strategy.” When pushed on whether people aged 18 and over would be invited to get the booster sooner, he added: “Those adults 18 plus will have an offer of a booster earlier than we had previously envisaged.” The exemption of the common travel area from new Covid-19 restrictions against the Omicron variant has been welcomed by the Irish Foreign Affairs Minister. Simon Coveney clarified that travellers from Ireland to the UK will not be affected by the measures against the new Covid-19 variant. On Saturday the Irish Department of Health announced its own measures to mitigate against Omicron, including mandatory home quarantine regardless of vaccine status. Returning Irish residents will be required to undergo strict home quarantine regardless of vaccine/recovery/test status, and undergo PCR testing during quarantine. The government is “nowhere near” having to reimpose mandatory social distancing and home working to mitigate the threat from the Omicron Covid variant, Sajid Javid has said, adding that he hoped other new measures could be removed within weeks. Beginning a morning of media interviews after Boris Johnson announced rules to combat the variant, including compulsory masks on public transport and in shops, the health secretary called the plans “proportionate and balanced”. The chief medical officer of Moderna has said while Omicron is a “dangerous-looking” variant, he is “optimistic” about fighting it. Dr Paul Burton said: “I think we have cause to be hopeful, we’ve learnt a lot about this virus in general. “You know, we’ve learned so much about how to deal with Covid as well, through simple measures, and obviously through vaccines, but until we see how this virus now behaves in populations of older people, people with other comorbidities. We really want to get a handle on exactly how severe the disease could be, I think.” He added: “This is a dangerous-looking virus, but I think we have many tools in our armamentarium now to get to fight it, so I’m optimistic.” Dr Burton said researchers will have a better idea about the effectiveness of the current vaccines against Omicron in the “next couple of weeks”, but if a new vaccine is required that could be produced on a large scale by early 2022. Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, has urged people to act on the assumption the riskier new Omnicron Covid variant is circulating in Scotland and follow all the existing face-covering and restrictions. Sturgeon told the Andrew Marr programme on BBC1 that the variant, which was first detected in southern Africa, had not yet been found in Scotland. But she added: “I’m asking people to behave in Scotland just now as if it is present.” She said tougher restrictions, including on travel, could be needed if the variant caught hold. The Scottish government has already matched all the restrictions on travel from southern Africa introduced by the UK government for English airports last week. “I think we may need to go further to restrict travel in the next few days,” she said. “I think we need to be open minded to doing anything to keep the population safe right now.” She said that “on the upside”, health experts and ministers knew what to do in these situations, and the vaccines were still effective at limiting its spread and its ill-effects. She urged people to take up vaccines and booster jabs. The doctor who discovered the Omicron variant said the UK was “panicking unnecessarily” and that the symptoms are “extremely mild”. Dr Angelique Coetzee, chair of the South African Medical Association, told The Andrew Marr Show she first encountered the variant in a man in his early 30s who presented with tiredness and a mild headache, but none of the usual coronavirus symptoms. She said: “What we are seeing clinically in south Africa, and remember I’m at the epicentre - that’s where I’m practising - it’s extremely mild. For us, that’s mild cases.” When asked if the UK was “panicking unnecessarily”, she said: “I think you already have it there in your country and you’re not knowing it, and I would say, yes, at this stage I would say definitely. “Two weeks from now maybe we will say something different.” The UK shadow foreign secretary said Labour supports measures on mask wearing but that her party “desperately” wants to see the Government “tighten up” travel restrictions. Speaking to Trevor Phillips On Sunday on Sky News, Lisa Nandy said her party will consider the plans in Parliament on Monday but there are “a number of outstanding holes in our defences” that need to be addressed. Asked if she accepts the Government’s strategy laid out on Saturday, she said: “There is a balance to be struck, I think the Health Secretary is right about that. “We don’t think the Government has been getting the balance right up to now. That’s why we support the measures to bring in greater use of masks, mandatory masks in some settings, and we’ll be asking questions about whether the scientific basis for that suggests that that needs to go further. “We desperately want to see them tighten up the travel restrictions. There is a real problem when for 18 months the Government has been warned that there are holes in those defences and still hasn’t taken action to plug what you rightly suggested are just practical measures that could be dealt with in order to stop the new variant spreading around the country.” The UK health secretary has said he expects the public to comply with the new rules around mask wearing. Speaking to Trevor Phillips on Sky, Sajid Javid said that following the news of a new variant: “I do think people will take this more seriously.” He added that people should make plans for Christmas “as normal” amid questions about another lockdown. Javid said: “I think it’s fair to say that the nature of this pandemic is it would be irresponsible to make guarantees. “As for Christmas, I think people should continue with their plans as normal for Christmas, I think it’s going to be a great Christmas.” Austria has detected its first suspected case of the new Omicron coronavirus variant in the Tirol, Reuters reports. A traveller who returned from South Africa last week tested positive for COVID-19 with indications of the new variant, though confirmation requires further sequencing over the coming days, Tirol authorities said in a statement. South Africa’s discovery of the variant has sparked global concern, a wave of travel bans or curbs and a sell-off on financial markets on investor fears that it could stall recovery from the pandemic. Cases were detected in several European countries on Saturday, including Italy and Germany. Austria had already powered down public life last Monday with its fourth national coronavirus lockdown, becoming the first western European country to reimpose the unpopular measure this autumn owing to surging COVID-19 infections. The UK health secretary has said there is a reason to think that the Omicron variant may make the current vaccines “less effective”. Sajid Javid said that mandatory mask wearing on public transport and in shops would come into force on Tuesday in a “temporary” measure in response to the new strain. Speaking to Trevor Phillips on Sky said the government’s approach was “proportionate and balanced”, but said the impact of the variant on vaccines was not yet known. He said: “There is reason to think that maybe, and I stress the word may, that this variant may turn out to make our vaccines less effective, it may not. We just don’t know enough. “We will learn to live with this.” Javid said that even if Omicron makes vaccines less effective it was still expected to make only a “small impact”. Measures intended to control the spread of the new Omicron coronavirus variant have been described as “a watered-down version of Plan B” by Professor Lawrence Young. The professor of molecular oncology at the University of Warwick said it is a “shame” the measures introduced by Boris Johnson do not go as far as to advise people to work from home and use vaccine passports. Speaking to Times Radio, he said: “I think what we’re looking at at the moment is what I call ‘Plan B lite’. It’s a shame that we’re just not going a little bit further. “That’s not about lockdowns, but it’s about encouraging people to work from home where possible and thinking about how we, you know, dare I say, use some form of vaccine passport just to make sure that we’re all safe. “So, what we heard yesterday, and what’s likely to happen over the next few weeks, is a watered-down version of Plan B and the hope is that that will be sufficient so we don’t end up in a really difficult situation at Christmas.” I will be handing over blogging duties very soon. These are the main developments in the pandemic in the past few hours: Cases of the new Omicron variant of Covid-19 are continuing to be detected in countries across the world. Australia confirmed two cases on Sunday, joining Britain, Germany, Italy and the Czech Republic among others that have declared cases. Boris Johnson said arrivals to the UK have to take a PCR test by the second day of their arrival and self-isolate until they have a negative result after the first cases of the new variant were reported in Nottingham and Essex. Face coverings will also become compulsory in shops and on public transport in the UK from next week. US government expert Dr Anthony Fauci said he “would not be surprised” if the Omicron variant was already in the US. President Joe Biden has been briefed on the situation. Israel is to ban the entry of visitors from all countries due to the Omicron variant. The country will also reintroduce counter-terrorism phone-tracking technology for contact testing in order to contain the spread of the new strain. China would face a ‘colossal” outbreak if it opened up society along the lines of the USA, a study by mathematicians has said. It could have 630,000 Covid-19 infections a day if it dropped its zero-tolerance policies, according to researchers at Peking University. There was concernabout the Omicron variant in the Netherlands after 61 people tested positive for Covid-19 after arriving on two flights from South Africa on Friday. Further tests were under way to determine if any of them had the Omicron variant. Health officials in New South Wales confirmed two cases after people arrived on a flight from southern Africa on Saturday and tested positive to the coronavirus. Some states and territories are tighteniung up their borders to stop any spread, but New South Wales’s opening up plan remains in place. Amid all the concern about Omicron it seems like a good idea to re-up this explainer about what we know about the new variant and what the risks might be: The Maldives said it was barring travellers from seven African countries from Sunday over concerns about the new Omicron variant of COVID-19. Travellers will not be allowed into Maldives from South Africa, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Lesotho and Eswatini, the health ministry said in a statement on Sunday. Travellers who arrived from these countries over the past two days will have to undergo 14 days of quarantine. A quarter of people with severely suppressed immunity that leaves them highly vulnerable to Covid have still not had a third vaccination, according to official figures. The figure emerged just days after NHS England contacted cancer specialists and services across the country asking them to assist in boosting the numbers, with concerns that it means more than 100,000 extremely vulnerable people are yet to have their third jab. A letter from the NHS sent earlier this month said that 30% were still without the third vaccination, which has since fallen to 25%. You can read Michael Savage’s full story here: Back to Australia, and health authorities in New South Wales have confirmed that the two overseas travellers that tested positive overnight have been infected with the new Omicron variant. Both passengers arrived from southern Africa on Saturday evening, and underwent testing last night. Both cases are asymptomatic and in isolation at special health accommodation, and both are fully vaccinated. As curbs spread around Europe along with the new variant, Switzerland has widened quarantine requirements to travellers arriving from Britain, the Czech Republic, the Netherlands, Egypt and Malawi, where cases have been detected, its health ministry said. On Friday, Switzerland banned direct flights from South Africa and the surrounding region due to the detection of a new COVID-19 variant, while also imposing restrictions on travel from other countries including Hong Kong, Israel and Belgium. Entry from those countries would only be possible for Swiss citizens or those with a residence permit in Switzerland or the broader Schengen area. Now, following the detection of new Omicron cases, travellers from Britain, the Czech Republic, the Netherlands, Egypt and Malawi will need to present a negative COVID-19 test and quarantine for ten days as well, the Federal Office of Public Health said in a tweet. The Australian Red Cross has sent a large delivery amount of PPE to Papua New Guinea to be distributed to remote hard-to-reach communities as the nation continues to battle coronavirus. The critical delivery includes: 636,000 surgical masks 65,000 examination gloves 360 infrared thermometers 24,000 bottles of hand-sanitizer PNG has officially confirmed almost 35,000 coronavirus cases and 542 deaths but it is believed many more cases and deaths are going unreported in the nation of nine million where vaccination hesitancy is reported to be high. China could face more than 630,000 Covid-19 infections a day if it dropped its zero-tolerance policies by lifting travel curbs, according to a study by Peking University mathematicians, Reuters reports. In the report by the Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, the mathematicians said China could not afford to lift travel restrictions without more efficient vaccinations or specific treatments. Using data for August from the United States, Britain, Spain, France and Israel, the mathematicians assessed the potential results if China adopted the same pandemic control tactics as those countries. China’s daily new cases would reach at least 637,155 if it adopted the United States’ pandemic strategy, the report said. And daily cases would hit 275,793 if China took the same approach as Britain and 454,198 if it imitated France, it said. “The estimates revealed the real possibility of a colossal outbreak which would almost certainly induce an unaffordable burden on the medical system,” the report said. “Our findings have raised a clear warning that, for the time being, we are not ready to embrace ‘open-up’ strategies resting solely on the hypothesis of herd immunity induced by vaccination advocated by certain western countries.” Germany has reported another 44,401 Covid cases, tasking its total to 5,761,696. There were also another 104 deaths from Covid in the past 24 hours, meaning that 100,883 people have died from the disease. The health ministry in the German state of Bavaria announced on Saturday two confirmed cases of the Omicron variant. The two people entered Germany at Munich airport on 24 November, before Germany designated South Africa as a virus-variant area, and were now isolating, said the ministry, indicating without stating explicitly that the people had travelled from South Africa. World stock markets plunged on Friday as news emerged of the Omicron variant – and futures trading suggests more steep falls when trading resumes on Monday. Wall Street’s Dow Jones industrial average is on course to shed around 2.5% on Monday and the broader S&amp;P500 is tracking for losses of 2.2%. Other major indices are heading the same way with the FTSE100 expected to drop 3.8%, the Hang Seng seen losing 1.2%%, and the Nikkei to drop more than 3%. However, there’s a lot that could happen in the meantime. If evidence emerges that the new variant is not as dangerous as previous ones, markets could rebound very sharply so the futures indices will be closely watched for the next 24 hours in the build up to the next session opening in Asia Pacific. Worth quoting comments by Dr Angelique Coetzee, chair of the South African Medical Association and a practising GP based in Pretoria, who said it was “premature” to make predictions of a health crisis. “It’s all speculation at this stage. It may be it’s highly transmissible, but so far the cases we are seeing are extremely mild,” she said” Australian states and territories are braced for the spread of Omicron, with authorities conceding on Sunday that positive cases were inevitable. Both the NSW and Victorian governments have introduced 72-hour isolation requirements for all fully vaccinated international arrivals, regardless of where they have arrived from. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard said the new variant may “already be here” and that little is known about it. “What we do know is that it’s going to be hard to ascertain just how many people are here who have been in those African nations.” Full story here: Israel is banning the entry of all foreigners into the country, making it the first country to shut its borders completely in response to the Omicron variant. It also said it would use counter-terrorism phone-tracking technology in order to contain the spread of the Omicron variant. Naftali Bennett, the prime minister, said in a statement that the ban, pending government approval, would last 14 days. Officials hope that within that period there will be more information on how effective COVID-19 vaccines are against Omicron, which was first detected in South Africa and has been dubbed a “variant of concern” by the World Health Organization. “Our working hypotheses are that the variant is already in nearly every country,” interior minister Ayelet Shaked told N12’s “Meet the Press,” “and that the vaccine is effective, although we don’t yet know to what degree.” Israelis entering the country, including those who are vaccinated, will be required to quarantine, Bennett said. The ban will come into effect at midnight between Sunday and Monday. A travel ban on foreigners coming from most African states was imposed on Friday. A hospital in the northern Czech city of Liberec has confirmed a case of the Omicron strain in a female patient, a spokesman told Czech Television on Saturday. Czech prime minister Andrej Babis said earlier Saturday that the woman had been in Namibia and flew back to the Czech Republic via South Africa and Dubai. Babis said the woman was vaccinated and had mild symptoms of the disease. “Given where the patient came from and all the circumstances, we can confirm the strain has been confirmed,” the spokesman added. The Czech Republic is currently grappling with a spike in Covid-19 infections making it one of the worst-hit countries in the world in terms of infections per capita. Australia’s federal health minister said he was meeting the prime minister, Scott Morrison, and the chief health officer, and state and territory counterparts to discuss developments around the Omicron Covid-19 variant. Greg Hunt did a swift u-turn on Saturday by shutting the country’s border with South Africa and reinstating mandatory quarantine for arrivals from nine southern African countries as concerns about Omicron mounted. States such as South Australia are already tightening up their borders again after only beginning to emerge from the Delta lockdown in place in much of the country since June and July. New South Wales, however, is sticking with its reopening plan. State premier Dominic Perrottet said it was “inevitable” that more variants will emerge and enter Australia, and said the state was taking a “precautionary approach” with the changes to international arrivals announced yesterday. “We need to learn to live alongside the virus and to live alongside the various strains of the virus that will come our way, and the best thing we can do is get vaccinated and get booster shots,” he said. “Urgent” genomic sequencing is under way after two passengers on a Qatar Airways flight arrived in Sydney on Saturday night. Perrottet confirmed that 29 people arrived in Sydney yesterday, after spending time in southern Africa. Mexico recorded 245 coronavirus deaths on Saturday and an additional 2,956 confirmed cases, according to health ministry data, bringing the overall death toll to 293,859 and the number of cases to 3,882,792. The US has praised South Africa for quickly identifying the Omicron strain and sharing the information with the world, AFP reports. In what has been viewed as a swipe at China’s handling of the original outbreak of Covid in 2019, secretary of state Antony Blinken spoke with South Africa’s international relations and cooperation minister, Naledi Pandor, and discussed cooperation on vaccinating people in Africa. “Secretary Blinken specifically praised South Africa’s scientists for the quick identification of the Omicron variant and South Africa’s government for its transparency in sharing this information, which should serve as a model for the world,” a statement from the State Department said. First under Donald Trump and now under president Joe Biden, the US has repeatedly criticised China as not being forthcoming on the origins of the coronavirus. Morning/afternoon/evening wherever you are in the world, and welcome to the Guardian’s rolling updates about the coronavirus pandemic. The main developoments in the past 24 hours or so concern the rush to contain the Omicron variant as cases are detected in countries around the world. Here is a quick summary of where we are: Britain, Germany, Italy and the Czech Republic detected cases of the new Omicron coronavirus variant on Saturday. There was also concern in the Netherlands after 61 people tested positive for Covid-19 after arriving on two flights from South Africa on Friday. Further tests were under way to determine if any of them had the Omicron variant. Boris Johnson said arrivals to the UK have to take a PCR test by the second day of their arrival and self-isolate until they have a negative result after the first two cases of the new variant were reported in Nottingham and Essex. Face coverings will also become compulsory in shops and on public transport in the UK from next week. US government expert Dr Anthony Fauci said he “would not be surprised” if the Omicron variant was already in the US. President Joe Biden has been briefed on the situation. Israel is to ban the entry of visitors from all countries due to the Omicron variant. The country will also reintroduce counter-terrorism phone-tracking technology for contact testing in order to contain the spread of the new strain. Health officials in New South Wales, Australia, have begun urgent testing after two people who arrived on a flight from southern Africa overnight tested positive to the coronavirus. But the state’s opening up plan remains in place for now. Follow all the developments in Australia at our separate live blog here. Two people with the new variant entered Germany at Munich airport on 24 November, before South Africa was designated a virus variant area and were now isolating, Bavaria’s health ministry said. Earlier, officials in the western state of Hesse, home to Frankfurt airport, said a suspected case of the Omicron variant had been found in a passenger arriving from South Africa. A case of the Omicron variant has been detected in Italy. The genome was sequenced at the Laboratory of Clinical Microbiology, Virology and Bioemergency Diagnostics of the Sacco Hospital in Milan from a positive sample of a patient coming from Mozambique.“Folks say that as we get on, life is a series of indignities,” muses a judge to a police chief in a small American town. “I’m not sure I see it that way. Because once you don’t give a shit how you look or what people think, then nothing seems like an indignity.” He Irishes up his coffee with whiskey. “If my man boobs are blocking the view of my shoes, so what?” It’s a good question, the kind of lugubrious, cod-philosophical rhetoric that bejewels the dramatic wasteland of American Rust (Sky Atlantic). But there is a problem. Between page and shot, the man boobs have gone walkies, and it’s the judge’s beer belly that is obscuring his shoes. Is nobody paying attention to continuity? For many years now, adding “American” to a title has not only burned my British biscuits, but served as a guarantor of suckery. American Beauty? Sucked. American Gothic? Sucked. An American Werewolf in London? Sucked, and was historically inaccurate. American Sniper? Don’t even. American Psycho? A rare exception. Could American Rust buck the trend? Not according to the US reviews that come trailing the show like a cloud of stink. Indeed, the opening episode lurches from cliche to cliche. A depressed police chief in unbecoming plaid (played by Jeff Daniels with all the pep of previous roles removed) unsurprised at human folly and venality? Check. Another cop – an Iraq war veteran – wondering if the antidepressants are neutralising the amphetamines, or vice versa? Check. A lantern-jawed twentysomething doomed to be stuck in a small town after not taking up a football scholarship? Check. A fireball with grim blue-collar job and a horrible ex? Check. Hundred per cent cloud cover and a palette of bleached-out browns and greys? Check. Predictably, the police chief, Del Harris, is navigating a doomed romance with the fireball, Grace Poe (played by Maura Tierney, best known as Abby in ER). There are also after-hours brawls in car parks, and more duelling banjos on the soundtrack than John Boorman programmed in Deliverance. Meanwhile, we also have the sense that the leading cultural activity is – as in The Deer Hunter – exterminating local wildlife, and there’s a conspiracy over a body found in the old mill. And yet, for all of its boilerplate qualities, American Rust doesn’t stink as much as forecast. Partly this is because of the script, which – thanks to some good, understated dialogue – bucks the general mood , ie that this show was not so much written as collaged from odds and ends of other police procedurals. It’s also because Daniels and Tierney remind me so much of David Harbour and Winona Ryder in Stranger Things. Even so, it isn’t great. The first episode opens with Harris in front of a pestle, mortar, scales and knife, measuring out his meds very, very slowly. No doubt, this scene is intended to simulate the opioid fog that has enervated this Pennsylvania valley, but that surely is an aesthetic mistake: viewers are supposed to sense others’ enervation, rather than losing the will to live themselves just four minutes in to the show. Worse yet, the ritual is recycled repeatedly, as though Harris is locked in some opioid Groundhog Day. It’s as if Mare of Easttown never existed. Once again, we are in a washed-out burg with a sad-eyed cop who’s unlucky in love, slow in locomotion, but with their heart in the right place and the safety off their gun just in case things turn nasty. If you’re a superfan who started vaping and wearing unbuttoned flannel shirts to emulate Mare Sheehan (Kate Winslet) – the anti-style icon of Mare of Easttown – then American Rust might be what you need to get you to the end of 2021. But it probably isn’t. This is all surprising given that John Dahl – director of 90s stylish neo-noir movies Red Rock West and The Last Seduction – helmed this opening episode (and four of the other eight). If you are going to tell another story about the underclass struggling on the fuzzy end of the economic lollipop (we learn that there is 12% unemployment in this fictional town and personal income here is 25% lower than the rest of Pennsylvania; no doubt we will own find out that many of the downtrodden workers gave Trump an electoral bump), at least make drama that doesn’t look and feel as though we have been here too many times already. But perhaps what the judge said is right. After a while, dignity becomes expendable.Joe Biden’s chief medical adviser, Anthony Fauci, said on Sunday the US has “the potential to go into a fifth wave” of coronavirus infections amid rising cases and stagnating vaccination rates. He also warned that the newly discovered Omicron variant shows signs of heightened transmissibility. As Fauci toured the political talkshows, countries around the world including the US scrambled to guard against Omicron, which has stoked fears of vaccine resistance. On Sunday evening, shortly after the first Omicron cases in North America were confirmed in Canada, the White House said Biden met Fauci and other advisers on returning to Washington from holiday in Nantucket. Fauci, a statement said, “informed the president that while it will take approximately two more weeks to have more definitive information on the transmissibility, severity, and other characteristics of the variant, he continues to believe that existing vaccines are likely to provide a degree of protection against severe cases of Covid”. The statement also said those already vaccinated should receive booster shots. Biden would “provide an update about the new variant and the US response on Monday”, the White House said. Earlier, Fauci discussed why Omicron has raised such alarm. “Right now we have the window into the mutations that are in this new variant,” he told NBC, “and they are troublesome in the fact that there are about 32 or more variants in that very important spike protein of the virus, which is the business end of the virus. “In other words, the profile of the mutations strongly suggest that it’s going to have an advantage in transmissibility and that it might evade immune protection that you would get, for example, from the monoclonal antibody or from the convalescent serum after a person’s been infected and possibly even against some of the vaccine-induced antibodies. “So it’s not necessarily that that’s going to happen, but it’s a strong indication that we really need to be prepared for that.” Fauci also pointed to how Covid case numbers shifted dramatically in South Africa, where Omicron was discovered, over a short period. “You were having a low level of infection, and then all of a sudden there was this big spike … and when the South Africans looked at it, they said, ‘Oh my goodness. This is a different virus than we’ve been dealing with.’ “So it clearly is giving indication that it has the capability of transmitting rapidly. That’s the thing that’s causing us now to be concerned, but also to put the pressure on ourselves now to do something about our presentation for this.” The federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has said no Omicron cases have been discovered in the US. Fauci said: “As we all know, when you have a virus that has already gone to multiple countries, inevitably, it will be here.” On CBS, Fauci said any fifth wave of cases “will really be dependent upon what we do in the next few weeks to a couple of months”. “We have now about 62 million people in the country who are eligible to be vaccinated,” he said, “who have not yet gotten vaccinated. “Superimpose upon that the fact that, unquestionably, the people who got vaccinated six, seven, eight, nine, 10 months ago, we’re starting to see an understandable diminution in the level of immunity. It’s called waning immunity, and it was seen more emphatically in other countries before we saw it here.” Fauci said an increase in immunization rates and booster shots might prevent another surge – but the US had to act fast. “So if we now do what I’m talking about in an intense way, we may be able to blunt that,” he said. “If we don’t do it successfully, it is certainly conceivable and maybe likely that we will see another bit of a surge. How bad it gets is dependent upon us and how we mitigate.” Politically charged resistance would seem to make a rapid increase in vaccination rates unlikely. While more than 70% of US adults are fully vaccinated, the most recent CDC data indicated cases up 16% over the previous week. By Sunday there had been 48,202,506 cases in the US with 776,537 deaths, according to Johns Hopkins University. Francis Collins, director of the National Institutes of Health, also discussed the Omicron variant on Sunday. “I think the main thing that has us focused on this,” he told CNN, “… is that it has so many mutations.” Collins also said there were “good reasons to think it will probably be OK but we need to know the real answers to that and that’s going to take two or three weeks”. On Friday, Biden said the US would join other countries and impose restrictions on travel from southern Africa from Monday. Collins said: “I know, America, you’re really tired of hearing these things, but the virus is not tired of us and it’s shape-shifting itself. If you imagine we’re on a racetrack here … it’s trying to catch up with us, and we have to use every kind of tool in our toolbox to keep that from getting into a situation that makes this worse. “We can do this but we have to do it all together.” On CBS, Fauci was also asked about Republican attacks over federal research before the pandemic and his role in the Trump administration. “Anybody who’s looking at this carefully realizes that there’s a distinct anti-science flavor to this,” he said. “They’re really criticizing science because I represent science. That’s dangerous. To me, that’s more dangerous than the slings and the arrows that get thrown at me.” Asked if he thought attacks were meant to scapegoat him and deflect attention from Donald Trump’s failures, Fauci said: “You have to be asleep not to figure that one out.” “I’m just going to do my job and I’m going to be saving lives and they’re going to be lying,” he said.Donald Trump has challenged leading editors and politicians to debate him in public over his lie that Joe Biden beat him in 2020 through electoral fraud. In a typically rambling statement on Sunday, the former president complained about “the heads of the various papers [and] far left politicians” and said: “If anyone would like a public debate on the facts, not the fiction, please let me know. It will be a ratings bonanza for television!” Despite Trump’s insistence that “the 2020 election was rigged and stolen” – and his well-known fixation on TV ratings – it was not. Even William Barr, an attorney general widely seen as willing to run interference for Trump, publicly stated there was no evidence of widespread electoral fraud. Biden beat Trump by more than 7m in the popular vote and by 306-232 in the electoral college, a result Trump called a landslide when he beat Hillary Clinton by it in 2016. Clinton also beat him in the popular vote. Trump’s proposal of a public debate – which seemed unlikely to bear fruit – extended to what he called “members of the highly partisan unselect committee of Democrats who refuse to delve into what caused the 6 January protest”. The attack on the US Capitol, Trump said, was caused by “the fake election results”. In a way, he was right. It was his lies about the election which led to the deaths of five people around the attack on Congress by a mob seeking to stop certification of Biden’s win, some chanting that Trump’s vice-president, Mike Pence, should be hanged. At a rally near the White House shortly before the riot, Trump told supporters to “fight like hell” in his cause. He was impeached for inciting an insurrection but acquitted when only seven GOP senators found him guilty, not enough to convict. On Sunday, Adam Schiff, the Democratic chair of the House intelligence committee and a member of the 6 January panel, told CNN: “We tried to hold the former president accountable through impeachment. That’s the remedy that we have in Congress. We are now trying to expose the full facts of the former president’s misconduct as well as those around him.” To adapt the Tennessee Republican Howard Baker’s famous question about Richard Nixon and Watergate, the House committee is focusing on what Trump knew about plans for protest and possible violence on 6 January – and when he knew it. Numerous Trump aides and allies have been served with subpoenas. Most, like the former White House strategist Steve Bannon, who has pleaded not guilty to contempt of Congress in the first such case since 1983, have refused to cooperate. Schiff said a decision on a possible contempt charge for Mark Meadows, Trump’s last White House chief of staff, would likely be made in the coming week. It seems unlikely any senior figure in the US media or among Democrats in Congress or state governments will take up Trump’s challenge to debate him in public. Observers including the former New Jersey governor Chris Christie, who helped Trump prepare for his debates against Biden, agree that a near-berserk performance in the first such contest did significant damage to Trump’s chances of re-election. At one point on a chaotic evening in Cleveland in September, Biden was so exasperated as to plead: “Would you shut up, man? This is so unpresidential.”Britain and Israel will sign a 10-year trade and defence pact in London on Monday, promising cooperation on issues such as cybersecurity and a joint commitment to prevent Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons. The agreement was announced by Liz Truss, the foreign secretary, and her Israeli counterpart Yair Lapid, despite evidence that spyware made by Israeli company NSO Group had probably been used to spy on two British lawyers advising the ex-wife of the ruler of Dubai, Princess Haya. In a joint article in the Daily Telegraph, Truss and Lapid said the agreement amounted to “a new strategic plan for the next decade spanning cyber, tech, trade and defence,” while the two countries would “work night and day to prevent the Iranian regime from ever becoming a nuclear power”. The ministers added that the two countries would “work closer” to defend themselves in cyberspace, while Israel would become a tier one cyber partner for the UK and have greater access to the British market. “Our partnership will keep us at the forefront of the technological revolution,” Truss and Lapid added. Just over a week ago, Priti Patel, the home secretary, announced that the UK would proscribe the political wing of Palestinian political group Hamas, bringing the UK in line with the US and the EU. “Hamas is fundamentally and rabidly antisemitic,” Patel said in a speech she gave in Washington DC. But it comes after a British court ruled that NSO’s Pegasus spyware had been used against divorce lawyer Lady Shackleton, and an associate, at a time when they were advising Princess Haya in a child protection battle being played out in the UK. British complaints at the time were relatively muted, although sources close to the company said it had altered its software to prevent +44 UK numbers from being spied on again. NSO technology has since been put on a US blacklist, citing use of the company’s software by regimes around the world for “transnational repression”. Meanwhile, talks with Iran on salvaging the 2015 nuclear deal restart on Monday in Vienna after a five-month break, although there is little hope of a breakthrough that would allow the US to rejoin the agreement given Tehran’s negotiating demands. Nevertheless, in the joint statement by the foreign ministers, Britain seeks to reassure Israel that it will remain vigilant on the issue. “We will also work night and day to prevent the Iranian regime from ever becoming a nuclear power. The clock is ticking, which heightens the need for close cooperation with our partners and friends to thwart Tehran’s ambitions,” Truss and Lapid said.