Misinformation and sceptical views about Covid-19 and vaccines has been allowed to spread on more than a dozen Facebook and Instagram accounts, pages and groups that together have gained 370,000 followers over the past year, according to a report. The misinformation and promotion of vaccine hesitancy includes posts in Facebook groups claiming that children are being “murdered by the experimental jab they’re being pressured to take”, and an Instagram account promoting a documentary by Andrew Wakefield, one of the key figures in promoting discredited links between MMR inoculation and autism. The 20 accounts, pages and groups have been tracked by NewsGuard, an organisation that monitors online misinformation. Since September last year NewsGuard has submitted regular reports to the World Health Organization, at the WHO’s request, flagging social media sites and other digital platforms that are spreading falsehoods about Covid-19. In research published on Tuesday, NewsGuard said 20 of the sites that it had monitored over that period had gained a total of 372,670 followers. A full report containing the research has been sent to the WHO. The NewsGuard research points to prominent sources of vaccine scepticism such as the Facebook pages of Robert F Kennedy Jr, a prominent anti-vaxxer, and Joseph Mercola, an alternative medicine doctor, as well as smaller sources such as the France Soir account on Instagram. Kennedy was banned from Instagram over his vaccine stance in February but his Facebook page and Mercola’s Instagram account have gained more than 140,000 followers since February, according to NewsGuard. Mercola has said he has “every right to inform the public by sharing my medical research”. Facebook came under pressure to ban Kennedy, the nephew of President John F Kennedy, in March when he released a documentary, Medical Racism, which has been accused of seeking to promote vaccine hesitancy among black Americans. Kennedy has said the film “empowers all Americans to demand the safest vaccines”. Facebook and Instagram are both owned by Meta, the company that until a rebranding last week was known as Facebook. Alex Cardier, the UK managing director for NewsGuard, said Facebook and Instagram were failing to protect their users from Covid-19 and vaccine misinformation despite having been warned “repeatedly”. He said: “The company’s engagement-at-all-costs mantra means that viral and divisive sources of misinformation continue to flourish, despite warnings from NewsGuard and the clear danger posed to users. Facebook gave itself a new name but their promotion of misinformation remains the same.” A Meta spokesperson said the company was encouraging users of its platforms to get vaccinated and it was taking action against misinformation. “During the pandemic we have removed more than 20m pieces of harmful misinformation and we’ve taken down content identified in this report which violates our rules. In total we’ve now banned more than 3,000 accounts, pages and groups for repeatedly breaking our rules. We’re also labelling all posts about the vaccines with accurate information and worked with independent factcheckers to mark 190m posts as false.” In an effort to reassure users on the efficacy of vaccines, several of the Facebook pages highlighted by NewsGuard contained Facebook labels directing users to a WHO page on vaccines or the company’s own Covid-19 information centre page. Meta announced last week that was stepping up efforts to promote vaccination efforts for children on its apps.That’s it from me, Samantha Lock, for today. Please join us a little later for when we launch our next Covid blog. In the meantime follow along with all the latest global headlines here. Unvaccinated Australians who have lost their jobs for refusing to comply with Covid vaccine mandates are using social media to find and share employment opportunities at workplaces where the new rules are not being enforced. Telegram and Facebook have had an influx of people searching for paid jobs after states and territories implemented mandates covering a range of industries from health and aged care workers, teachers and police to construction and hospitality workers. On some job boards, businesses that are happy to accept unvaccinated people advertise that they are “welcoming of everyone”. Beauty therapists, childcare workers, disability support workers and accountants are among 20,000 people who are members of the largest group for unvaccinated jobseekers in Australia. Read the full story here. Brazil registers 98 new Covid-19 deaths on Monday, the lowest number since April 2020. The Health Ministry also reported 3,838 additional confirmed cases of the coronavirus on Monday. Brazil has reported 607,922 deaths due to the virus, the world’s second highest tally behind only the United States. Hawaii holds on to virus restrictions even as Covid cases plummet. Hawaii remains among the most restrictive US states for Covid-19 mandates, despite having one of the highest vaccination rates in the country. Various state and county rules have changed often, leaving some businesses, travellers and residents confused and frustrated. Hawaii Governor David Ige said earlier this year that all restrictions would end once 70% of the population was fully vaccinated. But a surge of delta variant cases filled hospitals and extended rules to guard against Covid-19. Now, case counts have dropped and about 83% of eligible Hawaii residents are fully vaccinated. But many rules remain in place. In early July, most US states had scaled back mask and other coronavirus restrictions. The delta variant surge pushed some jurisdictions to reinstate rules, but many are again easing as cases currently plummet. Good morning from sunny Sydney, Australia. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be bringing you the latest Covid headlines for the next short while. Over here in Australia it’s promising news for Victoria, the state most embattled by Covid. Victoria has recorded 989 new Covid-19 cases as lockdown is eased. It is the lowest daily case number since 986 infections were recorded for 27 September. There are 19,409 active cases in the state and the death toll stands at 1134. I’m handing over to my colleague Samantha Lock now, here’s a summary of the evenings news. Summary The United States is rolling out Pfizer/BioNTech Covid-19 vaccines for children aged 5 to 11 this week, but most of the 15 million shots being shipped initially are unlikely to be available before next week In Tennessee in the United States the state’s general assembly has passed laws that will make it harder for bodies like schools to bring in measures to restrict the spread of Covid – including masks for children. In Australia the state of New South Wales is looking to take advantage of lifted travel restrictions in the run-up to Christmas as the tourism and hospitality sectors seek to make up for losses endured during months of Covid-19 lockdown. Cambodia’s prime minister, Hun Sen, declared the country open and ready for a new way of life after hitting vaccination targets that made it one of the most vaccinated countries in south Asia. In the United States, as deadlines for jabs approach, military leaders are wrestling with the decision of how to treat soldiers who choose not to be vaccinated. A total of 49,987,325 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine have been delivered in the UK by 31 October, a rise of 27,402 on the previous day, government figures show. Of the 377 local areas in the UK, 64 have seen a week-on-week rise in rates while the majority – 313 – have seen a fall. In Greece, officials alarmed by the steep rise in Covid-19 infections are poised to implement a new round of restrictive measures for those who remain unvaccinated. As Australia begins to reopen its international borders for fully vaccinated citizens, politicians are debating about the ongoing restrictions on internal travel. The US government has begun assembling and shipping millions of Covid-19 vaccines in preparation for getting the go-ahead to jab children aged five to 11. The United States is extending Pfizer/BioNTech Covid-19 vaccinations to children aged 5 to 11 this week, but most of the 15 million shots being shipped initially are unlikely to be available before next week, the White House said today. Millions of doses specifically formulated for children of that age group will start arriving at distribution centres over the next few days, Reuters reports In the US, Tennessee’s general assembly has passed laws that will make it harder for bodies like schools to bring in measures to restrict the spread of Covid – including masks for children. The strict new rules are part of a sweeping bill Republicans signed off on in the middle of the night over the weekend. Tennessee continues to experience some of the lowest Covid-19 vaccination rates in the United States even after recording some of the highest case counts, deaths and hospitalisation rates in the nation. Under the proposal, government entities – including schools – would largely be prohibited from implementing mask mandates. Those entities would only be allowed to require masks if they lived in a county with a rolling average 14-day Covid-19 infection rate of at least 1,000 per 100,000 resident while the state is under a state of emergency. The state is currently far below that threshold. In Australia the state of New South Wales (NSW) is looking to take advantage of lifted travel restrictions in the run up to Christmas as the tourism and hospitality sectors seek to make up for losses endured during months of COVID-19 lockdown. Tourism &amp; Transport Forum CEO Margy Osmond told the Australian Associated Press that the industry has been losing close to $4 billion a month with virtually no international visitors for almost two years. On Monday NSW began welcoming Australians home without quarantine and fully-vaccinated people are now free to travel anywhere in the state, triggering the revival of of the hard-hit regional tourism and hospitality sectors. “What makes this Christmas very different from last Christmas is the fact that there’s joy in the air,” Ms Osmond told the Nine Network on Tuesday. “I think there’s a different kind of spirit this Christmas. It’s going to be a very celebratory one,” she said. However, states like Queensland, WA and the Northern Territory that have yet to open up to international tourists will miss out. “They are not going to be getting the sort of Christmas summer holiday boost they might have expected because their opening is going to so late,” Ms Osmond said. “If we have any chance of getting international tourists back, you are hoping to come to lovely Sydney, of course, but you’re hoping to go to the Great Barrier Reef or Uluru or Ningaloo or the Barossa. “We need certainty around borders for people to be planning those long-distant trips.” Qantas flight QF1 left Sydney on Monday night bound for London via Darwin carrying outbound vaccinated Australians. Flights also arrived at Sydney International Airport from the US, Singapore, Japan, Vietnam, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, New Caledonia, Hong Kong, Fiji and Dubai on the first day of quarantine-free travel for vaccinated Australian citizens, permanent residents and their immediate families. Cambodia’s Prime Minister Hun Sen declared the country reopen and ready for a new way of life today after hitting vaccination targets that made it one of the most vaccinated countries in south Asia. Today alone around 300,000 school children were jabbed, with 86% of its population now vaccinated, Reuters reports. Hun Sen, said it was time to get on with life. “From now on, the full reopening of the country in all areas and living with COVID-19 in a new way of life starts from today,” he said. Cambodia has recorded more than 118,522 coronavirus cases and 2,788 deaths overall, the vast majority this year. The country, among the poorest in Asia, has been lauded for its early success in administering vaccines. Hun Sen said the government had a supply of 10 million doses of COVID-19 vaccine for boosters and more were on order. The country reopened its theatres and museums at the weekend, reflecting a decline in new coronavirus cases. It will also reopen three tourist locations to vaccinated visitors from the end of this month, with quarantine reduced to five days in Sihanoukville, nearby Koh Rong and Koh Kong provinces. In the United States, military leaders are wrestling with the decision of how to treat soldiers who choose not to be vaccinated the Associated Press reports. Deadlines loom for military and defense civilians to get the Covid jab and while the vast majority of the active duty force has received at least one shot, tens of thousands have not. For some it may be a career-ending decision. Others could face transfers, travel restrictions, limits on deployments and requirements to repay bonuses. Exemption decisions for medical, religious and administrative reasons will be made by unit commanders around the world, on what the Pentagon says will be a “case-by-case” basis. That raises a vexing issue for military leaders who are pushing a vaccine mandate seen as critical to maintaining a healthy force, but want to avoid a haphazard, inconsistent approach with those who refuse. Brig. Gen. Darrin Cox, surgeon general at Army Forces Command, said commanders want to ensure they are following the rules. “Because of some of the sensitivities of this particular vaccine, I think that we just wanted to ensure that we were consistent and equitable” in meting out a punishment that would be “a repercussion of continuing to refuse a valid order.” Military vaccination rates are higher than those of the general population in the United States but unlike most civilians, military personnel are routinely required to get as many as 17 vaccines, and face penalties for refusing. The military services are reporting between 1%-7% remain unvaccinated. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin has called for compassion in dealings with those troops, which totals nearly 60,000 active duty service members, according to data released last week. Officials say the numbers change daily, and include those who may have gotten or requested an exemption. They have declined to say how many troops are still seeking an exemption or refused the vaccine. The Air Force may be the test case, because they are the first to hit a deadline. The more than 335,000 airmen and Space Force guardians must be fully vaccinated by Tuesday, and the Air Guard and Reserve by Dec. 2. According to Air Force data, as many as 12,000 active duty airmen and guardians were still unvaccinated as of late last week. Some have requested or gotten exemptions, others have refused outright. They have until Monday to request exemptions. The nearly 350,000 Navy sailors and more than 179,000 Marines must be fully vaccinated by Nov. 28, and the reserves by Dec. 28. The Army, the military’s largest service at nearly 490,000, has given active duty soldiers until Dec. 15 to be fully vaccinated. A total of 49,987,325 first doses of Covid-19 vaccine have been delivered in the UK by October 31, a rise of 27,402 on the previous day, Government figures show. Some 45,712,351 second doses have been delivered, an increase of 13,449. A combined total of 8,115,229 booster and third doses have also been delivered, a day-on-day rise of 163,949. The Press Association has released figures that look at which parts of the UK have the highest Covid rates at the moment. Of the 377 local areas in the UK, 64 have seen a week-on-week rise in rates while the majority - 313 - have seen a fall. The rate is expressed as the number of new cases per 100,000 people. Tewkesbury in Gloucestershire continues to have the highest rate in the UK, with 803 new cases in the seven days to October 28 - the equivalent of 831.1 per 100,000 people. This is down from 1,216.1 in the seven days to October 21. Stroud in Gloucestershire has the second highest rate, down from 1,206.8 to 771.7, with 933 new cases. Torfaen in Wales has the third highest rate, down from 1,059.8 to 769.8, with 730 new cases. Clackmannanshire has the highest rate in Scotland (633.7) and Antrim &amp; Newtownabbey has the highest rate in Northern Ireland (571.1). In Greece, officials alarmed by the steep rise in Covid-19 infections are poised to implement a new round of restrictive measures for those who remain unvaccinated. On Monday – hours after the Greek government spokesman confirmed “the adjustments” – the public health body, EODY, announced that the country had set a new record of 5,449 cases in the previous 24 hours. With a further 52 Covid-related fatalities, the death toll fell just short of 16,000, less than four weeks after it crossed the 15,000 mark. Epidemiologists are now talking of an epidemic among the unvaccinated in a nation where just 60.5 % have had the shot. Of the 430 patients in intensive care, 84.7% are only partially inoculated or haven’t had the jab at all. The new measures, which are expected to be unveiled on Wednesday, are likely to be applied in areas of high transmissibility and will affect unvaccinated citizens most, Giannis Oikonomou, the government spokesman, said. “The state has done everything possible for life to return to normal. The refusal to vaccinate is an act that is potentially suicidal for the people who refuse to protect themselves and at the same time is socially damaging and irresponsible.” In what would amount to a night-time lockdown for those who have not had the jab, further restrictions at eateries and entertainment venues are among some of the measures being contemplated. A text message campaign to persuade hesitant Greeks to have the vaccine is also on the cards, as is the prospect of vaccinations being made mandatory in sectors where interaction is commonplace. As Australia begins to reopen its international borders for fully vaccinated citizens, politicians are debating the ongoing restrictions on internal travel. “It is absurd that you can travel to Singapore but not to Perth,” government treasurer Josh Frydenberg said, criticising the harsh border stance of Western Australia’s Premier Mark McGowan. He added: “We need to bring an end to that and make sure all borders are open at the first possible opportunity.” Mr McGowan has refused to budge on reopening WA to the rest of the country. Covid travel restrictions have been eased in many jurisdictions as key vaccine targets are reached, with state and territory leaders setting out road maps for border measures to be relaxed. The western state is the least vaccinated jurisdiction in the country, with just 63.3 per cent of its over 16s being fully immunised. “We have a virtually unique opportunity to get to very high levels of vaccination before such time as we have Covid come in,” Mr McGowan said. “Really, it’s a matter of a few months. We’re heading towards the end of this, we’re just going to remain safe whilst we get there.” Acting Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce hit out at Mr McGowan’s refusal, indicating those in Western Australia would soon want to have free travel arrangements like other jurisdictions. “We’re all going to be jumping on planes and flying to other parts of the world,” Mr Joyce told reporters. “If you want to live and stay in Western Australia forever more, I don’t think (Western Australians) will, (they) will want to go overseas with us.” It comes as the medical regulator cleared the way for more travellers from overseas to come to Australia. The Therapeutic Goods Administration on Monday approved the Indian-made Covaxin and the Chinese-made BBIBP-CorV vaccine. As part of the reopening plan, only travellers immunised with a TGA-recognised vaccine will be able to come to Australia without having to quarantine. Currently, international travel is limited to flights out of Sydney and Melbourne, but that will expand to other cities once vaccination rates increase. The US government has begun assembling and shipping millions of Covid-19 vaccines in preparation for getting the go-ahead to jab children aged five to 11. The White House said today that children could start being vaccinated as soon as the middle of this week. “We are not waiting on the operations and logistics,” said coronavirus coordinator Jeff Zients. On Tuesday, a special advisory panel to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) will meet to consider detailed recommendations for administering the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine to younger children. The FDA has already approved the use of the vaccine in young children and since then workers at the drug company and at distribution centres have been preparing and packing 15 million doses, said Zients. Pfizer’s vaccine has already has been authorised for use in older children. The goal is for parents to have a range of options for getting children vaccinated, from paediatricians’ offices to clinics and pharmacies.The director of the CDC, Dr Rochelle Walensky, stressed that clinical trials of the Pfizer vaccine for children have found it highly effective in preventing serious disease, with no severe adverse reactions in safety and efficacy trials. Separately, Zients announced that about 70% of US adults are now fully vaccinated, while 80% have received at least one vaccine dose. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, for today. I’m handing over to my colleague Harriet Grant. Here’s a quick roundup of what’s been happening so far: The global death toll from Covid-19 has hit five million, 19 months after the pandemic was first declared, according to figures released from the Johns Hopkins University. Some experts, including a number from the World Health Organization, believe the true toll may be two to three times higher than official figures suggest. Indonesia has given the world’s first emergency use authorisation for the Covid vaccine produced by Novavax. The company’s protein-based vaccine could prove hugely important for lower-income countries and the WHO-backed vaccine access scheme Covax. Greece recorded 5,449 new coronavirus infections in the latest 24-hour period, the highest single-day figure since the pandemic began. One in four people in their mid-30s to mid-50s in England are no longer following the full rules for self-isolation after a positive Covid test, according to a survey that suggests compliance with the requirements has slipped since the summer. Thailand has reopened to fully vaccinated tourists, with tens of thousands of travellers expected to touch down in Bangkok and Phuket as the country reboots its tourism industry after 18 months of Covid restrictions. Any government plan for mandating vaccinations for NHS workers should be delayed until April to avoid shortages of healthcare workers during the winter, Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers in England, has said. Nearly 34,000 people were locked into Shanghai’s Disneyland on Sunday without warning and tested for Covid after a single confirmed case was linked to the park. It comes as China reported 59 locally acquired cases on Monday – a new daily high since the latest outbreak began on 17 October. US President Joe Biden tested negative for Covid-19 on Sunday as part of the entry requirements to visit Cop26 in Glasgow in Scotland. There had been concern as White House press secretary Jen Psaki had tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, raising potential concerns that the US president was a close contact. Some companies in Germany are reportedly making unvaccinated employees eat their lunch in a separate area of the office cafeterias. The Times reports that workers who have been double-jabbed can sit together as they please under the “two-class canteen” system. Those who have not must stay in a designated zone behind Perspex panels where they must wear masks when not eating and observe stricter social distancing rules. The schemes are being piloted by the major pharmaceutical company Bayer, the electricity provider Eon, and Alltours, the Düsseldorf travel group, according to a report in the local Rheinische Post newspaper. The UK recorded 40,077 new positive Covid tests on Monday, up from 38,009 the previous day. Cases have been rising but have not reached the mid-month peak of 56,658 new cases on 18 October. A further 40 deaths were recorded in the past 24 hours, compared with yesterday’s 74 deaths. The drop in reported figures is down to a “data issue” where the number of Covid deaths was not received from NHS England, according to the government’s coronavirus dashboard. A little more on Novavax receiving approval for its Covid vaccine in Indonesia. The green light marks the first time a regulator has approved a protein-based vaccine for Covid-19, and the first time a regulator has approved any vaccine produced by Novavax. It is hoped that the Novavax vaccine will form a critical part of the effort to vaccinate the developing world and the company has signed an agreement to provide 1.1bn doses to Covax, the UN-led initiative to get vaccines to poorer countries. Speaking to Reuters following the announcement today, Novavax’s chief executive Stanley C. Erck said the World Health Organization is currently reviewing Novavax’s regulatory filing with results expected in the coming weeks. Approval from the WHO would allow Novavax to begin shopping doses to the Covax programme. “I think we’ll get some doses to Covax this year,” Erck said. “But I think (Novavax is) going to really start being able to ship large quantity to COVAX in the first quarter” of 2022. People eligible for a booster jab in England are reportedly facing a “postcode lottery” of vaccination centre locations which could be a key reason behind the relatively slow rollout of the booster jab scheme. The i reports that out of the more than 2,500 vaccination centres offering jabs, many are chemists in cities and larger vaccination centres often found in built-up areas. In the City of London, there are 53 vaccination centres per hundred thousand people over the age of 50, while in North Kevenston in the East Midlands, there is just one centre per hundred thousand people over 50. As a result, people living in more rural areas have struggled to reach the nearest vaccination centres where they are eligible for their booster shots. One 88-year-old woman from Alderley Edge, a village in Cheshire, told the paper that she must wait until mid-November for her booster jab as the local medical centre where she received her first two doses in January and March is no longer administering vaccines. Greece has recorded 5,449 new coronavirus infections in the latest 24 hour period, the highest single-day figure since the pandemic began. A further 52 deaths were also reported, taking the total to 15,990, Reuters reports. Giannis Oikonomou, a spokesman for the government, said it was “pressing” to increase the number of vaccinations. Just 60.5% of Greeks are vaccinated against Covid. “We’re not done with Covid yet,” he told reporters this afternoon. “As long as there are unvaccinated people, the virus finds a suitable ground to spread. “We mourn the loss of human lives due to non-vaccination, and this cannot, and should not, continue.” Schoolchildren returned to classrooms across Iraq today for the first time in a year and a half, marking one of the global pandemic’s longest school closures. Some 11m students were affected. Associated Press reports that learning levels in Iraq are among the lowest in the Middle East and North Africa, amid warnings from the World Bank that “students in Iraq are facing more than a lost year of learning”. Iraq’s Ministry of Education did provide online learning throughout the school closures, but pupils have struggled to catch up as they have faced poor internet connection, regular power cuts and many families’ dire economic conditions. Chronically underfunded and overcrowded, Iraq’s public schools are ill-equipped to properly enforce safety measures. Many parents were still relieved to see their children back in school from Monday. One parent told AP: “I’m optimistic. I hope to get rid of this damn pandemic.” Vladimir Putin has said Russia may need the army’s help to build field hospitals for Covid patients as officials battle rampant outbreaks that have led to a nationwide workplace shutdown, Reuters reports. Speaking to the defence minister, Sergei Shoigu, and other top brass, the Russian president said the situation was “very difficult”. “More than 40,000 cases [a day]. This has never happened,” he said. “I ask you to … continue to provide support to the civil medical service if needed. Maybe use your construction abilities because there is a need to keep building prefabricated medical facilities.” His remarks came as Russia reported 40,993 new Covid infections, its highest single-day case tally since the start of the pandemic. The Russian army has announced plans to set up a coronavirus hospital in the Moscow region. The “specialised hospital” would be staffed by “brigades of doctors and nurses”, the Ministry of Defence said in a statement quoted by state media. On Thursday, authorities in Moscow shut down non-essential services for 11 days, two days before the start of a week-long nationwide paid holiday. Schools and many offices have been closed in the capital, and restaurants told to offer a takeaway service only. Here’s more on the recent study showing that one in four people in their mid-30s to mid-50s are no longer following the full rules around self-isolation after a positive Covid test. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) figures, based on a survey of 881 people in England in late September and early October, show that only 75% of respondents aged 35 to 54 complied with the full rules around self-isolation for the 10 days after testing positive for coronavirus. The number is down substantially from the 86% compliance reported by the ONS in July and suggests that those in that age group are now the least able, or least likely, of any to abide by the full requirements of self-isolation after a positive result. Hints of lower compliance were also seen in people aged over 55, but evidence for an opposing trend was seen in younger people, with 82% of 18-to-34-year-olds reporting full compliance with self-isolation rules in the latest survey, up from 75% in the summer. The UK health secretary, Sajid Javid, is facing legal action over the Immensa testing fiasco, in which about 43,000 people have been given false negative Covid results since September. The Good Law Project, led by Jo Maugham QC, has sent a pre-action letter to Javid, seeking answers over the scandal and demanding to terminate Immensa’s contracts immediately, compensate the individuals affected and take action to properly regulate private testing firms. Immensa was founded in May 2020 by Andrea Riposati, a former management consultant and owner of a DNA testing company. Three months later, the Department of Health bypassed the normal competitive procedures and awarded it a £119m PCR testing contract. Immensa was subsequently given a further £50m testing contract in August 2021. Since the scandal broke it has emerged that Immensa was not fully accredited with the UK Accreditation Service. It was already the subject of an investigation into its sister company, Dante Labs, by the Competition and Markets Authority into its travel tests. Riposati is also the founder of Dante Labs. Downing Street has denied claims that the false Covid test results from the Wolverhampton lab were to blame for a sharp rise in cases in south-west England, saying the region may have been catching up with the rest of the country. Read more of Rowena’s report here: Thousands of New York City municipal workers are expected to be told to stay home from Monday for failing to be vaccinated against Covid. From today, the city is enforcing its vaccine mandate for all its employees, including sanitation workers and members of the police and fire department. Those who refuse to get vaccinated without a medical or religious exemption will be placed on unpaid leave. City officials have been scrambling to deal with potential staff shortages as a result of the vaccine mandate, which has faced opposition from unions for both the fire and police department. The New York police department has estimated that as many as 2,500 employees could be placed on leave while a source told CNN that the fire department was preparing for a 20% reduction in service. It is one of the most remarkable success stories of the pandemic: the unproven technology that delivered the Moderna and Pfizer/BioNTech vaccines in record time, helping to turn the tide on Covid-19. The vaccines are based on mRNA, the molecule that instructs our cells to make specific proteins. By injecting synthetic mRNA, our cells are turned into on-demand vaccine factories, pumping out any protein we want our immune system to learn to recognise and destroy. Pre-pandemic, the technology was viewed with scepticism – a clever concept, but not guaranteed to deliver. Now there is growing confidence that mRNA vaccines could have far-reaching applications in tackling diseases from flu to malaria. All NHS test and trace Covid testing sites in England will reportedly begin scaling back their opening hours from today. According to the Telegraph, NHS test and trace has ordered all regional and local test sites to stop offering a service after 6pm. Officials told the paper they had taken the decision because “demand for tests reduces significantly” in the evenings. At the time of its launch, Boris Johnson claimed the government’s flagship test-and-trace system would be “world-beating”, but a recent report by the Commons spending watchdog found it had failed to achieve “its main objective” to cut infection levels and help Britain return to normal despite being handed an “eye-watering” £37bn in taxpayers’ cash. Indonesia has given the world’s first emergency use authorisation for the Covid vaccine produced by Novavax, Reuters reports. The two-dose vaccine is made with lab-grown copies of the spike protein that coats the coronavirus, unlike mRNA vaccines such as Pfizer and Moderna that deliver genetic instructions for the body to make its own spike protein. The Novavax vaccine is stored at 2C to 8C, which could allow it to play an important role in boosting supplies in hard-to-reach areas and poorer countries around the world. In a large US-based clinical trial, the Novavax vaccine was shown to be more than 90% effective, including against a variety of concerning variants of the coronavirus at the time. For Indonesia, the shot will be manufactured by the Serum Institute of India and sold under the Indian company’s brand name, Covovax. Novavax said it has already filed for authorisation of the vaccine in the UK, EU, Canada, Australia, India and the Philippines. Nearly 34,000 people were locked into Shanghai’s Disneyland on Sunday without warning and tested for Covid after a single confirmed case was linked to the park. The mass testing came after one person who visited the theme park on Saturday tested positive after returning to nearby Hangzhou over the weekend. Visitors to the resort’s Halloween carnival were forced to wait for hours before they were allowed to leave the park. All tested negative. They will be required to get tested again over the course of the next two weeks and monitor themselves for health reasons. Shanghai Disneyland announced it would be closed on Monday and Tuesday. It comes as China reported 59 locally acquired cases on Monday – a new daily high since the latest outbreak began on 17 October. One in four people in the UK aged between 35 and 54 who test positive for Covid do not self-isolate for 10 days, a survey suggests. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) study shows that the number of older adults adhering to isolation requirements has fallen since last summer. In comparison, a higher proportion of young adults are now following the rules. Hello! It’s Léonie Chao-Fong here, taking over the live blog for the next few hours. The number of new infections has surged in Germany over the past week, surpassing 150 per 100,000 people for the first time since May, Agence France-Presse reports. The latest figures come as health professionals have reported seeing a new influx of infected people in hospital. In an interview on Sunday with the Frankfurter Allgemeine newspaper, the outgoing chancellor Angela Merkel said she was “very saddened” that as many as 3 million Germans aged over 60 have still not had the jab. About a third of Germans have yet to be vaccinated and a recent survey showed 65% of unvaccinated respondents said there was “no way” they would take a Covid jab. The global death toll from Covid-19 has hit five million, 19 months after the pandemic was first declared, according to figures released from the Johns Hopkins University. Some experts, including those from the World Health Organization, believe the true toll may be two to three times higher than official figures suggest. The death toll is about equal to the populations of Los Angeles and San Francisco combined. The US, Brazil, India, Mexico and the UK disproportionately account for more than half of all deaths worldwide. Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, has said any government plan for mandating vaccinations for NHS workers should be delayed until April next year, to avoid shortages of healthcare workers during the winter. Covid booster jabs are being given at walk-in clinics in England as the NHS aims to increase vaccine uptake before what is expected to be a challenging winter. New Zealand will extend coronavirus curbs for another week in its largest city of Auckland, but ease some after that, prime minister Jacinda Ardern, after another day of record new infections. People protesting against Italy’s health pass sparked controversy after comparing themselves to prisoners of Nazi concentration camps. The protesters wore striped bibs and held placards saying “No dictatorship” as they marched through Novara, in northern Italy, on Saturday. Russia has today confirmed another 40,402 Covid-19 infections and 1,155 further deaths. US President Joe Biden tested negative for Covid-19 on Sunday as part of the entry requirements to visit Cop26 in Glasgow in Scotland. There had been concern as White House press secretary Jen Psaki had tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, raising potential concerns that the US president was a close contact. Thailand has reopened to fully vaccinated tourists, with tens of thousands of travellers expected to touch down in Bangkok and Phuket as the country reboots its tourism industry after 18 months of Covid restrictions. Singapore could see as many 2,000 Covid-19 deaths annually over time, mainly among the elderly, a government minister has said as the country battles its biggest surge in infections. Also worth noting, in today’s episode of our Today in Focus podcast, Michael Safi speaks to Mark Valentine about his efforts to carry out his brother’s dying wish – Phil Valentine was a Tennessee-based conservative talk radio host who was sceptical about the US government’s response to the coronavirus crisis. Before he died from Covid, he asked Mark to tell others to get the vaccine to make amends for the message he had spread on his show. The episode also features reporter Sirin Kale talking about how you should approach conversations about the vaccine with hesitant loved ones. That it is it from me, Martin Belam, today. I will see you tomorrow. Léonie Chao-Fong will be along shortly to continue our live coverage of coronavirus developments in the UK and around the world. A quick snap from Reuters here to confirm that on his way to the Cop26 conference in Glasgow, US president Joe Biden tested negative for Covid-19 on Sunday. The spokeswoman, speaking to reporters on board the US presidential plane Air Force One on Monday, said the PCR test was taken as part of entry requirements for attendance. The White House press secretary Jen Psaki had tested positive for Covid-19 on Sunday, raising potential concerns that the president was a close contact, however in a statement she had last seen Biden on Tuesday. I have seldom had cause to mention Chris de Burgh during my stints on the Covid live blog, but all that is about to change, as the singer has been on ITV’s Good Morning Britain today and said he feels thankful for having had his booster vaccination after catching coronavirus earlier this year. PA Media quotes the Lady in Red singer saying: “I had two jabs and, like so many other people I have come across, I got another little dose. Thank God I had been vaccinated. It was like a mild cold. I was shocked, actually. I was about to do a solo tour in Europe and I had to defer it for a few weeks. “But living in Africa, as I was as a child, I had to have all of them – yellow fever, polio, et cetera et cetera, and I never got any of them. Vaccinations work. Sorry, folks, but they do work.” De Burgh said the virus has not affected his singing voice. Another musician reflecting on their Covid experiences today is Tori Amos. We have an interview with her this morning where she spoke about the impact of lockdown upon her and her family, and I was struck by this quote here: By the third lockdown, however, in January of this year, I was not at my best. I was grieving not playing live for the longest time in my life, not doing what musicians do. There isn’t the spiritual ceremony of the collaboration with a live audience. We’re talking about a voltage that I can’t achieve by myself. That was gone, and there was no way to recreate that. I became despondent and sad, and filled with loss. You’re trying to find different coping mechanisms at 50-some years old, and sometimes not even realising that that’s what you’re needing to do. I will be carrying on here with the latest developments on coronavirus from the UK and around the world on this blog, but we do have two other live blogs running this morning which might pique your interest. Kevin Rawlinson has UK politics live, which is quite dominated by the Brexit fishing row at the moment. We also have live coverage from the Cop26 conference in Glasgow, which is being helmed at the moment by my colleague Alan Evans. People protesting against Italy’s health pass sparked controversy after comparing themselves to prisoners of Nazi concentration camps. The protesters wore striped bibs and held placards saying “No dictatorship” as they marched through Novara, in northern Italy, on Saturday. There have been several, at times violent, protests in Italy over the so-called ‘green pass’, which the government made mandatory for all workers in October. “For months, the no-vax movement has continued to use the memory of the Holocaust in a distorted or shameful way,” said Rossella Bottini Treves, president of the Jewish Community of Vercelli. “The latest alarming case being that of Novara, where anti-vaccine and green pass demonstrators raved about being ‘prisoners of Auschwitz’.” The anti-fascist organisation, Anpi, described the episode on Twitter as “the shame of ignorance” The Italian health minister, Roberto Speranza, expressed his shock, adding: “What I saw in Novara is out of the grace of God.” Meanwhile, 900 people gathered in Predappio, the birth town of the fascist dictator Benito Mussolini, on Sunday to mark the anniversary of his march on Rome and to protest against the green pass. Italians must present proof of vaccination, immunisation or a negative test when entering their workplaces and for dining inside at bars or restaurants, travelling by plane or long-distance train and entering museums, theatres, cinemas, nightclubs and stadiums. As of Monday, almost 83% of the population aged over 12 were fully vaccinated. Since the Zimbabwean government partly reopened church gatherings in August, Apostolic members, known for their open-air worship, can be seen every weekend around the capital. The government has asked religious groups to endorse the Covid-19 vaccine. The Catholic church, evangelical and adventist groups have done so. But with a tradition of not seeking or trusting medical help, some of the “white garment” churches are refusing to encourage congregations to get vaccinated. With millions of followers across southern Africa, the church’s stance could undermine Zimbabwe’s attempts to vaccinate 60% of the population by December. “We believe in God, and science is entirely subject to God’s will,” says Gramaridge Musendekwa, of the Vadzidzi Apostolic church. “I grew up on my parents’ prayers and I am passing it down to my children. My family will not take the vaccine because we are protected by prayers,” says Musendekwa, 38. “I believe we should not be forced to get vaccinated. For us who grew up without medicine, vaccinations are an insult to our faith and religion. Surely the authorities can achieve whatever they want to do without involving us.” Read more of Nyasha Chingono’s report here: ‘We are protected by prayers’: the sects hampering southern Africa’s vaccine rollout Just back to that global death toll again for a moment, Associated Press have some quotes from Dr Wafaa El-Sadr, director of ICAP, a global health centre at Columbia University in the US. She says “What’s uniquely different about this pandemic is it hit hardest the high-resource countries. That’s the irony of Covid-19.” Wealthier nations with longer life expectancies have larger proportions of older people, cancer survivors and nursing home residents, all of whom are especially vulnerable to Covid-19, El-Sadr noted. Poorer countries tend to have larger shares of children, teens and young adults, who are less likely to fall seriously ill from the coronavirus. Russia has today confirmed another 40,402 Covid-19 infections and 1,155 further deaths. The Moscow Times notes that all of Russia’s 85 regions across 11 time zones have now mandated vaccines for certain categories of workers. Israel recently announced that it would recognise the Sputnik V vaccine and allow vaccinated Russians into the country from 15 November. As the global death toll from coronavirus hits five million Dr Albert Ko, an infectious disease specialist at the Yale School of Public Health, said “This is a defining moment in our lifetime. What do we have to do to protect ourselves so we don’t get to another 5 million?” The death toll, as tallied by Johns Hopkins University, is about equal to the populations of Los Angeles and San Francisco combined. It rivals the number of people killed in battles among nations since 1950, according to estimates from the Peace Research Institute Oslo. Globally, Covid-19 is now the third leading cause of death, after heart disease and stroke. Carla K Johnson for Associated Press writes that hot spots have shifted over the 22 months since the outbreak began, turning different places on the world map red. Now, the virus is pummeling Russia, Ukraine and other parts of Eastern Europe, especially where rumours, misinformation and distrust in government have hobbled vaccination efforts. In Ukraine, only 17% of the adult population is fully vaccinated; in Armenia, only 7%. The global death toll from Covid-19 has hit five million, according to figures released from the Johns Hopkins University, 19 months after the pandemic was first declared. Some experts, including those from the World Health Organization, believe the true toll may be two to three times higher than official figures suggest. The number of deaths from Covid-19 far outstrip that of other viral epidemics in the 21st century and most from the 20th century, with the notable exception of the Spanish flu. Since it was first recorded in China in late 2019, the coronavirus spread quickly to almost every corner of the world and was declared a pandemic in March 2020. The virus has since mutated into more than a dozen new variants, including the highly infectious Delta strain. Dozens of countries have recorded more than 1,000 deaths, while case counts now stand at well over one million in some countries. The US, Brazil, India, Mexico and the UK disproportionately account for more than half of all deaths worldwide. Phil Valentine was a Tennessee-based conservative talk radio host who was sceptical about the US government’s response to the coronavirus crisis. He was not completely “anti-vax”, but he did not think he was vulnerable to Covid and talked on air about his decision not to be vaccinated. He even performed a song called Vaxman, a parody of the Beatles’ Taxman. Shortly after the song was released, he contracted the virus. Before Valentine died, he sent a message to his brother Mark from hospital about his regret. He asked him to tell others to get the vaccine to make amends for the message he had spread on his show. In today’s episode of our Today in Focus podcast, Michael Safi speaks to Mark Valentine about his efforts to carry out his brother’s dying wish and to reporter Sirin Kale about how you should approach conversations about the vaccine with hesitant loved ones. You can listen to it here: Today in Focus – The regrets of the unvaccinated: why Covid-bereaved families are speaking out Singapore could see as many 2,000 Covid-19 deaths annually over time, mainly among the elderly, but it was focused on avoiding excess mortality, a minister said this morning, as the country battles its biggest surge in infections. Reuters report that at 0.2%, Singapore’s Covid-19 case fatality rate is similar to the rate of deaths from pneumonia before the pandemic struck. Janil Puthucheary, a senior minister of state in parliament, said “It does mean that over time, the absolute number of deaths from Covid-19 will rise despite the best possible medical care,” he said. “We could have perhaps 2,000 deaths per year from Covid.” The minister did not specify for how many years that estimate might apply. Singapore had 4,000 deaths per year due to influenza and other respiratory diseases pre-pandemic, he said. More than 80% of Singapore’s 5.45 million population has been fully vaccinated and almost all its cases are asymptomatic or mild. Puthucheary said the country was trying to live with Covid as endemic without excess mortality. Chris Hopson, chief executive of NHS Providers, has just told BBC Breakfast this morning in the UK that any government plan for mandating vaccinations for NHS workers should be delayed until April next year, to avoid shortages of healthcare workers during the winter. PA Media quote him saying: If we lose staff over the winter period our ability to provide care is compromised. We’ve got a very, very difficult winter coming up and we know the NHS is going to be at full stretch, so it makes sense to set that deadline once that period has passed. If we lose very large numbers of unvaccinated staff, particularly over the winter period, then that also constitutes a risk to patient safety and quality of care. Thailand has reopened to fully vaccinated tourists, with tens of thousands of travellers expected to touch down in Bangkok and Phuket as the country reboots its tourism industry after 18 months of Covid restrictions. The coronavirus pandemic has hammered the kingdom’s economy, with tourism making up almost 20% of its national income. Last year saw its worst performance since the 1997 Asian financial crisis with arrivals down more than 80%. From 1 November, Thai authorities will allow vaccinated tourists from more than 60 “low-risk” countries to skip hotel quarantine - providing the sector a much-needed lifeline. Previously, vaccinated tourists had to undergo at least seven days hotel quarantine. Read more here: Thailand reopens to some vaccinated tourists after 18 months of Covid curbs New Zealand will extend coronavirus curbs for another week in its largest city of Auckland, but ease some after that, prime minister Jacinda Ardern said on Monday, another day of record new infections. As New Zealand battles the spread of the infectious Delta variant of Covid, it has agreed on a 10 November reopening date for retail stores and institutions such as libraries and museums, Ardern told a news conference. “Because of the high vaccination rates in Auckland we can move with greater confidence,” Ardern said. “These decisions are carefully balanced and allows us to release some of the pressure and fatigue that we know exists in Auckland.” Reuters report the city’s limit on the size of outdoor gatherings was lifted to 25 people. Daily cases have been rising to record highs in the last few days, with 162 on Monday. Of these, 53 people were in hospital, with four in intensive care. Cases are expected to keep rising in a model of the outbreak released to the media. But Ardern said high vaccination rates gave protection to keep down hospital admissions. “Previously we worked hard to eliminate every case. While Delta has forced us to change our approach, vaccines ensure we have the same goal,” she added. More than 75% of New Zealand, or about 3.1 million people, have now been fully vaccinated, while 88% have had one dose. Covid booster jabs are now being given at walk-in clinics in England as the NHS aims to increase vaccine uptake before what is expected to be a challenging winter. From Monday, anyone in an eligible group who had their second dose of a coronavirus vaccine at least six months ago can turn up at one of hundreds of sites to get their top-up without making an appointment. The walk-in centres are also offering vaccinations to 12- to 15-year-olds. The move follows criticism of the booster campaign, with only about half of the 12 million people in England eligible so far for a third vaccine dose having received one. The vaccine rollout to teenagers has lagged behind that of countries including France, Italy and Spain. People entitled to a booster jab are: those aged 50 and over, people who live and work in care homes; frontline health and social care workers; people aged 16 and over with a health condition that puts them at high risk of getting seriously ill from Covid-19; those aged 16 and over who are a main carer for someone at high risk from the virus, and; people aged 16 and over who live with someone who is more likely to get infections. Nikki Kanani, a GP and the deputy lead for the NHS Covid-19 vaccination programme, said: “NHS staff are making it as easy as possible for people to get their top-up vaccination, and from today people can now go online, find their nearest site and go and get their booster without delay. Read more of our science correspondent Hannah Devlin’s report here: Covid booster jabs offered at NHS walk-in clinics in England As expected, foreign secretary Liz Truss’s first media appearance of the day on Sky News was entirely dominated by Cop26 and the Brexit fishing row, and coronavirus didn’t get a look in. Here’s a quick status check on the latest situation in the UK. For a bit of wider context, here’s the longer view on the UK government’s own data dashboard, so you can get a view of how the current caseload compares to other phases of the pandemic in the UK. One of those countries lifting restrictions is Australia, with citizens able to fly home and walk straight out of the airport for the first time in 583 days. As fully vaccinated passengers on the first flights from Singapore and Los Angeles walked into the arrivals terminal shortly after 6am, they were greeted by family members. In many cases, they had been separated for years – since before the pandemic began. “It’s a little bit scary and exciting,” traveller Ethan Carter said. “I’ve come home to see my mum ‘cause she’s not well. So it’s all anxious and excitement and I love her heaps and I can’t wait to see her” Hello, it is Martin Belam in London stepping in now. I’ll be with you for the next four hours or so. Having a look across the news landscape this morning before I started, I can tell you that there will be a lot of posts coming today explaining that “country X is lifting restrictions, just as nearby country Y starts imposing restrictions.” The UK government minister doing the media round this morning is foreign secretary Liz Truss, and I’ll have any Covid lines that emerge from her first appearances soon, though I suspect Cop26 is likely to dominate any questioning. Indonesia has authorised the Sinovac vaccine for children aged 6-11, following the FDA’s authorisation of the Pfizer vaccine for children aged 5-11 in the US. It also authorises the Novavax vaccine. Indonesian tourism officials also held a regular briefing as more countries in the Asia-Pacific reopen to foreign visitors Hello and welcome back to our global Covid blog. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be reporting from Sydney, Australia, to bring you all the latest developments from around the world. First up, it’s welcome news for recently returning Australians and their families - many of whom have not seen each other for almost two years due to strict Covid-19 quarantine and lockdown measures. Sydney airport was the scene of tearful reunions as fully vaccinated Australians flew in and walked straight into the arms of loved ones for first time in 583 days. On the other side of the world less hopeful news is unfolding as French health authorities say the number of people hospitalised because of Covid-19 went up by 48 over the past 24 hours to reach 6,572, the highest daily increase since 6 September. Daily new infections stood at 6,329, a 26.5% rise from a week ago, and the seven-day moving average of daily new cases reached a five-week high of 5,858, Reuters reports. For everything else you might have missed read our summary below. A summary of today’s developments Thailand has reopened to fully vaccinated tourists from more than 60 “low-risk” countries as the nation reboots its tourism industry after 18 months of Covid restrictions. The UK recorded 38,009 new infections, but the rise in weekly cases is down 13.5%. A further 74 deaths saw the weekly average Covid deaths a day climb 15.8% on last week. Covid booster jabs are being offered at NHS walk-in clinics in England for people who have had their second dose at least six months ago. New Zealand will extend coronavirus curbs for another week in its largest city of Auckland after another day of record new infections. Russia reported 40,993 new Covid-19 infections, its highest single-day case tally since the start of the pandemic. The US jabbed the most vaccine doses into arms in 5 months, delivering 1,412,416 doses of Covid vaccines in the last 24 hours. US regulators are delaying their decision on Moderna’s Covid-19 vaccine for 12- to 17-year-olds while they study the rare risk of heart inflammation, the company said on Sunday. The FDA is looking into a rare heart inflammation called myocarditis after vaccination. White House press secretary to US president Joe Biden, Jen Psaki, tested positive for the coronavirus on Sunday, but said she last saw Biden on Tuesday in masks and outside. France saw new infections surge by 26.5% on the previous week. Taiwan will receive a total of 4 million vaccine doses from the US, up 1.5 million from the former amount, Reuters reported. Singapore recorded 3,163 Covid-19 cases, a high tally for the city state during the pandemic which until recently pursued a zero-Covid strategy. New York City’s municipal worker vaccine requirements come into force on Monday, and officials said 2,000 fire department workers took medical leave to protest the measures. But officials said the part-vaccinated rate had jumped to 91% on Saturday from 76% on Thursday. Italy saw 26 more Covid-related deaths, taking the country’s death toll to 132,100 – the highest tally in Europe behind the UK. Poland reported 7,145 new Covid cases as the Eastern European epidemic continued to grow.We’re wrapping up our live US politics coverage for today. Here’s an updated summary of today’s key events. Joe Manchin called on the House to quickly pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill, even as he refused to endorse Joe Biden’s framework for the $1.75tn reconciliation package. Manchin, one of the two Democratic holdouts on the reconciliation package in the Senate, said he would not support the legislation until he had a clearer sense about how it would impact the deficit. Despite Manchin’s statement, the White House expressed confidence that the senator would ultimately support the reconciliation package. “Senator Manchin says he is prepared to support a Build Back Better plan that combats inflation, is fiscally responsible, and will create jobs,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. “The plan the House is finalizing meets those tests.” House progressives indicated they still hoped to pass both the infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package later this week. Congressional Progressive Caucus chair Pramila Jayapal said she trusted Biden’s assurances that the reconciliation bill framework can attract the support of all 50 Democratic senators. Biden addressed the Cop26 climate change conference, underscoring the urgent need to curb carbon emissions. “We meet with the eyes of history upon us and with profound questions before us,” Biden said in Glasgow. “It’s simple. Will we act? Will we do what is necessary? Will we seize the enormous opportunity before us, or will we condemn future generations to suffer? This is the decade that will determine the answer.” Meanwhile, Trump told supporters that climate change is a “hoax”. The supreme court heard oral arguments in the case over Texas’ six-week abortion ban. Five of the court’s conservative justices allowed the ban to go into effect in September, but at least two of those justices — Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett — sounded skeptical today when hearing Texas attorneys’ justifications for the law. Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen said Mark Zuckerberg should step down as chief executive, and said the stakes of Facebook taking safety seriously could be measured in the loss of millions of lives over the next decades. Ahead of a planned senate vote this week on legislation to protect voting rights, only one GOP senator, Lisa Murkowski, has expressed her support. Tomorrow’s closely contested gubernatorial election in Virginia will be a key sign of just how challenging the 2022 midterms may be for Democrats. Democrats mark confirmation of federal appellate court’s ‘first openly lesbian judge’ The confirmation of Justice Beth Robinson is a milestone, Chuck Schumer tweeted: Some background on Robinson’s career: AP: Images of vulnerable Afghans removed from Pentagon website The Pentagon on Monday said it has temporarily removed from its visual information website tens of thousands of photos and videos of Afghans who supported the US war effort and were deemed vulnerable to Taliban retaliation, the Associated Press reports. Pentagon press secretary John Kirby said that starting in August, during the US-led evacuation, all imagery showing the faces or other identifiable features of vulnerable Afghans was removed. He said the images will be returned to the public domain when it is deemed safe. Military weighs penalties for those who refuse Covid vaccine As deadlines loom for military and defense civilians to get mandated Covid-19 vaccines, senior leaders must now wrestle with the fate of those who flatly refuse the shots or are seeking exemptions, and how to make sure they are treated fairly and equally, the Associated Press reports. Exemption decisions for medical, religious and administrative reasons will be made by unit commanders around the world, on what the Pentagon says will be a “case-by-case” basis. That raises a vexing issue for military leaders who are pushing a vaccine mandate seen as critical to maintaining a healthy force, but want to avoid a haphazard, inconsistent approach with those who refuse. Military vaccination rates are higher than those of the general population in the United States and the reasons for objecting – often based on misinformation – are similar to those heard throughout the country. But unlike most civilians, military personnel are routinely required to get as many as 17 vaccines, and face penalties for refusing. The military services report between 1%-7% remain unvaccinated. Defense Secretary Lloyd Austin has called for compassion in dealings with those troops, which total nearly 60,000 active duty service members, according to data released last week. Jury selection underway at Kyle Rittenhouse homicide trial The trial of Kyle Rittenhouse opened Monday with the challenging task of seating jurors who hadn’t already made up their minds about the young aspiring police officer who shot two people to death and wounded a third during a night of anti-racism protests in Kenosha last year, the Associated Press reports. The jury that is ultimately selected in the politically charged case will have to decide whether Rittenhouse acted in self-defense, as his lawyers claim, or was engaged in vigilantism when he opened fire with an AR-15-style semiautomatic rifle. Rittenhouse, who was 17 at the time, is also facing a charge of illegal possession of a dangerous weapon by a person under 18. By late afternoon, at least 28 of the 150 or so prospective jurors summoned had been dismissed, about a dozen of them because they had strong opinions about the case or doubts they could be fair. Some also expressed fear about serving on the jury because of public anger but were not immediately let go. One juror said she did not want to serve on the Rittenhouse jury because “either way this goes you’re going to have half the country upset with you and they react poorly.” She said: “I don’t want people to come after in their haze of craze.” Facebook whistleblower: ‘A million, or maybe 10 million lives on the line’ My colleague Dan Milmo has more on Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen’s speech in Lisbon today, including her call for Mark Zuckerberg to step down as chief executive. “I think Facebook will be stronger with someone who is willing to focus on safety,” Haugen told the European audience. She argued that the stakes for Facebook focusing on safety over profits or growth are extremely high: “I genuinely believe that there are a million, or maybe 10 million lives on the line in the next 20 years, and compared to that nothing really feels like a real consequence.” Facebook’s announcement last week, in the face of intense questioning over the consequences of its technology for the health of children and democracy, that its parent company would rebrand as ‘Meta’ was part of a pattern at the company, Haugen argued: “I think there is a meta problem at Facebook which is that over and over again Facebook chooses expansion in new areas over sticking the landing on what they have already done and I find it unconscionable that, as you read through the documents, it states very clearly there needs to be more resources on very basic safety systems.” Read the full story here: Ahead of a planned Wednesday senate vote on a voting rights bill, only one Republican senator has announced her support of the legislation. That’s a stark contrast from just 15 years ago, when voting rights received unanimous support in the senate, Ari Berman, a longtime reporter on the voting rights beat, noted: In her first public address since she leaked a trove of damaging documents about Facebook’s inner workings, whistleblower Frances Haugen urged her former boss, Mark Zuckerberg, to step down and allow change rather than devoting resources to a rebrand, Reuters reports. “I think it is unlikely the company will change if [Mark Zuckerberg] remains the CEO,” Haugen told a packed arena on Monday at the opening night of the Web Summit, a tech fest drawing dozens of thousands to the Portuguese capital, Lisbon. Things that are back to normal: New York City’s Thanksgiving Day parade The Macy’s Thanksgiving Day Parade will return to its pre-pandemic form this year, with its route restored through Manhattan, high-flying helium balloons once again pulled by handlers and crowds welcomed back to cheer them on, the Associated Press reports. This year’s parade — the 95th annual — will snap back to form after bowing to pandemic restrictions last year. It will feature 15 giant character balloons, 28 floats, 36 novelty and heritage inflatables, more than 800 clowns, 10 marching bands and nine performance groups and, of course, Santa Claus. In an email to supporters, the former president labeled climate change a “hoax”. Politico’s Scott Waldman, a White House reporter focused on climate change, said this was the first time Trump had “ranked [climate change] alongside his own conspiracies”. US prisons face staff shortages as officers quit amid Covid, conditions worsen At a Georgia state House of Representatives hearing on prison conditions in September, a corrections officer called in to testify, interrupting his shift to tell lawmakers how dire conditions had become, the Associated Press reports. On a “good day”, he told lawmakers, he had maybe six or seven officers to supervise roughly 1,200 people. He said he had recently been assigned to look after 400 prisoners by himself. There weren’t enough nurses to provide medical care. “All the officers … absolutely despise working there,” said the officer, who didn’t give his name for fear of retaliation. In Texas, Lance Lowry quit after 20 years as a corrections officer to become a long-haul trucker because he couldn’t bear the job any longer. Watching friends and coworkers die from Covid-19, along with dwindling support from his superiors, wore on him. “I would have liked to stay till I was 50,” said Lowry, 48. “But the pandemic changed that.” Read the full investigation: Estranged wife of Trump-endorsed senate candidate testified he choked her The Philadelphia Inquirer reports from a custody hearing today that included tearful testimony, under oath, from the estranged wife of Sean Parnell, a Trump-endorsed candidate competing in the Republican primary for an open US senate seat in Pennsylvania. The race is seen as a key 2022 battleground for the political control of the senate. Parnell has responded: A former Republican congressman from Pennsylvania, Ryan Costello, tweeted that Parnell was a “disaster of a candidate” and should get out of the race: AP: Robert Durst indicted on a murder charge in disappearance of his first wife in 1982 New from the Associated Press: Millionaire real estate scion Robert Durst was indicted Monday on a murder charge in the death of his first wife, Kathie Durst, who disappeared nearly four decades ago, prosecutors said. The second-degree murder indictment in the New York City suburbs comes weeks after an investigator in the case filed a criminal complaint against the 78-year-old Durst, who was recently sentenced to life in prison in California for killing a confidante who helped him cover up the slaying. Durst was transferred to a state prison medical unit last week less than two weeks after being hospitalized on a ventilator with COVID-19 following sentencing in the Los Angeles case. A warrant has been issued for his arrest in the killing of Kathie Durst, Westchester District Attorney Mimi Rocah said in a statement announcing the indictment. “When Kathleen Durst disappeared on January 31, 1982, her family and friends were left with pain, anguish and questions that have contributed to their unfaltering pursuit of justice for the last 39 years,” Rocah said. On the eve of a very tight race for Virginia governor, the Democratic candidate told CNN that he wished “from a political perspective” that Donald Trump still had a Twitter account, even though “for the sake of the country” it’s good that Trump is off the site. Politico’s Christopher Cadelago interpreted this remark to mean that “Republicans are still getting what they need from Trump,” even without the former president’s powerful Twitter account, but that Democrats are not. More updates on a potential Republican win for Youngkin in Virginia tomorrow Some more data points on tomorrow’s closely-watched election in Virginia, where Republican Glenn Youngkin has a chance to take back the governor’s mansion from Democrats just two years after Democrats turned the state blue in 2019. New tax rate on top US firms abroad will help Americans at home, Yellen says The treasury secretary Janet Yellen has said US multinationals who have spent years avoiding paying tax on American soil will be forced to help fund improvements to education, social and infrastructure programmes, thanks to the landmark global tax deal. Speaking in Ireland, where 800 US companies are based, Yellen said the new global tax rate agreed by 136 OECD countries halted the “race to the bottom” where multinationals scoured the world for the lowest corporation tax rate, failing to pay their dues to the populations that helped them make billions every year in profits. What will the results of Virginia’s gubernatorial election tell us about the midterms? This is Lois Beckett, picking up our live US politics coverage from our West Coast bureau in Los Angeles. The University of Virginia’s Center for Politics has a deep dive on the very close race for governor in Virginia, and what the outcome of that election might signal about the relative strength of Democrats and Republicans going into the 2022 midterm elections. The full article is worth a read, but two of the key points: The takeaways for the national environment shouldn’t be all that different whether McAuliffe wins by a tiny margin or Youngkin wins by a similarly small margin...Both of those possible results — a narrow win by either candidate — would suggest a significant falloff for Democrats from their strong Virginia performances in the Trump era and represent, at the very least, a bright red “check engine” light at the midpoint of the Democrats’ journey from last year’s presidential race to next year’s midterm. And if the results are not close: A Youngkin win by several points would offer confirmation that the political environment has broken wide open against Democrats. Meanwhile, if McAuliffe wins by several points, it may indicate that Biden’s poor approval ratings are not as much of a drag on Democrats as one might otherwise think. That’s it from me today. My west coast colleague, Lois Beckett, will take over the blog for the next few hours. Here’s where the day stands so far: Joe Manchin called on the House to quickly pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill, even as he refused to endorse Joe Biden’s framework for the $1.75tn reconciliation package. Manchin, one of the two Democratic holdouts on the reconciliation package in the Senate, said he would not support the legislation until he had a clearer sense about how it would impact the deficit. Despite Manchin’s statement, the White House expressed confidence that the senator would ultimately support the reconciliation package. “Senator Manchin says he is prepared to support a Build Back Better plan that combats inflation, is fiscally responsible, and will create jobs,” White House press secretary Jen Psaki said. “The plan the House is finalizing meets those tests.” House progressives indicated they still hoped to pass both the infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package later this week. Congressional Progressive Caucus chair Pramila Jayapal said she trusted Biden’s assurances that the reconciliation bill framework can attract the support of all 50 Democratic senators. Biden addressed the Cop26 climate change conference, underscoring the urgent need to curb carbon emissions. “We meet with the eyes of history upon us and with profound questions before us,” Biden said in Glasgow. “It’s simple. Will we act? Will we do what is necessary? Will we seize the enormous opportunity before us, or will we condemn future generations to suffer? This is the decade that will determine the answer.” The supreme court heard oral arguments in the case over Texas’ six-week abortion ban. Five of the court’s conservative justices allowed the ban to go into effect in September, but at least two of those justices -- Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett -- sounded skeptical today when hearing Texas attorneys’ justifications for the law. Lois will have more coming up, so stay tuned. Senate majority leader Chuck Schumer said he will file cloture later today on the motion to proceed to the John Lewis Voting Rights Advancement Act. That move will set up a Wednesday vote on the voting rights bill, which would restore some of the key protections of the Voting Rights Act of 1965. (Those protections were gutted as a result of the supreme court’s 2013 decision in Shelby County v Holder.) “The fight to protect our democracy from voter suppression and election subversion continues in the United States Senate,” Schumer said in a floor speech. Historically, the Senate has been able to reauthorize the Voting Rights Act in a bipartisan fashion, but the Wednesday vote will almost certainly fail. Senate Republicans are expected to filibuster the bill, meaning Democrats will need to convince ten of their colleagues on the other side of the aisle to join them in order to advance the legislation. But as of now, only one Republican senator -- Lisa Murkowski of Alaska -- has indicated she supports the bill. House speaker Nancy Pelosi reiterated that Democrats remain committed to soon passing both the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package, despite Joe Manchin’s latest statement on the negotiations. “The House, Senate and White House continue to move forward with the Build Back Better Act – which will be one of the most historic, consequential legislative victories For The People in a century,” Pelosi said in a new statement. “Build Back Better will grow the economy without increasing inflation, because it is fully paid for,” she added. Although Pelosi’s statement does not explicitly mention Manchin’s name, that comment seems to be a response to his concerns about whether the legislation may negatively contribute to the federal deficit. “Democrats look forward to passing the Build Back Better Act and Bipartisan Infrastructure Framework For The People,” Pelosi concluded. Mondaire Jones echoed Congressional Progressive Caucus chair Pramila Jayapal, saying the House should pass both the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package this week. So it seems like House progressives are mostly brushing aside Joe Manchin’s latest statement on the reconciliation package, in which he refused to explicitly endorse Joe Biden’s framework for the bill. Congressional Progressive Caucus chair Pramila Jayapal downplayed the significance of Joe Manchin’s latest statement on the reconciliation package. The Washington congresswoman said the House still intends to pass both the reconciliation package and the bipartisan infrastructure bill in the next few days. Jayapal reiterated that Joe Biden reassured House Democrats about his framework for the $1.75tn reconciliation package ultimately gaining the support of all 50 Democratic senators, and she said she would let the president handle any necessary conversations with Manchin. Jayapal urged congressional Democrats to “keep tempers down” as they navigate what they hope will be the final stage of the negotiations over the two bills. The White House has released a statement insisting Joe Manchin will ultimately support the $1.75tn reconciliation package, even though the Democratic senator has not committed to doing so. “Senator Manchin says he is prepared to support a Build Back Better plan that combats inflation, is fiscally responsible, and will create jobs,” press secretary Jen Psaki said in a new statement. “The plan the House is finalizing meets those tests—it is fully paid for, will reduce the deficit, and brings down costs for health care, child care, elder care, and housing. “Experts agree: Seventeen Nobel Prize-winning economists have said it will reduce inflation. As a result, we remain confident that the plan will gain Senator Manchin’s support.” During his meeting with House Democrats last week, Joe Biden also said that he believed his framework for the reconciliation package would win the support of all 50 Democratic senators. But in his statement to the press moments ago, Manchin emphasized he had not yet decided whether he would support the final version of the package. “I’m open to supporting a final bill that helps move our country forward, but I am equally open to voting against a bill that hurts our country,” Manchin said. Joe Manchin would not explicitly endorse Joe Biden’s framework for the $1.75tn reconciliation package, and the West Virginia senator would not commit to supporting the final version of the legislation. “I’m open to supporting a final bill that helps move our country forward, but I am equally open to voting against a bill that hurts our country,” Manchin said. That will not likely be reassuring for the House progressives who want guarantees about the future of the reconciliation package before supporting the bipartisan infrastructure bill. House Democratic leaders had originally hoped to hold votes on both bills later this week, but it’s unclear how Manchin’s latest statement may affect that timing. Joe Manchin fiercely criticized House progressives for refusing to support the bipartisan infrastructure bill until the reconciliation package moves forward. “The political games have to stop,” the Democratic senator said. “Holding this bill hostage is not going to work in getting my support for the reconciliation bill.” Of course, Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the other key Democratic holdout in the Senate, have used their two votes to demand drastic cuts to the reconciliation package and are now refusing to endorse Joe Biden’s framework for the smaller bill. So one could make the argument that the “political games” are not restricted to the progressive wing of the Democratic party. Joe Manchin held a press conference this afternoon to offer some clarity on his opinion of Joe Biden’s framework for the $1.75tn reconciliation package. However, the West Virginia senator instead just reiterated his demand that the House pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill without explicitly endorsing the framework. “I’ve worked in good faith for three months,” Manchin said. “And I will continue to do so. For the sake of the country, I urge the House to vote and pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill.” House progressives have said they will not support the infrastructure bill until the reconciliation package moves forward as well. But Manchin said he would not endorse Biden’s framework for the reconciliation package until he has more information about the legislation’s cost. “To be clear, I will not support the reconciliation legislation without knowing how the bill would impact our debt and our economy in our country. And we won’t know that until we work through the text,” Manchin said. The Democratic senator left the press conference without taking questions. Donald Trump is scheduled to host a Virginia campaign event today for Glenn Youngkin, the Republican candidate for governor in a race headed down to the wire. But Youngkin will not participate, as he attempts to balance appeals to the former president’s supporters with a semblance of independence. Trump will host a phone-in “tele rally” as he seeks to boost Youngkin past his Democratic opponent, the former governor Terry McAuliffe. John Fredericks, a conservative radio host and Trump’s campaign chair in Virginia in 2016 and 2020, said tens of thousands of participants were expected for “the largest Tele-rally ever”. “The key to a Republican victory in Virginia rests clearly on the shoulders of Trump voters turning out on game day in massive numbers,” Fredericks said in a statement. The contest is seen by many as a referendum on the Biden presidency and a bellwether for midterm elections next year. The realclearpolitics.com polling average has Youngkin up by less than two points; Fivethirtyeight.com puts him up by one. McAuliffe was due to stage rallies in Roanoke, Virginia Beach and Richmond and in northern Virginia. Youngkin was to rally in Roanoke, Richmond, Virginia Beach and Loudon county. McAuliffe, a close ally of Bill and Hillary Clinton, has campaigned with Joe Biden, Vice-President Kamala Harris, former president Barack Obama and other high-profile Democrats. Nonetheless he has struggled to generate enthusiasm in a state Biden won by 10 points. Youngkin, a businessman, has not appeared with Trump. On Saturday, he told reporters: “I’m not going to be engaged in the tele-town hall. The teams are talking, I’m sure.” Given that Republicans used to get very upset about Barack Obama’s supposed “apology tour” of the world, mostly as a way to complain about a president keen to engage diplomatically and not with mindless bombast … Joe Biden might expect some blowback at home for an apology he offered at the Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow, Scotland today. “I guess I shouldn’t apologise,” the president said, “but I do apologise* for the fact that the United States – the last administration pulled out of the Paris accord. It put us sort of behind the eight ball a little bit.” Donald Trump withdrew from the Paris climate deal, to which Biden recommitted. Biden also said “the American people, four or five years ago, weren’t at all sure about climate change, whether it was real … well, they have, as they say in southern parts of my state [Delaware], ‘seen the lord’. They’ve seen what’s happened back home. The incredible changes that are taking place. And they’re now finally ... seeing the sense of urgency that you all are.” Put it this way: views on the climate crisis tend to vary on partisan lines, Democrats thinking the need for action is more urgent than Republicans do. Also, this headline from The Verge is rather handy: “More Americans believe in climate change but still can’t quit fossil fuels”. Here’s Oliver Milman and Nina Lakhani’s report from Glasgow on Biden’s speech at Cop26: *Blogger’s note. Though I am not Scottish, I would be glad to accept an apology from Joe Biden, or any American, come to that, for pronouncing Glasgow “Glass-gau”. It is, most assuredly, “Glazgo”. I’ll wait. In arguments before the supreme court today over the extreme Texas anti-abortion law, Elena Kagan, a liberal justice, interrupted the Texas solicitor general to say the law appeared to have been written by “some geniuses” to evade the broad legal principle that “states are not to nullify federal constitutional rights”. Opponents of the Texas law say it undermines Roe v Wade, the 1973 ruling which guaranteed the right to abortion. Today’s hearing, by a court tilted 6-3 in favour of conservatives during the Trump years, thanks to Republican Senate leader Mitch McConnell’s mastery of pure hardball politics, is being eagerly watched: Here’s where the day stands so far: House Democrats are still hoping to hold votes on the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package this week. House leaders had initially planned to hold votes tomorrow, but that timeline has been altered as Democrats race to craft a drug pricing provision for the reconciliation package. Joe Biden addressed the Cop26 climate change conference, underscoring the urgent need to curb carbon emissions. “We meet with the eyes of history upon us and with profound questions before us,” Biden said in Glasgow. “It’s simple. Will we act? Will we do what is necessary? Will we seize the enormous opportunity before us, or will we condemn future generations to suffer? This is the decade that will determine the answer.” The supreme court heard oral arguments in the case over Texas’ six-week abortion ban. Five of the court’s conservative justices allowed the ban to go into effect in September, but at least two of those justices -- Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett -- sounded skeptical today when hearing Texas attorneys’ justifications for the law. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned. The New York City fire commissioner, Daniel Nigro, on Sunday slammed firefighters who took paid sick leave in advance of a Friday deadline to receive at least one dose of Covid-19 vaccine, raising the prospect of staffing shortages from Monday. “The department has not closed any firehouses,” Nigro said. “Irresponsible bogus sick leave by some of our members is creating a danger for New Yorkers and their fellow firefighters. They need to return to work or risk the consequences of their actions.” Opposition to vaccine mandates fueled by rightwing politicians and media figures led to protests in New York this week, with firefighters and police officers prominent in crowds at City Hall and Gracie Mansion, the official residence of the mayor. Fire officials previously said they were prepared to close up to 20% of fire companies and see 20% fewer ambulances in operation. The department also planned to change schedules, cancel vacations and seek non-fire department emergency medical service providers. Officials said 9% of the whole municipal workforce remained unvaccinated after the Friday deadline. Dr Anthony Fauci, the president’s chief medical adviser, said all Americans will likely soon be eligible to receive a coronavirus vaccine booster. “It will be very likely that everyone will be able to get a booster within a reasonable period of time,” Fauci said during the White House pandemic response team’s press briefing today. Fauci emphasized that those who are fully vaccinated but have not yet received a booster are still “really quite protected against severe disease and hospitalization”. Dr Rochelle Walensky, the director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, added that the “overwhelming” number of infections in the US continue to occur among unvaccinated individuals. About 80% of US adults now have at least one dose of a coronavirus vaccine, and 70% of American adults are fully vaccinated. According to data compiled by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 206,333,974 American adults have now gotten at least one vaccine dose, and 179,729,970 of them are fully vaccinated. That translates to 79.9% and 69.6% of the American adult population, respectively. Jeff Zients, the coordinator of the White House pandemic response team, celebrated the milestone during a press briefing today: Almost a third of Republicans believe violence may be necessary to “save” the US, according to a new poll. Researchers at the Public Religion Research Institute, a nonprofit, found that 30% of Republicans agreed with the statement “Because things have gotten so far off track, true American patriots may have to resort to violence in order to save our country”. Among Americans who believe the 2020 election was “stolen” from Donald Trump, which it was not, 39% believe violence may be required. The troubling statistics show the post-election rancour that led to the violent insurrection at the US Capitol on 6 January is still very much in place. Republicans are most likely to believe “true American patriots may have to resort to violence”, PRRI found, with just 11% of Democrats and 17% of independents agreeing with the statement. Among all Americans, 18% agreed. Senator Joe Manchin said he will release a statement later today on Democrats’ reconciliation package, days after Joe Biden released a framework for the $1.75tn proposal. “I think I will clear up a lot of things sometime today,” the West Virginia senator told CNN. “I think there needs to be clarity on where everybody stands.” Biden has indicated that he believes the framework, which is the result of months of negotiations, can attract the support of all 50 Democratic senators. However, Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, the other key Democratic holdout in the Senate, have not yet explicitly endorsed the framework. If Manchin indicates he will not support the framework, it would jeopardize both the reconciliation package and the bipartisan infrastructure bill. House progressives have said they will not support the infrastructure bill until the reconciliation package advances as well. Stay tuned. Meanwhile, across the Atlantic, Joe Biden is now speaking at the opening session of the Cop26 climate change conference in Glasgow. “We meet with the eyes of history upon us and with profound questions before us,” the US president said. “It’s simple. Will we act? Will we do what is necessary? Will we seize the enormous opportunity before us, or will we condemn future generations to suffer? This is the decade that will determine the answer.” Biden argued it was still possible to keep levels of global warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius, and he expressed hope that the United Nations conference will kick off a “decade of ambition and innovation” to meet that goal. For more updates from Glasgow, follow along with the Guardian’s Cop26 live blog: The supreme court is now hearing oral arguments in the case over Texas’ six-week abortion ban, and the justices have already indicated some skepticism about the law’s legitimacy. Neal Katyal, the former acting solicitor general under Barack Obama, noted that two of the court’s six conservative justices -- Brett Kavanaugh and Amy Coney Barrett -- were both sounding wary of Texas attorneys’ justifications for the law. As Katyal notes, both Kavanaugh and Barrett ruled in favor of keeping the law in place two months ago, so their positions remain unclear. Stay tuned. In briefs, Texas argued the supreme court should not review the case, and the state wrote the law specifically to frustrate opponents. SB8 deputizes private citizens to enforce its provisions in civil court, awarding plaintiffs $10,000 fees for any violation of its law, in an attempt to avoid federal court scrutiny. However, Texas argued if the court did review its case, it should use the opportunity to overturn Roe v Wade. The landmark 1973 case allows abortion to the point a fetus can survive outside the womb. Texas’s law bans abortion before most people know they are pregnant. The court appears unlikely to overturn Roe v Wade in this case, and will probably focus instead on two other issues. First, is the private enforcement mechanism constitutional and, second, can the federal government sue to stop it? Both the Biden administration and abortion providers have asked the court to block the law, claiming it is incompatible with Roe v Wade and causing immediate harm to people seeking abortions in Texas. As the supreme court prepares to hear oral arguments in the case over Texas’ six-week abortion ban, abortion rights supporters are protesting outside the court building. Some of the protesters have shared their own stories of abortion to demonstrate the harm that Texas’ law could have on its citizens: The US supreme court is set to hear oral arguments over whether Texas can continue to allow private citizens to enforce a controversial six-week abortion ban on Monday. Texas’s ban has halted the vast majority of abortions in America’s second largest state geographically, where more than 6 million women of child-bearing age live. The focus of arguments is whether Texas can allow private citizens to enforce an abortion ban in direct contradiction to supreme court precedent in Roe v Wade, which provides a constitutional right to abortion to roughly 24 weeks, and whether the federal government then has standing to stop the law in court. The nine-member bench will hear from three parties: attorneys for Texas, the Biden administration and abortion providers. As veteran Capitol Hill reporter Jamie Dupree notes, congressional Democrats have limited time to pass the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the reconciliation package before Thanksgiving on November 25. The House and the Senate are scheduled to be out of session next week, and lawmakers will then have only one week of work left before departing Washington for the Thanksgiving holiday. However, that schedule could change if Democratic leaders decide they want some extra time to get the two bills passed. Stay tuned. Greetings from Washington, live blog readers. House Democratic leaders had originally hoped to vote on the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the $1.75tn reconciliation package tomorrow, but that timeline is getting altered as lawmakers race to craft a prescription drug price proposal. CNN reports: Most House progressives signaled during a virtual meeting Sunday they are likely to back the bipartisan infrastructure bill and the social safety net bill when they both come up for a vote, which is likely to happen after Tuesday. Several sources on the call told CNN that President Joe Biden has committed to progressives that all 50 Democrats in the Senate would support the legislative text as voted on by the House and that the Congressional Progressive Caucus is taking the President at his word. Moderate Democratic Sens. Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona and Joe Manchin of Virginia, who are key votes, have not yet publicly endorsed the framework. ... Meanwhile, shortly after, a House Democratic leadership aide told CNN that while there has been ‘extensive progress’ on drug price reform, a key initiative for Senate Budget Chairman Bernie Sanders, the Rules committee will not be meeting Monday -- meaning a full vote will likely not take place on Tuesday. Democrats are still hopeful about House votes happening later this week, although it’s unclear whether that will happen. Regardless, with progressives signaling they will support both bills, it’s looking more and more likely that the two proposals will pass the House whenever they do come up for a vote. The blog will have more coming up, so stay tuned.The New South Wales government will be forced to correct and resend 44,000 letters to returning travellers demanding payment for hotel quarantine, due to a basic error explaining its legislative power to recover debts. The state government has issued more than 134,800 invoices charging inbound travellers thousands of dollars for hotel quarantine since the pandemic began. Where the invoices are not paid, Revenue NSW issues debt recovery orders demanding payment, and warning recipients it has the power to take money from wages or a bank, seize property, or issue a charge on land. But the debt recovery order letters contain a small, but potentially, consequential error. In referencing its power to recover debts, the state government names a nonexistent piece of legislation, saying its powers are contained in the State Debt Recovery Act 2013. The correct law is the State Debt Recovery Act 2018. When the Guardian approached Revenue NSW, it said it was “now aware of the incorrect reference”. It said more than 44,300 debt recovery orders had been issued with the incorrect reference. “For the avoidance of doubt, Revenue NSW will issue amended Debt Recovery Orders to all affected individuals, however this will not alter the requirement that each invoice be paid,” a spokesperson said. One recipient, who asked not to be identified, told the Guardian they had legal advice suggesting that basing a debt recovery order on a nonexistent law makes it unenforceable. “I have brought this to the attention of NSW Revenue on five separate occasions [emails can be provided] and they have simply ignored it and continued to send debt recovery orders,” he said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning But Revenue NSW denied that the mistake had any impact on the enforceability of the orders. “This error has no impact on the enforceability of these orders if they were challenged in court.” “Sections 38 and 40 of the State Debt Recovery Act 2018 outline what must be in a debt recovery order, which does not include the authority under which the debt recovery order is issued.” NSW began charging returned travellers for hotel quarantine in mid-2020, saying it had spent $65m to that point on housing returning travellers. “Australian residents have been given plenty of time to return home – and we feel it is only fair that they cover some of the costs of their hotel accommodation,” then premier Gladys Berejiklian said. On Monday, it ended hotel quarantine for fully vaccinated Australian citizens returning home. Unvaccinated Australians will continue to need to quarantine and comply with a cap on arrivals. The state is also trialling a home quarantine program to allow returning travellers to avoid hotels and the associated costs. The pilot may become permanent. It relies on an app that uses geolocation and facial recognition technology to ensure that individuals are at the right address. The use of such technology has prompted significant privacy and civil liberties concerns.Robert Durst was indicted on Monday for murder in the death of his first wife, Kathie McCormack Durst, who disappeared nearly four decades ago. The multimillionaire real estate heir is currently serving a life sentence in California for the murder of Susan Berman, his friend and confidante who prosecutors say helped him cover up Kathie Durst’s killing. Durst was hospitalized on a ventilator with Covid-19 after his 14 October sentencing in the Los Angeles case and was transferred last week to a state prison hospital. His current medical condition was not released. A grand jury in the New York City suburbs returned the second-degree murder indictment on Monday. “When Kathleen Durst disappeared on January 31, 1982, her family and friends were left with pain, anguish and questions that have contributed to their unfaltering pursuit of justice for the last 39 years,” the Westchester district attorney, Mimi Rocah, said in a statement announcing the indictment. Rocah said her office had “reinvigorated its investigation” into Robert Durst when she took office in January, launching a cold case unit and dedicating necessary skill and resources. She decided to take the case to a grand jury in early October. Rocah said Durst’s indictment was a “huge step forward in the pursuit of justice for Kathie Durst, her family and victims of domestic violence everywhere”. Asked by a reporter if he had any reaction to the indictment, Durst’s lawyer Chip Lewis replied in an email: “Fake news!” Asked in a subsequent email if he would be representing Durst in the New York case and whether there were health concerns about moving him to New York, Lewis responded: “Not sure he will make it. But if he does, I’ll let you know.” A lawyer for Kathie Durst’s family said they were still processing the news of the indictment and would speak more about the matter in the coming days. Kathie Durst’s 1982 disappearance garnered renewed public interest after HBO aired a documentary in 2015 in which Durst appeared to admit killing people, stepping off camera and muttering to himself on a live microphone: “Killed them all, of course.” Kathie Durst was 29 and in her final months of medical school when she was last seen. She and Robert Durst, who was 38 at the time, had been married nearly nine years and were living in South Salem, a community in Lewisboro, New York. Her body was never found. Robert Durst divorced her in 1990, citing abandonment. At the request of her family, she was declared legally dead in 2017. Robert Durst had never previously been charged in her disappearance. In December 2000, Durst shot and killed Berman as she was preparing to tell police about her involvement in Kathie Durst’s death, prosecutors said. She had told friends she provided a phony alibi for him after his wife vanished, according to prosecutors. Durst was convicted in September of killing Berman. Afterward, the Los Angeles prosecutor John Lewin described him as a “narcissistic psychopath”, saying Durst had “killed his wife and then he had to keep killing to cover it up”. Durst, testifying in the Los Angeles trial in August, denied killing Kathie Durst. After her medical school called to report that she hadn’t been going to class, he said he figured she was “out someplace having fun” and suggested that perhaps drug use was to blame. “It hadn’t occurred to me that anything had happened to her,” Durst said, speaking slowly in a strained, raspy voice. “It was more like: what had Kathie done to Kathie?”Listening to a 15-second instrumental piece on a loop for seven hours convinced Karen Eck that phone queues were an untapped resource for promoting Australian music. Since she was placed on hold for most of the day while trying to change an airline ticket with Qantas during lockdown in August, the Sydney publicist and talent manager has been campaigning for Australian companies to ditch their royalty-free elevator music and turn to local content on their call-waiting systems. Initially, Eck targeted Centrelink, Service NSW and Services Australia as well Qantas’s CEO Alan Joyce. She also lobbied the federal arts minister Paul Fletcher and New South Wales customer service minister Victor Dominello. A petition launched on Change.org – Hold Aussie Music – has so far attracted almost 10,000 signatures, and the Australian Recording Industry Association (Aria) and the music copyright organisation Apra Amcos have both thrown their support behind the campaign. Now Eck has ramped up the volume, with a plan to target 30 brands in 30 days over the month of November. “The Australian music industry has been on its knees during the pandemic, so why shouldn’t big corporations give our local musicians a platform to showcase their work?” Eck told Guardian Australia. “It’s just about choosing a playlist that supports our incredible talent in Australia.” The companies selected for targeting will be at the suggestion of the campaign’s supporters, with NRMA, Apple, Telstra, Optus, Sydney airport and the Australian Taxation Office in its sights. Large businesses that already play commercial music but are being asked to switch to more Australian content include Medicare, Energy Australia, Centrelink, MyGov and three of the four big banks. On Tuesday, tagging #HoldAussieMusic, ME Bank in Melbourne announced it would update its playlist for call holding with 10 new homegrown tunes, including those from Jack River, Tones and I, Budjerah, Birdz and Gang of Youths. Eck said she believes many companies are simply unaware of what their customers experience when they are placed on hold. “The people in positions of power, the decision-makers, they are never put on hold with their own business, so they often just don’t think very much about it,” she said. “There’s an awareness that needs to be encouraged from a management brand perspective. Sign up for the fun stuff with our rundown of must-reads, pop culture and tips for the weekend, every Saturday morning “And there are companies that can curate playlists for individual businesses, who can make sure that the music is appropriate for the brand, that it has the right tempo, the right tone. “A businesses can really use their music on their call-holding system as a platform to reflect their own brand.” Supermarket wars On Monday, Woolworths announced a new partnership with Australian Radio Network, owners of the KIIS Network, The Edge and iHeartRadio brands. The deal includes an undertaking to play more Australian artists in Woolworths’ 995 stores across the country (subject to the tastes of each store’s demographic) and on the supermarket’s digital radio via the iHeartRadio app. “It will be shopping trolleys at 50 paces as Australia’s two supermarket giants go head-to-head with in-store entertainment,” Radio Today declared, referring to a longstanding partnership between Woolworth’s only competitor, Coles, and Nova Entertainment. In 2019, the Coles/Nova partnership saw Coles Radio topping the digital-only radio ratings, with 254,000 listeners across the country each week (ABC’s Double J was second, with 221,000 listeners). Hold Aussie Music is just one of several campaigns since the start of the pandemic to push for more Australian music in the corporate sector. In August, singer-songwriter Holly Rankin, who performs as Jack River, called out on social media Channel Seven’s failure to play sufficient Australian music during its Tokyo Olympics coverage. She also challenged Coles, Woolworths, Aldi and banks to use more local music in-store and in their ads. Coles responded by announcing it would turn up the volume on its commitment to local music. In October, the Aria-led Our Soundtrack Our Stories campaign succeeded in getting the Commonwealth Bank, Nissan Australia, Bonds, Channel Seven, Qsic, 7Eleven, Channel 10, Rebel Sport and Bank Australia to publicly commit to increase their support for homegrown music.The New South Wales government has brought forward a raft of freedoms for fully vaccinated residents, while delaying when unvaccinated people can exit stay-at-home orders. From Monday 8 November, fully vaccinated people will be able to have unlimited visitors to their home, density limits on venues will ease and dancing will be allowed at nightclubs. Under the original roadmap, restrictions were supposed to ease from 1 December. The NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, said the changes were due to the state’s high vaccination rate, with authorities pushing NSW to hit 95% double dose coverage. “We said from the outset that this was the key for our state to be able to open up safely,” Perrottet said. “Everybody has done an incredible job to ensure NSW can ease restrictions in a safe and considered way earlier than we planned. [This] is one last push and I believe that we can get to that 95% mark.” The changes also delay when restrictions ease for unvaccinated people – either when the state hits that 95% fully vaccinated rate or by 15 December, whichever occurs first. This means unvaccinated residents will continue to be barred from businesses, gyms and venues for at least two weeks more than expected. Perrottet said the delay was to ensure the state could continue reopening “safely” and hoped it would incentivise people to get the jab. “Ultimately we want a united society and we believe by moving that date back to December 15 will incentivise” he said. Caps on gym and dance classes remain, but entertainment venues with fixed seating will open to 100% capacity. Indoor swimming pools will also be able to reopen. The mask mandate will also remain until the state hits 95% fully vaccinated, or 15 December. The health minister, Brad Hazzard, welcomed rising vaccination rates and the changes, calling them a “giant step” for the state. “A year and a half ago we all wondered whether we would get vaccinated or whether we would ever get our freedoms back,” he said. “A little as three or four months ago, when things were looking dark, we were all wondering if we’ll be able to get through the next few months. “This really is a giant step for all of us, and how good is it that we have actually faced down this enemy of this hidden virus and managed to get our freedoms back.” Hazzard said while vaccination rates in western Sydney were “absolutely amazing”, there were still some concerns for the Hunter region. “The message is: the virus is still out there,” he said. In NSW 93.6% of people eligible have now had at least one dose of the vaccine, while 87.8% are fully vaccinated. The state’s chief health officer, Dr Kerry Chant, urged young people to take up the vaccine or to book their second dose. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “I know you haven’t had access to the vaccines for as long … but just to reiterate, there is plenty of vaccine and plenty of access points for you,” she said. “We know those age groups actually drive transmission. “They are the connectors in our society, they connect with younger people and they also connect with older people. They also have more social contacts. So it is critical we achieve high rates of coverage in those groups.” The changes were announced as the state recorded 173 new locally acquired cases, and four deaths: two men in their 50s, one man in his 60s and one man in his 70s. Victoria recorded 989 new locally acquired cases and nine deaths on Tuesday, dropping below 1,000 daily cases for the first time since September. The Australian Capital Territory recorded eight new locally acquired cases, with seven Covid patients in hospital. Of those, four are in intensive care.Two teenage girls from a high school in Perth are accused of plotting to kill a teacher before one of them allegedly stabbed her on Monday. A teacher, aged in her 50s, was taken to Fiona Stanley hospital with non life-threatening injuries after emergency services were called to Willetton Senior High School at 11.15am on Monday. The student accused of the attack fled the school grounds and was taken into custody on Monday evening. Police allege two students talked online about how to kill the teacher. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning A WA police spokesperson said: “Between 14 October and 1 November 2021, a 13-year-old student participated in numerous online chat messages with a 14-year-old student.” “It will be alleged the conversations related to talking about and planning to kill a teacher. “The victim received a one-centimetre wound in the area of her left armpit and was conveyed to Fiona Stanley hospital for treatment. “On police arrival, the 13-year-old student was taken into custody and a search commenced for the 14-year-old student who was located around 6.50pm on foot in Willetton and taken into custody by police.” State School Teachers Union of WA president Pat Byrne said they were “deeply disturbed” by the incident. “Every teacher and principal should be able to go to work confident that they are safe in their workplace,” Byrne said. “The union will liaise closely with the department of education to ensure all staff at the school get every support they need during this traumatic time. “Through its Safety is Our Priority campaign the SSTUWA has worked unceasingly to improve safety standards at schools. This incident is a reminder of the dangers teachers face and the need for constant improvements around safety in schools. “The SSTUWA will make no further comment as the matter is now before the courts.” The students, both from Willetton, have each been charged with attempted to unlawfully kill. They are due to appear before the Perth children’s court on Tuesday. Students from the school told Nine News Perth one teenager had been suspended last week.The Liberal senator Hollie Hughes is performing paid consulting work for a for-profit biofuels company. The work has been disclosed on her register of interests through a trust assisting “charitable organisations”. Hughes has insisted she properly declared her interest as a potential beneficiary of the SLN Services Trust, claiming her work for PBFH Pty Ltd will help the Australian company setting up in Papua New Guinea to “reinvest in local communities”. But use of a trust appears to have helped Hughes side-step the requirement to declare “any other substantial sources of income” on her register of interests, as she was advised would otherwise likely be necessary by the Senate clerk. There is no suggestion by Guardian Australia that Hughes has breached any rules by using the trust in this manner. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Guardian Australia has surveyed the register of interests of all members and senators to audit their use of trusts in the wake of Christian Porter declaring that his defamation legal fees were part-paid by the Legal Services Trust with funds from undisclosed donors. Although the privileges committee of both houses have been asked to consider clarifying the rules around financing legal cases, Labor’s complaint about Porter raises the broader issue that trusts declared by parliamentarians can be used to receive fees or donations for private purposes from unknown sources. Parliamentarians declared an array of trusts including for investment purposes, self-managed super funds, and family trusts relating to businesses including agricultural concerns. On 8 October, Hughes declared a shareholding in SLN Services Pty Ltd, the trustee of the SLN Services Trust, which she disclosed is “a discretionary trust in which the senator is a potential beneficiary and provides consultancy services, including in relation to charitable organisations”. The declaration includes no further details of entities that pay the trust for services. Hughes told Guardian Australia that through the trust she and “others, whoever I want to engage” perform advisory work for the board of PBFH Pty Ltd – Pacific Biofuels Holdings – which she said had “set up a charitable arm, a social services arm” to “reinvest in local communities”. The trust is paid an undisclosed, fixed annual fee. “[PBFH is] an Australian company setting up in PNG, and they’ve asked me to assist them because I used to run charities in Australia but also know PNG,” Hughes said. “I haven’t been a beneficiary of anything – yet. But we set [SLN Services Trust] up because at some stage I may be a beneficiary of it.” “The reason I had to set something up is I’m not an employee of theirs [PBFH]”. We’re not trying to hide anything, there wouldn’t be a problem putting PBFH on the register of interests … We have done this all the right way.” Hughes said PBFH is the only entity to have paid SLN Services Trust, which has no other potential beneficiaries “at the moment”. Hughes is the sole director and secretary of the trustee company and has a beneficial interest in 100% of its shares. Zach Frederick, PBFH’s social change director, told Guardian Australia it is a “new, for-profit company that will be using a portion of its profits to effect beneficial social programs in PNG and throughout the South Pacific”. “These programs include investing in education and local health initiatives.” An engagement letter sent to Hughes in September by the PBFH chief executive, Mary Symons, states that SLN Services will advise on “social change programs, aimed at improving the lives of the people in the Central Province”. Symons wrote PBFH had selected SLN Services due to “extensive experience in charitable work and your deep understanding of the mechanics of how to best obtain positive outcomes”. Before entering parliament, Hughes was the chair of the Country Autism Network for seven years and a non-executive director of Streetwork, a charity for at-risk youth. PBFH advised it had “no agreements with the Australian commonwealth”, ensuring that Hughes’ work would not disqualify her from sitting in parliament. In June, the Senate clerk, Richard Pye, provided advice to Hughes on the declaration of senators’ interests. Pye noted that senators are required to declare “any other substantial sources of income” using the rule of thumb that income of more than $5,000 a year should be disclosed. “I expect that Senator Hughes would need to make a declaration here,” he said, commenting on an earlier letter of offer before Hughes decided to provide services through a trust. Hughes has not declared any “other” sources of income. A spokesperson for Hughes said the corporate advisory work “has been disclosed as a registrable interest”. The Nationals senator Susan McDonald discloses on her register of interests that she is a discretionary beneficiary of “OHG Trust”, which is described as a “consultancy”. A spokesperson for McDonald said it was “set up to provide consultancy prior to the senator’s election” but “has been inactive since then with no services being provided by anyone or to anyone”. McDonald has not received a distribution from the trust since becoming a senator, they said.Lawyers for the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, are arguing behind closed doors for suppressions on a judgment that overturned prior secrecy orders in the trial of the barrister Bernard Collaery. The layer upon layer of secrecy in the case has prompted renewed criticism from human rights lawyers, who say the loss of open justice erodes public confidence. Collaery, a lawyer and former Australian Capital Territory attorney general, is facing trial for allegedly disclosing intelligence information about a 2004 mission by Australia to bug its impoverished ally Timor-Leste during oil and gas negotiations. He and his client, the former intelligence officer Witness K, have been described as heroes of Timor-Leste for their actions, including by the former president Jose Ramos-Horta. Last month Collaery won a major battle in the ACT court of appeal to remove secrecy orders shrouding significant parts of his prosecution from the public. In a summary of its decision, the court cited the importance of open justice in preventing “political prosecutions”. “The court emphasised that the open hearing of criminal trials was important because it deterred political prosecutions, allowed the public to scrutinise the actions of prosecutors, and permitted the public to properly assess the conduct of the accused person,” the summary said. Almost four weeks later, the court’s full judgment has still not been published. On Tuesday Australia’s attorney general again intervened in the case, this time asking for significant parts of the judgment to be redacted, on grounds including national security. Arguments for redactions took place briefly in open court. The court was then closed to the public and media to allow the attorney general, represented by Anna Mitchelmore SC, to fully make the case for suppressions. A Human Rights Law Centre senior lawyer, Kieran Pender, said the court of appeal had already made clear that secrecy in the Collaery case erodes public confidence. “The next step in this sorry saga should be to drop the charges altogether, not to argue for more secrecy, at a secret hearing, about a judgment that said no to a secret trial,” he said. The federal government has until Wednesday to tell the court whether it will appeal against the ACT court of appeal’s ruling. Guardian Australia has asked Cash’s office whether a decision to appeal has yet been made. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Collaery is facing five charges of disclosing protected intelligence information to ABC journalists and of conspiring with Witness K to communicate information to the Timor-Leste government. The pair were helping Timor-Leste mount a case against Australia in the international courts, arguing that the Timor Sea agreement had been rendered void by Australia’s spying. Australia’s domestic spy agency raided their homes in 2013. Witness K’s passport was seized, preventing him from travelling to The Hague to give evidence. After Timor-Leste and Australia reached a new agreement on the Timor Sea, the Australian government signed off on a prosecution of Collaery and Witness K.Joe Exotic’s nemesis Carole Baskin may throw the second series of the hit Tiger King Netflix documentary into disarray after taking legal action in Tampa, Florida. The founder of Big Cat Rescue and her husband, Howard Baskin, have accused Royal Goode Productions and Netflix of breach of contract by using footage of the couple in the trailer of Tiger King 2. The second series of the stranger-than-fiction documentary is scheduled for release on 17 November. According to Variety, the lawsuit was filed on Monday, with the couple arguing they only signed appearance release forms for the first series, which Carole Baskin later described as “a reality show dumpster fire”. The lawsuit states: “By utilizing the film footage of the Baskins and Big Cat Rescue secured by Royal Goode Productions under the Appearance Releases in ‘sizzle reels’ and promotional trailers for the sequel entitled ‘Tiger King 2,’ the Defendants are in breach of the terms of the Appearance Releases.” The Baskins want Royal Goode Productions and Netflix to ditch all footage of them from Tiger King 2. The lawsuit also claims that the first series was misleading in its depiction of Big Cat Rescue’s operations and unfairly accused the Baskins of animal abuse. Carole Baskin is also claiming the first series perniciously implicated her in the disappearance of her first husband in 1997. The Guardian has sought comment from Netflix in the US. Millions of viewers became enthralled watching Tiger King, with the intense hatred between Joe Exotic, the showman owner of the Greater Wynnewood Exotic Animal Park in Oklahoma, and animal conservationist Carole Baskin central to the real-life drama. In 2018, Exotic, whose real name is Joseph Maldonado-Passage, was arrested and accused of hiring two men to murder Baskin. The following year he was found guilty of multiple federal charges of animal abuse and two counts of attempted murder and was sentenced to a 22-year prison sentence in Fort Worth, Texas. Exotic is currently appealing the harshness of the sentence and has sold his zoo. In January this year, an Oklahoma federal judge ordered the new owners of zoo, Jeff and Lauren Lowe, to turn over all the lion and tiger cubs in their possession, along with the animals’ mothers, to the federal government, finding the animal park had violated the US’s Endangered Species Act and the Animal Welfare Act. The Baskins have since collaborated with film-maker Michael Webber (The Elephant in the Living Room) for the 2021 documentary The Conservation Game.The Reserve Bank of Australia has sent its strongest signal yet that the emergency measures it introduced to support the economy during the Covid pandemic will now be wound back, paving the way for an earlier than expected interest rate rise. As expected the central bank left the official cash rate target at the record low 0.1% annual rate set at the November board meeting last year. Analysts’ attention, though, was focused on the shift in the language of its accompanying commentary. Previous months’ statements had identified 2024 as its “central scenario” when inflation would be “sustainably” within its 2%-3% target range. A recent pickup in core inflation to 2.1% in the September quarter – entering that target range for the first time in six years – and other recent signs of a recovery in the economy since the lifting of Delta Covid-19 lockdowns in NSW, Victoria and the ACT has given the RBA confidence to bring that date forward to 2023. In order for the actual inflation rate to remain within 2%-3%, the labour market will need to be “tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially higher than it is currently”, Reserve Bank governor Philip Lowe said, adding “this is likely to take some time”. “The board is prepared to be patient, with the central forecast being for underlying inflation to be no higher than 2.5% at the end of 2023 and for only a gradual increase in wages growth,” he said. The country’s central bank declared “a bounce back is now under way” after the Delta outbreak, with companies now hiring and the job rate set to trend lower for the next couple of years. The RBA expects GDP growth of 3% over 2021, and 5.5% and 2.5% over the following two years, it said. “One important source of uncertainty continues to be the possibility of a further setback on the health front.” The encouraging comments about the economy will likely mean interest rates rise sooner than that 2024 scenario previously stated by the bank. While the cash rate was left unchanged for now, the RBA has surrendered to market forces and ceased trying to keep the yield on the benchmark April 2024 to just 10 basis points, or 0.1%. However, the bank also maintained its bond buying at the $4bn a week pace until at least mid-February 2022. “The decision to discontinue the yield target reflects the improvement in the economy and the earlier-than-expected progress towards the inflation target,” Lowe said. “Given that other market interest rates have moved in response to the increased likelihood of higher inflation and lower unemployment, the effectiveness of the yield target in holding down the general structure of interest rates in Australia has diminished.” The Australian dollar dropped below the US75 cent mark, bond yields fell, and the stockmarket rose after the RBA statement. Economists including AMP’s Shane Oliver continue to expect the first rise in official interest rates to come by the end of 2022. Maxime Darmet, a director at Fitch Ratings, said “it’s really like the first step we think towards the normalisation of [Australia’s] monetary policy settings, which had been very loose since the pandemic”. However, he said should the recovery remain strong we can expect more adjustments sooner than the 2023 RBA forecast: “It’s very possible that in the next meeting they would think it would be 2022.” Evidence the RBA can start paring back emergency measures will be noted elsewhere, with the central banks of the US and the UK also holding key meetings this week. The US Federal Open Market Committee begins two days of meetings today and investors are expecting it to announce a reduction – or tapering – of its quantitative easing problem on Wednesday. Since March 2020 as the first Covid waves disrupted the world economy, the Fed has been buying up $US120b in bonds and mortgages each month to drive down interest rates and support the economy. On Thursday, the Bank of England announces its policy decision, with investors wary that it will lift interest rates to quell rising inflation in the UK. In Australia’s case, the RBA has already eased its bond-buying binge from $5bn a week to $4bn in its bid to keep commercial banks flush with cheap money that they can lend. Much of the borrowing activity, though, has ended up in residential housing. October house prices were almost 22% higher than a year ago, CoreLogic said on Monday. Separate figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics, also out yesterday, revealed a small drop in housing lending for owner-occupied housing in September but the tally was 49% higher than pre-Covid levels in February 2020. Fitch’s Darmet said the RBA had been relatively “dovish” in its signalling that it was not worried about inflation. However, it also couldn’t be seen to be too slow in responding as central banks in the US, Canada and soon the UK prepare to wind back support for the economy. “You’re seeing so much pressure on prices at a global level with energy prices spiking, with supply bottlenecks persisting and so on,” Darmet said. “It’s a very dovish central bank but starting gradually to come around to the new reality that inflation is going to be probably higher than they expected.” While mortgage holders can take some relief from Tuesday’s RBA comments that an interest rate rise isn’t around the corner, Australia and other nations have allowed housing prices to rise too far too fast for the overall health of the economy, not to mention housing affordability for those not in the market. “Low interest rates are the main channel through which people are taking on more debt,” Darmet said. “[It] can become a concern in terms of not only affordability for low income households, but also it creates a lot of potential financial instability and risk. “And this is something many central banks are not taking too seriously,” the Fitch analyst said. In an unusual webinar – used to explain “important announcements” – Lowe said Tuesday’s meeting had not discussed house prices “in any detail”. “At the moment, I don’t have any concerns about the deterioration in lending standards” for home loans, Lowe said. Instead, the focus was on the decision to end the yield curve target, which had made recent days “turbulent ones in the bond market”, he said. The central bank chief also made it clear the RBA is not about to lift its cash target rate, dismissing market predictions of a rise as soon as next March “as a complete overreaction to the recent inflation data”. A reason for caution is that the Covid pandemic might not have finished in terms of its ability to throw the economy off track. “One source of such a shock would be a new strain of the virus or a decline in vaccine effectiveness,” Lowe said. “In this case, the cash rate would need to remain at its current level for longer than otherwise.” While there are supply shortages of some goods, those could ease over the coming six months or so as consumers respond to the end of lockdowns by switching some of their spending to services. While many overseas economies faced higher energy prices, Australia’s electricity prices at least are lower than a year ago, Lowe said, as was reported last month.An education app founded by a group of university students nine years ago has surprised its 53 employees with a NZ$10,000 bonus, after being named the fastest growing company in New Zealand. Kami, meaning paper in Japanese, is a digital classroom platform and app, which allows teachers and students to interact with, and collaborate on, documents and learning resources, either within the classroom or remotely. The company is not the only one in the news recently for rewarding its employees – US shapewear company Spanx last week announced it was giving employees two first-class plane tickets and US$10,000 each to mark its new US$1.2bn valuation. Kami was founded in 2013 by Auckland university students Hengjie Wang, Jordan Thoms, and Alliv Samson, who were looking for a way to digitally streamline their note-taking. The service is now used in more than 180 countries and by more than 30 million teachers and students, with its largest user-base in North America. Now, more than 90% of US schools are using the platform. Last week, the company secured the number one spot in the 2021 Deloitte Fast 50 index, with “a remarkable 1,177% revenue growth over the past three years”, according to Deloitte. Last year, Kami offered its software to teachers around the globe free of charge to help them continue to digitally reach students during the worst of the global pandemic. Sales dried up overnight, the company’s chief executive Wang said, but that turned around when teachers asked to start paying, to ensure the platform’s future. “Fast forward 18 months, with that sort of massive shift in education, we saw maybe about five years’ worth of growth in the market in one year.” To celebrate both this success and hitting the 30 million user mark, the company decided to reward its employees. “Our team had been working incredibly long hours, made a lot of sacrifices over the last 18 months, supporting teachers and students globally. We wanted a way to say thank you and recognise what they have achieved,” Wang said. Kami announced the bonus in a Zoom call to staff this week, saying they were all “shocked and surprised”. “We live in one of the most diverse cities that you can ever possibly operate in so, you know, I think we ultimately just built a company that reflects the Auckland culture … we really want to celebrate the best ideas and letting them come to the top, and over time that that has clearly shown in our results.” Wang said he hopes Kami’s success could become an example to other local tech startups. “You hear all of these big startup funding announcements, and Kami was certainly not one of these. But despite this we have shown the world that achieving this level of growth and the impact that we have is possible. Operating a cashflow-positive startup is possible. “We have shown that it is possible from little old New Zealand. Capital is not a barrier to growth and success.”Trainer Chris Waller finally got his hands on the Melbourne Cup after Verry Elleegant, ridden by James McDonald, upset the overwhelming pre-race favourite Incentivise at Flemington racecourse. Incentivise, one of the shortest-priced Cup favourites, had to settle for second place in the $8m race over 3,200m with UK-trained Spanish Mission crossing the line in third. Floating Artist was fourth, The Chosen One fifth and Grand Promenade sixth. After a spectator-free event due to Covid-19 restrictions in Victoria last year, a 10,000-strong fully-vaccinated crowd was allowed back in the stands on Tuesday and they made their voices heard as Verry Elleegant surged down the home straight. In perfect racing conditions under blue skies, the six-year-old mare delivered a first Cup win for Waller after overhauling Incentivise on the long Flemington straight and then leaving the star of this year’s Spring Carnival in her wake. The reigning Australian horse of the year crossed the line three-and-a-half lengths in front to claim her 10th Group 1 win, while victory for Waller added the Cup to his collection of four Cox Plates won with Winx. “I never thought I would ever win one,” McDonald said. “I always dreamed of winning one, but it’s so hard to win. A dream come true. When I went for home, I don’t know, I don’t know what I was thinking. I was thinking, where’s that post? “She travelled so sweetly in the run for such a big way. She is trained by a master. He gets them right. She is a superstar and I’m so proud of her. “We’ve been along for the ride for so many seasons now. This has cemented her place right up the top of those real top horses because what she’s done over the years, some seven furlongs to 3,200m. To win one of the biggest races in the land, it is just incredible.” McDonald only found himself partnering the eventual winner after UK horse Away He Goes was scratched less than a week ago and the jockey was booked late to pilot Verry Elleegant, who was entered into the Cup after her Cox Plate placing. Waller, who is based in Sydney, was not trackside to watch his charge’s greatest victory but the stable’s assistant trainer, Johanne Taylor, paid tribute to the absent trainer. “This is unreal,” she said. “I think everyone in Australian racing dreams of this. It’s such a pity Chris can’t be here. He certainly deserves this more than anyone. Very emotional from the entire team and it means the world to us.” All 23 horses that started the race crossed the finish line. The starting field had been reduced by one after the late scratching of outsider Future Score, who showed signs of lameness on race eve and failed veterinary checks on Tuesday morning. There had also been doubts over the participation of Delphi but the former UK-based horse was passed fit and came home seventh as champion jockey Damian Oliver’s bid for a fourth Cup triumph fell short. The build up to the main race had been disrupted as animal rights activists gathered outside the racecourse gates. Eight horses have died following the Melbourne Cup event in the past nine years.As fireworks lit up the sky over Shanghai Disney Resort on Sunday, chatter began to spread through the crowds. Qian, a young Chinese woman who’d decided to spend her Halloween at the theme park, saw a Weibo alert from Disney saying the park had closed and rides had stopped. No more guests could enter Disneyland – those already inside, all 34,000 of them, would have to be tested and isolate. The news filtered through the throngs of parkgoers but, as Qian described, caused no panic, despite the worsening outbreak of Delta across 16 Chinese provinces. “The tourists around me started discussing this matter, but they all finished watching the first fireworks in peace,” she posted on Weibo. As they moved towards the exit, the crowd learned no one could leave until all were tested. They were ushered along outdoor trestle tables staffed by PPE-wearing healthworkers for testing, as the second evening fireworks show blasted in the background. The gates were closed and the rail lines shut down. “I never thought that the longest queue in Disneyland would be for a nucleic acid test,” another visitor wryly noted on social media. Late in the night more than 200 buses took people home for two days of self-isolation and further testing. Another 100,000 people who visited the park on the weekend will also be tested. The surreal scenes were prompted by the discovery of one case, a Saturday visitor Shanghai who was later found to be positive. Reports were conflicted on whether she had even gone to Disneyland. Disney’s initial alert had only attributed the closure to a need to “cooperate with the pandemic investigation in other provinces and cities”. Regardless, the park and Disneytown – its retail hub – shut until Wednesday. On Monday, China reported another 54 cases in a stubborn outbreak of Delta which, while dwarfed by numbers around the world, is threatening China’s commitment to remaining free from Covid. So far about 500 people have been diagnosed across at least 16 provinces, initially centred around Inner Mongolia but now mostly in Heilongjiang. Throughout the pandemic authorities have responded swiftly and strongly to outbreaks, with sudden lockdowns, transport restrictions and mass testing drives. But the high transmissibility of the Delta variant has seen a rise in more creative attempts to curb its spread. Communities are largely complying – in Heilongjiang an official bragged of the 35,000 people who rushed to the testing stations, queueing under umbrellas. But tolerance is beginning to wane, especially when it involves so few cases. In Jiangxi authorities turned all traffic lights red to halt movement after a single case was identified – its first in almost two years. The move was reversed after public outcry. In Beijing some residents complained of glitchy health apps recording their location in the wrong place, and leaving them stranded. On Monday Beijing’s health commission asked people to avoid leaving or returning if possible. In Ruili, a small town on the border between China’s Yunnan and Myanmar, repeated lockdowns and waves of outbreaks have driven people away. Local media reported that one baby in the city who had been tested 74 times since September. In late October, someone who claimed to be a Ruili student posted on Weibo that he and his family were unable to return home. Local officials told Chinese media that since 2020 the number of residents had reduced from half a million to 200,000. “Impacted by the epidemic for a long time, many people found life hard to cope with,” one said. The mayor has made an extraordinary plea for help from Beijing. China, Hong Kong and Taiwan are among the last global jurisdictions still clinging to elimination strategies for the virus. For all three it involves the continuation of strict border closures and quarantine systems. Some have begun to question the sustainability of the strategy, as the rest of the world begins reopening and accepting life with the virus, mitigated by high rates of vaccination and less intrusive health measures. Others note that the strategy has worked – all three places are largely Covid free, having seen few of the world’s five million recorded deaths. In Shanghai, Qian praised the response at Disneyland. “One can really believe in Shanghai for ever. The response speed and the measures to deal with the epidemic are really fast and reasonable,” she said. “This Halloween will be unforgettable, a happy, beautiful, and wonderful journey with no dangers. I hope the epidemic gets better soon and everyone is safe and sound.”Everything in Muhammet Şahin’s garden is dead: the plants, his chickens, the bees. This summer’s unusually ferocious wildfires in south and west Turkey swept down on to his restaurant in the village of Osmaniye from two directions. As the flames rushed down the hillside, he and his wife had to evacuate, leaving their home and livelihood behind. The couple have managed to pay for a new roof and fixed glass windows that shattered in fires over two devastating weeks in August, when the blazes reached a heat intensity four times higher than Turkey’s previous record. But for Şahin and many of his neighbours there is still a lot of repair work to do, and serious questions remain. “I should have extinguished it myself but the electricity was out, the water was out. That’s why we had to leave,” the 50-year-old said. “If it happens again I will stay. The state was useless. It’s as if they wanted it to burn.” Marmaris is a popular tourism destination because of its natural beauty. But above the sparkling turquoise waters of the Mediterranean, much of what used to be dense green pine forest is now nothing more than eerie skeletons, charred and bare. Ash stirred up by the wind catches in the throat; the sound of chainsaws removing burned trees deemed too unsightly to remain near roads and resorts echoes through the dead forest. “We didn’t understand how fast it would spread,” said Fatma Aydın, a 60-year-old who sells butter, cheese and yoghurt from her goats at a local market. She and her husband are waiting on his pension to come in next month to finish the work that needs doing on their property. “We have been devastated financially but next year I hope it won’t happen again because there is nothing left to burn.” Much has been said and written about democratic backsliding and the erasure of rule of law in Turkey during two decades of Justice and Development party (AKP) rule. But just as destructive, and much harder to fix, is the party’s addiction to concrete: the AKP has relied on large, job-heavy infrastructure projects as the engine of Turkey’s economy. Concerns about environmental damage have long been ignored. But this summer, a culmination of population growth, industrialisation, urban sprawl and the climate crisis has finally made it impossible for Ankara to ignore the consequences of pursuing economic growth at the cost of everything else. Last month President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan finally ratified the Paris climate agreement, ahead of this week’s Cop26 environmental summit in Glasgow. Erdoğan faced significant blowback over state mismanagement and unpreparedness after admitting the country had no serviceable firefighting planes. According to Dr Cihan Erdönmez, a lecturer at Istanbul university’s forestry department, lessons have been learned across government after the summer fires disaster: a new fleet of planes will be established and the forestry ministry is increasing staffing levels. “However, it should not be forgotten that fires will always occur in this geography and the climate crisis will increase the number and impact of fires. Therefore, the real solution should be sought not in extinguishing fires, but in preventing fires,” he said. And while the summer blazes were the biggest in living memory, they are far from the country’s only pressing environmental problem. Also this August, the northern Black Sea region experienced the worst flooding on record, in which 81 people died. The biggest drought in a decade has left major cities with severely depleted water reserves and decimated this year’s wheat, barley and lentil crops; huge dam projects that have drowned traditional life in the majority Kurdish south-east have contributed to the drought problem rather than solved it. Large natural lakes have dried up, killing fish and birds, and rising temperatures in Istanbul’s Sea of Marmara left marine life suffocating under layers of “sea snot” released by out-of-control growth of phytoplankton. Europe’s plastic waste, sent to Turkey for recycling, has ended up illegally dumped, burned or thrown in the ocean, while the land has been scarred and polluted by the booming gold, mineral and lignite – low-quality coal – mining industries. “Turkish governments dating back to the 1970s have made national energy security and independence a primary goal as Turkey doesn’t have its own gas and black coal resources,” said Deniz Gümüsel, an environmental engineer and climate policy expert, who is camped out at a mining protest site not far from Marmaris. “There is no alternative in strategy other than relying on lignite for another 25 years, which exacerbates all of the problems. The fires and floods were interpreted as part of corruption issues and poor urbanisation policies in the country. [When it comes to climate change] there is still a lot that environmentalists must do to help society connect the dots,” she said. In a speech at the UN last month, Erdoğan made a surprise announcement that the country would finally ratify the Paris agreement on limiting global heating. Despite being the globe’s 16th biggest carbon emitter and a member of the G20, Turkey has dragged its feet on implementing the 2015 international treaty over disagreements on whether it qualified for financial and technical support from wealthier nations. The only other countries yet to join are Iran, Iraq, Libya, Yemen and Eritrea. It emerged that the Turkish parliament took the final legal step earlier this month after Ankara was offered financial guarantees from several European countries and two development banks. Details on the deal have not yet been published, but environmentalists believe Turkey has probably been extended a large credit line, as was the case with a similar initiative managed by the World Bank for a climate crisis strategy and action plan in 2009. Much of the $2.4bn (£1.7bn) was used to build hydropower plants in the Black Sea region, which have destroyed river systems and were blamed for exacerbating this year’s flooding. A small green movement has existed in Turkey for many years, and the 2013 Gezi park protest movement was sparked by plans to redevelop one of Istanbul’s green spaces. But even after a summer of destruction, environmental issues remain low on the political agenda. Turkey’s small Green Left party was joined by a new Green party in 2020. “We had no rain since March, so of course the fires were related to climate change,” said Mehmet Halil, a resident of Ormaniye who helped organise efforts to house displaced people during the fires. “Marmaris relies on tourists, they come and go, they don’t have to care … But this is our land. We will protect it.”The federal resources minister, Keith Pitt, made no effort to assess the impact on global heating of handing $21m to Empire Energy to frack the Beetaloo Basin, despite evidence that exploiting the region’s gas would drive up Australia’s emissions by 13%, a court has heard. The federal court on Tuesday began hearing a challenge to the lawfulness of federal grants designed to incentivise exploratory drilling in the Northern Territory as part of the Morrison government’s gas-led economic recovery. The case, described by litigants Environment Centre NT, as a landmark piece of climate litigation, argues the minister was required to make reasonable inquiries into a range of matters before awarding Empire $21m from the $50m grant program, including the consequences for global heating and Australia’s targets under the Paris climate agreement. Pitt, who is defending his decision, has previously described the case as “green lawfare” and said the litigation threatens to delay an estimated 6,000 new jobs for the Northern Territory along with around $37bn in economic activity Perry Herzfeld, SC, – acting for the Environment Centre NT, which launched the case – argued on Tuesday that the government’s failure to investigate the climate consequences was “stark”. “There were no inquiries made into climate change risks at all, and, further, no inquiries made into whether such inquiries should be made or deferred until later,” Herzfeld told the court. “There’s nothing in the material before your honour which suggests any engagement with this at all.” He showed the court expert evidence suggesting that extracting and using gas from the Beetaloo Basin would use up the rest of Australia’s carbon budget under the Paris agreement. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning On one scenario, it would drive up Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions by 13%. “What’s observed is that combustion of gas from the Beetaloo Basin shale field would equate to a 13% increase on Australia’s 2020 greenhouse gas emissions, these are annual emissions,” he said. Herzfield argued that any activity in the Beetaloo, even exploration, would harm Australia’s prospects of meeting its Paris agreement targets. He also argued it was not clear that the plan for Beetaloo would deliver a net economic benefit to Australia and said there was a risk that it could become a “stranded asset that has failed to deliver a return on investment”. The court also heard that a request for confidentiality over a range of documents linked to the case had been agreed to by the parties due to much of it containing “market sensitive information”. But the request caused justice John Griffiths significant concern. “It just strikes me that the claim for confidentiality is too broad and in some respects unsubstantiated,” he said. In one exchange, the court was taken to Pitt’s announcement of the Beetaloo strategic plan on 17 December 2020, in which he described the basin as the “hottest play on the planet”. Griffiths asked: “What’s the ‘hottest play on the planet’, Mr Herzfield?” Herzfield suggested the phrase meant that the Beetaloo was the “most exciting gas resources on the planet at the moment”. Griffiths said: “The ‘hottest play’ is not a reference to climate change, I assume?” Herzfield responded “decidedly not”, prompting Griffiths to quip: “You didn’t actually have to answer that.” Herzfield is arguing that the failure to properly consider the climate risks meant that the government breached section 71 of the Public Governance, Performance, and Accountability Act 2013, which states that a minister “must not approve a proposed expenditure of relevant money unless the Minister is satisfied, after making reasonable inquiries, that the expenditure would be a proper use of relevant money”. He argued that should invalidate the grants to Empire. Tom Howe, QC, representing the minister, argued later on Tuesday that the expert evidence did not give any indication of the likely emissions specifically from the three wells Empire wants to use to explore the basin. The purpose of the grants was to fund those wells and those wells only, he said. Howe also argued that a finding that the minister had not reasonably inquired into climate risk did not necessarily mean the grants should be invalidated. The hearing continues on Wednesday.That’ll do from me now. It’s been a pleasure and I leave you in comfort knowing no horses have died today. Until next time. My colleague Ben Doherty informs me there is a bit of serendipitous symmetry in the result. James McDonald rode Verry Elleegant wearing Melbourne Demons colours, in the same year the club won the AFL flag. The other James McDonald is a former Demons captain of more than 250 games. If you knew about this before the race you must be one lucky punter. Verry Elleegant’s part-owner Brae Sokolski – who also part-owns Incentivise – got a little excited and jumped the fence after the race. What about the protocols?? “Sorry,” he tells 10. “The adrenalin got the better of me. These moments are once in a lifetime.” He is seen here on the euphoric verge of embracing assistant trainer Johanne Taylor. Full finishing list: 1. Verry Elleegant 2. Incentivise 3. Spanish Mission 4. Floating Artist 5. The Chosen One 6. Grand Promenade 7. Delphi 8. Selino 9. Tralee Rose 10. She’s Ideel 11. Twilight Payment 12. Miami Bound 13. Great House 14. Sir Lucan 15. Explosive Jack 16. Master of Wine 17. Pondus 18. Carif 19. Knights Order 20. Persan 21. Port Guillaume 22. Johnny Get Angry 23. Ocean Billy I should note with relief that all runners appear to have completed the race unscathed. The presentations are taking place, which means some not-very-subtle plugging of sponsor Lexus. Pleasantries ensue, as does polite clapping. He continues. “What dreams are made of. I can’t believe it. When I went for home, I don’t know, I don’t know what I was thinking. I was thinking, ‘where’s that post?’ You know, so much faith. Love her to bits. I just, I’m speechless, really.” The mare made her move on the final straight and would not be stopped from there. It is her 10th Group 1 win. McDonald is ecstatic. He kisses and punches the sky. “Mwah!” he tells 10. “She was relaxed the whole way. When I looked at the 600, I still just, just... I was blowing kisss to her the whole way. I don’t know. I just can’t believe what’s just happened.” James McDonald was on the winner of Verry Elleegant, one of Chris Waller’s four runners in this race. 1. Verry Elleegant 2. Incentivise 3. Spanish Mission By three and a half lengths! Will there be a late dark horse in this? Only 500m to go and Persan still leads. 2000m to go and Persan is half a length in front with Incentivise in second. Knights Order and Floating Artist still up there, and Grand Promenade surging. Tralee Rose is out in front early along with Incentivise, Floating Artist and Knights Order. The 23 horses are racing. The horses are in the barriers now. We’re close. Meanwhile, outside ... Payne is tipping Spanish Mission and Grand Promenade (if you’re interested). Incentivise, as I’ve mentioned, is a favourite with odds so short he’s awesome concentrate. But the Melbourne Cup field is generally infamously open. Who could forget when Prince Of Penzance overcame 100-1 odds in 2015? The jockey in the saddle was, of course, Michelle Payne, who was the first woman to ride the winner. Rachel King will become the 13th female jockey and will be out to become the second female to ride the winner when she partners Pondus. Payne is on the Network 10 panel on today’s coverage and is taking a trip down memory lane to describe the pre-race vibe. “Going over the final thoughts over the field,” she says. “How they intend on riding their horse and what might change when the barriers open. You have to go with the plan A and you need to have a plan B and if that goes out the window you need to make it up as you go.” We are less than half an hour away from the big race now. Here is the final field with barriers: 1. TWILIGHT PAYMENT (IRE) G9 Joseph O’Brien 58kg (2) 2. INCENTIVISE G5 Peter G Moody 57kg (1.5kg penalty) (16) 3. SPANISH MISSION (USA) H6 Andrew Balding 57kg (14) 4. VERRY ELLEEGANT (NZ) M6 Chris Waller 57kg (19) 5. EXPLOSIVE JACK (NZ) H4 Ciaron Maher &amp; David Eustace 54kg (4) 6. THE CHOSEN ONE (NZ) H6 Murray Baker &amp; Andrew Forsman 54kg (5) 7 .DELPHI (IRE) H5 Anthony &amp; Sam Freedman 53.5 (3) 8. OCEAN BILLY (NZ) G6 Chris Waller 53.5kg (13) 9. SELINO (GB)G6 Chris Waller 53.5kg (24) 10. JOHNNY GET ANGRY (NZ) G4 Denis Pagan 53kg (22) 11. KNIGHTS ORDER (IRE) G7 Gai Waterhouse &amp; Adrian Bott 53kg (9) 12. PERSAN G5 Ciaron Maher &amp; David Eustace 53kg (11) 13. CARIF G6 Peter &amp; Paul Snowden 52.5kg (8) 14. MASTER OF WINE (GER) G7 Michael, Wayne &amp; John Hawkes 52.5kg (6) 15. PONDUS (GB) G6 Robert Hickmott 52.5kg (1) 16. GRAND PROMENADE (GB) G6 Ciaron Maher &amp; David Eustace 52kg (21) 17. MIAMI BOUND (NZ) M5 Danny O’Brien 52kg (17) 18. PORT GUILLAUME (FR) G5 Ben &amp; JD Hayes 52kg (23) 19. SHE’S IDEEL M6 Bjorn Baker 52kg (20) 20. FUTURE SCORE (IRE)G7Matt Cumani 51.5kg (15) — scratched 21. TRALEE ROSE (NZ) M5 Symon Wilde 51kg (12) 22. FLOATING ARTIST (GB) G6 Ciaron Maher &amp; David Eustace 50kg (10) 23. GREAT HOUSE (IRE) G5 Chris Waller 50kg (7) 24. SIR LUCAN (IRE) H4 Gai Waterhouse &amp; Adrian Bott 50kg (18) A quick digestible look at Melbourne Cup history: * First run in 1861 under the banner of the Victorian Turf Club and won by Archer who beat the favourite Mormon by six lengths. The prize was 1420 pounds and the trophy a gold watch. * Archer came back the following year to beat Mormon, this time by eight lengths, a record margin that still stands and is shared with the 1968 winner Rain Lover. * Trainer Bart Cummings claimed the first of his 12 Melbourne Cups in 1965 with Light Fingers. His other winners were Think Big (1974, 1975), Gold And Black (1977), Hyperno (1979), Kingston Rule (1990), Let’s Elope (1991), Saintly (1996), Rogan Josh (1999) and Viewed (2008). * Other trainers to have multiple Cup wins include: 5 - Lee Freedman: Tawrrific (1989), Subzero (1992), Doriemus (1995), Makybe Diva (2004, 2005); 4 - John Tait: The Barb (1866), Glencoe (1868), The Pearl (1871), The Quack (1872); Richard Bradfield: Patron (1894), The Victory (1902), Night Watch (1918), Backwood (1924); James Scobie: Clean Sweep (1900), King Ingoda (1922), Bitalli (1923), Trivalve (1927); W S Hinkenbothem: Mentor (1888), Carbine (1890), Newhaven (1896), Blue Spec (1905). * Young Irish trainer Joseph O’Brien will be trying for his third win with Twilight Payment. * Kingston Rule holds the metric race record of 3:16.30. * In 1985, a new era dawned for the Cup with prize money raised to $1 million. The owners of What A Nuisance received $650,000 and a $23,000 Cup. * This year the race is worth $4.4 million to the winning owners. * The oldest horses to win the race were the eight-year-olds Toryboy (1865), Catalogue (1938) and Twilight Payment (2020). * The last three-year-old to win was Skipton (1941). Technically the 2018 winner Cross Counter and 2017 winner Rekindling were three but considered four in the southern hemisphere. * Bobbie Lewis and Harry White are the most successful jockeys with four wins. * In 33 rides in the Cup, Lewis saluted the judge with The Victory (1902), Patrobas (1915), Artilleryman (1919) and Trivalve in 1927. He was also runner-up four times and finished third on Phar Lap in 1929. * Harry White steered the Bart Cummings-trained Think Big to successive victories in 1974 and 1975. He was back in the winners’ circle again with Arwon in 1978 and another Cummings’ runner Hyperno in 1979. * Three jockeys will be chasing their fourth Melbourne Cup win this year - Kerrin McEvoy (Grand Promenade), Damien Oliver (Delphi) and Glen Boss (Sir Lucan). * Makybe Diva is the only horse to win the Cup three times - in 2003, 2004 and 2005. * The longest-priced horses to win: Four horses have won at 100-1: The Pearl (1871), Wotan (1936), Old Rowley (1940) and Prince Of Penzance (2015). * The shortest priced are Archer 2-1 (1862), Tim Whiffler 5-2 (1867), Revenue 7-4 (1901), Phar Lap 8-11 (1930), Even Stevens 3-1 (1962), Let’s Elope 3-1 (1991) and Makybe Diva at 5-2 in 2004. * In 1993, Vintage Crop became the first northern hemisphere-trained horse to win. The Irish stayer was trained by Dermot Weld and ridden by Mick Kinane and is credited with putting the race on the world stage. * In 2015, Michelle Payne became the first woman to ride the winner of the Melbourne Cup when she steered the Darren Weir-trained Prince Of Penzance to a famous victory. * Rachel King will be striving to become the second female to ride the winner when she partners Pondus. My colleague Calla Wahlquist has put together a superb explainer on the Cup’s horse welfare changes. If you are not across the background, I highly recommend reading this one. “Organisers of the Melbourne Cup have been working to clean up its image after the high profile deaths of seven horses in the past six years. The changes – aimed at making sure horses are fit to race and do not have undetected underlying conditions – have been rolled out alongside an advertising and social media campaign that focuses on horse welfare. But will it be enough?” 1. Profiteer 2. Direct 3. Enthaar So there is an Instagram page called @farshansonthefield dedicated to anti-Cup sartorial statements. It’s the veteran Damien Oliver in the saddle this time and he is thrilled. “As soon as the gaps came, he was flying through them,” the 49-year-old, who will ride Delphi in the Melbourne Cup, tells Network 10. “Didn’t have to ask for effort. Point him through the gaps, he did the rest.” 1. Lackeen 2. Frankie Pinot 3. Blondeau My colleague Jonathan Horn wrote an excellent piece over the weekend addressing some of less comfortable elements of horse racing. Here is a snippet and the full article is below. “I don’t want to ban horse racing. I have a love-hate relationship with the sport. Like so many people who punt, go to the races, and opine for or against the sport, I really know nothing about horses. But I think racing is interesting. Some of my favourite sportswriters – WC Heinz, William Nack and Les Carlyon – brought the sport to life for me. Gerald Murnane’s three-page account of a dying steeplechaser at Flemington is just about the best piece of sports-writing I’ve ever read. None of those men shirked the abhorrent aspects of the sport. I think posting #nuptothecup does nothing but broadcast your own magnificence. I think vegans who glue themselves to roads and kidnap lambs are shrill, infantile twits. I think there’s a sneering, priggish undertone to much of the criticism of the sport. “But there’s so much about racing that turns me off.” The sun is out and so is Delta Goodrem’s décolletage. The Australian pop queen is channelling the Royal gramma fish. The Royal gramma, native to the deep-water reefs of the Caribbean and also known as the fairy basslet, is a calm and shy fish in the Grammatidae family. Goodrem is one of a boiled-down celeb turnout including Candice Warner, Love Island contestant Tayla Damir and Miss Universe Australia 2017 Olivia Molly Rogers. It’s a hot one in Melbourne today. Right now the mercury is hovering around 28 degrees celsius, and it’s expected to stay that right throughout the meet. At present the track is rated a Good 4. That could yet change depending how dry it gets, and could have ramifications for the likes of Miami Bound. Is it a chicken? Is it an egg? No, it’s Jessica Rowe! The TV presenter has opted for a figure-hugging white dress and yellow heels, and a fascinator that is, well, fascinating. Herewith in her own words on Instagram. Inside the course, the punters have arrived en masse in their Tuesday best. A maximum of 10,000 fully vaccinated spectators are allowed into the venue. 1. Milton Park 2. Skyman 3. Charliese “Say nup to the cup” is the catch-cry of the protesters. And it appears animal rights activists are not the only demonstrators near Flemington today. Early arrests already happening in those protests I mentioned. Race 1: Brereton won the first of the day, taking out the Darley Maribyrnong Plate (1000m). 1st – Brereton 2nd – Renosu 3rd – Le Gagneur Race 2: Team Captain made light work of the 2800m Macca’s Run field with jockey Blake McDougall aboard. It would have been a welcome win for Matt Cumani, the Ballarat trainer whose Cup horse Future Score was scratched this morning. 1st – Team Captain 2nd – Accountability 3rd – Good Idea Race 3: The Subzero Handicap (1400m) went to Excelman, and McDougall already has his double. 1st – Excelman 2nd – Naval Envoy 3rd – Standoff Good day to you and welcome to our live coverage of the Melbourne Cup. Are you feeling Incentivised today? The bookies certainly are – the Peter Moody-trained stayer is one of the shortest-priced favourites since Phar Lap over the 3,200m at Flemington. And the Australian is probably more of a chance given only a couple of internationals are running, which opens up the field for locally trained horses. As ever, the Cup is a day of conflict for many, and animal welfare groups are camped outside the racecourse protesting at the treatment of horses in the racing industry. The first Tuesday of November has become increasingly polarising in recent years given the growing list of horse deaths. In last year’s race, Anthony Van Dyck broke down and was later euthanised, and has since been found to have been lame before running. We will cover it all, and would appreciate your thoughts on all of the above. The main race starts at 3pm AEDT, but I will be here between now and then for the undercards and, of course, some fash-ahn. Yay. Or should I say, neigh.On a late May day in 1996, the singer Eva Cassidy and her bandmate Chris Biondo drove to a remote factory in rural Virginia to collect copies of the recording that turned out to be the last she would ever make. “We picked up a total of about 1,100 cassettes and CDs,” Biondo recalled. “When we got in the car, Eva cracked open a box and started getting very worried. She felt she wasn’t going to be able to sell them all. I’ll never forget her comment: ‘When I’m dead and they find me, there’s going to be boxes of these in my basement,’ she said. Her expectations for the record could not have been more minimal.” After all, Cassidy had been performing for nearly a decade by then in relative obscurity and, while she had a number of meetings with record company executives in that time, they never went beyond the talking stage. Worse, by the summer of 96, the 33-year-old was facing something dire. Over the course of the next few months, she would receive increasingly grim diagnoses of a cancer that had already begun to make quickening race through her body, robbing her of any chance of making a mark during her time on earth. Given that, who could have foreseen that Cassidy’s music would one day generate a sustained catalogue that would sell in the multi-millions, creating chart hits all over the world? “At the time, we just hoped to make enough money to buy a PA system,” Biondo said. This week will mark 25 years since Cassidy died of melanoma cancer, just 10 months after recording the live album she and Biondo had driven out to pick up that day. The story that emerged later – of a talent barely recognized in her lifetime, who went on to achieve rapturous posthumous acclaim – has become one of the most dramatic bad news/good news tales in pop history. But it never would have happened without the stalwart efforts of some dedicated supporters, as well as several connections that brought her songs to the attention of more media gatekeepers than normally receive credit in the tale. The small label that set things in motion, Blix Street Records, seemed an unlikely engine to power such a success. Before making a deal with Eva’s estate, the imprint had achieved modest sales with recordings by jazz instrumental bands and Celtic singers, the best-selling of whom was Mary Black. It was another singer on the label, Grace Griffith, a friend of Cassidy’s from the Washington DC club scene, who introduced her music to Blix Street chief Bill Straw. “We have this wonderful nightingale,’” Griffith told him, Straw recalled. “I’m afraid we’re going to lose her.” “As soon as her vocal came on, I felt it was extraordinary,” he said. “By the time I finished the album, I came to the conclusion that this was one of the best singers ever.” Though many have come to similar conclusions since, Biondo was one of the first to do so. He met Cassidy in the winter of 1986 when, on the recommendation of a mutual friend, she came to visit him at his small home recording studio. “She was afraid to come inside because she had not done any recording like this before,” Biondo said. Once she began to sing, however, he was instantly taken with her natural skill. “A lot of people take lessons to learn music theory and how to do harmonies,” he said. “She could just do it. I watched her come up with three- or four-part harmonies out of nowhere. She would hear it in her head and then sing anything she heard.” Biondo believes that skill is what freed her to bring so much emotion to the songs. “There are a lot of components to someone trying to pull off a tune,” he said. “They have to think about the technical parts, about what the next note is and what the phrasing will be. But because those things were so natural to Eva, it allowed her to go right to the next level, which was to go inside the song and feel the lyrics.” Her skill also meant she could improvise the tunes at will, as well as bend the notes with a sculptor’s care. “She could change the melody to something the band had not heard before on a gig-by-gig basis,” Biondo said. Then there was the sheer sound of her soprano, graced by a tone as plush as fleece. “It’s the purity of the tone that struck me,” said Rob Burley, who wrote the book Songbird, about Cassidy’s life. “The unadorned quality of it shines through.” At times, however, the subtlety of her approach, and the quiet intensity of it, could fly over the heads of some audiences. “We never played loud which was a problem for us,” Biondo said. “One time, we played this club in southern Maryland and we were doing ballads, country tunes and the clientele was into Lynyrd Skynyrd, so people were leaving. The guy who had hired us to play said, ‘How about I pay you and you guys go home?’ It’s never a good thing when someone pays you to leave.” On the other hand, Biondo said Cassidy “thought that was kinda cool,” an attitude that underscores her focus on the performance rather than its reception. “She just liked to go out and sing,” he said. “She didn’t want anybody to jump up and down.” Cassidy remained equally cool when it came to meetings with record companies. “Maybe half a dozen companies came down to talk to her,” Biondo said. “But she never did the kinds of things the people who think they’re going to get a contract do, which is to act all giddy and make fast friends with the A&amp;R people. I don’t think they were too impressed with her enthusiasm level.” Cassidy’s low-key response had two sources: her introverted character, and her concern that the industry might try to squeeze her omnivorous musical taste into a box. When one company executive asked Cassidy what kind of music she wanted to record, she told him, “anything but that pop crap,” Burley said. When the prestigious Blue Note Records gave Cassidy’s band a budget of $3,500 to cut six songs, she covered six different genres. “You could see that the business sense and who the artist is was going to collide,” Biondo said. At one point, Blue Note tried pairing her with a smooth jazz band on the label, Pieces of a Dream, for a few songs but the singer despised the result. A more pleasing proposal came from Apollo Records, run by civil rights activist Percy Sutton, a label connected to the vaunted Harlem-based theater. “They sent her a contract which meant she could have quit her day job (in a plant nursery) and gotten a yearly salary,” Biondi said. “That was a dream come true.” Unfortunately, before Cassidy could sign, the company folded. That’s the whole reason Cassidy and her band cut the Live at Blues Alley album. It was essentially a hail-Mary pass to get attention and earn some badly needed cash. Sadly, around the same time a mysterious mole on Cassidy’s back began to raise concerns. Because she hadn’t seen a doctor in years, Biondo insisted she go to his. But she delayed for six months. When she finally went, it instigated a procedure that became far more invasive that was first assumed. The doctor had to take the skin from the back of her neck all the way down her spine in a three-inch-wide swath. While the surgeon thought he caught all the cancer, it came back with a vengeance. “It was bad news after bad news,” Biondo said. “She had cancer in her lungs, her brain, her arm, her back.” Several months of heavy chemotherapy followed, to no avail. In her dying days, Cassidy’s music was brought once again to various labels. And they still turned her down. “The thing that pisses me off is that there wasn’t anybody smart enough to realize what was there,” said Biondo. “When they heard Eva, they should have known.” Bill Straw had heard Cassidy’s music by then; he was invited by Griffith to meet her at a benefit held for the singer two months before her death. But he felt it would be ghoulish for him to attend. Six months after she died, however, he met with her parents. Straw had the advantage of understanding the kind of specialized audience he assumed she could reach at that point. It helped that there were no other serious bidders. Though Cassidy had self-released just three albums in her lifetime – including a collaboration with DC go-go pioneer Chuck Brown, a solo work, and the live Blues Alley album – she had some 127 recordings in the can. From that deep trove, Blix Street fashioned an ideal set titled Songbird, which they issued in 1998. A myth has arisen that the album sold nothing until it was picked up by BBC Radio 2 two years later, but, according to Straw, the American press jumped on it quickly, with rave reviews in publications as mainstream as People magazine. Once the label convinced a Boston radio station to play her music, “we sold 10,000 CDs in that city in two weeks. We kept having these little explosions,” Straw said. The Mount Vesuvius moment, however, came when Blix Street’s associated label in the UK, Hot Records, hired Tony Bramwell, a record promo guy from the 60s who had worked with the Beatles, to promote the music. He took it to the producer of Terry Wogan’s huge morning show on Radio 2. “They listened because of Tony Bramwell’s lineage,” Burley said. The result instantly resonated with British listeners, generating snowballing sales. Just before Christmas 2000, after Top of the Pops 2 played a blurry video of Cassidy singing Over the Rainbow, the album soared to the top of the UK chart. In the years since, the demand for her music has encouraged the release of no fewer than 12 subsequent albums, consisting of either previously unheard or repackaged performances. This December will see the release of yet another – a 25th anniversary edition of Live at Blues Alley. Biondo, who is credited as producer on most of her recordings, doesn’t believe that all of that music deserves to be heard. “I don’t think Eva would want it all out,” he said. “She didn’t get the chance to censor her own stuff and I don’t think that’s fair, especially since she had such strong feelings about people not hearing her at her best.” Even Straw believes one release shouldn’t have happened – the Wonderful World set from 2004. Still, he said, pressure from the public dictated that release. As to what Cassidy herself would have made of the sheer scale of the attention she has received, Biondo said, “she would have been scared shitless.” He believes she would have preferred a more measured, and controllable, degree of attention. “I have this day dream about Eva every once in a while,” Biondo mused. “In the dream, she isn’t dead and she’s as loved as she is now. I see her singing in this little restaurant that’s behind my house. Maybe 40 people can fit in there and she plays there every night and people pay a lot of money to see her. And they’re quiet and they really listen. To her, that would be heaven.”The rowan trees opposite my office are now devoid of either leaf or fruit, but from August until recently they have been centres of intense activity for jackdaws, rooks, carrion crows and even magpies. The birds crowded the tops or chased each other through the foliage while they feasted daily on the red fruits. I had never previously noticed the connection between rowan berries and corvids. These observations, in turn, helped me to understand an older puzzle, because on the slopes along the high moorland edge, the ground had been sown with 30 young rowans. I’d previously credited this habitat creation to another tree-planting group, the thrushes. In their wonderful book Birds and Berries, Barbara and David Snow suggest that blackbirds were the chief consumers and propagators of rowans in their Hertfordshire study area. Here, however, it’s a far less beloved black bird that is the creative force. A third piece in the ecological jigsaw was a fragment of Aberdeenshire dialect once recounted to me by a farmer near Turiff. Saplings that spring up mysteriously in that area are known as “craa-sown”. Now I understand it. Once you are attuned to the rowan-planting efforts of these often despised black creatures, you realise how much we owe them. It turns out that hawthorns are equally popular with members of the crow family, and often the only native trees growing in the infertile soils of the High Peak are these two fruit-bearing bushes. The other name for rowan is mountain ash, and of all trees it is the one most tolerant of high, wind-swept places. It is the crows that we should thank partly for the colour, complexity and texture in parts of our upland landscape. Without them some areas of Derbyshire would almost certainly have no trees at all. If there had previously been doubt about who had sown the 30 young rowans, I am rather more certain about who chopped them down. Last spring it appears someone from a nearby driven-grouse moor took a chainsaw to them and felled the lot. I’m now putting my money on crows as the truer custodians of this landscape. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiarySlipperiness is Scott Morrison’s defining characteristic. And it was never more on show than this week as he sold “the Australian Way” on climate to a sceptical crowd in Glasgow, while being openly branded a liar by France over submarines. Take the stoush with Emmanuel Macron. When asked if Morrison had lied to him about dumping the $90bn Attack-class submarine contract, the French president said tartly: “I don’t think, I know.” Morrison denied it, before an instant pivot to a baseless claim about the journalists. “You were getting selfies with him.” No, we weren’t, said an indignant hack. “I must have been misinformed,” Morrison replied. All ridiculously trivial, but not quite innocent. When cornered, the Australian prime minister breaks the glass and reaches for distraction. Remember in March, when under pressure over the culture in parliament house, he suddenly turned on Sky News, warning about “glass houses”. “Right now, you would be aware that in your own organisation there is a person who had had a complaint made against them for harassment of a woman in a women’s toilet,” thundered Morrison. Not true, said Sky’s owners at News Corp. The prime minister issued a late night withdrawal. “The emotion of the moment is no excuse,” he said. Morrison’s next reactions to Macron were also interesting. “I have a lot of respect for your country,” Macron said, making plain he blamed Morrison specifically for what he contends was a lie. “A lot of respect and friendship for your people.” Morrison’s response was to defend Australia’s honour, citing his own “broad shoulders”. “I’m not going to cop sledging of Australia. I am not going to cop that on behalf of Australians.” Then, in an extraordinary breach of normal protocols, a personal text message from the French president was selectively leaked to the press. We now know that two days before the Aukus announcement, Macron texted Morrison to ask: “Should I expect good or bad news for our joint submarine ambitions?” This is being presented as evidence Macron knew the contract was about to be torn up. But Morrison’s fuller explanation subverts that reading. In mid-June, Morrison says he flew to Paris for dinner with Macron to state “candidly … that a conventional diesel-powered submarine was not going to meet Australia’s strategic requirements”. But whatever he now says he said, what the French plainly heard was merely that there were problems with costs and delays. On Morrison’s own account, “the French defence system swung into full action”, sending an admiral to Australia to respond “to the issues that I had raised at our dinner”. Back then, Morrison publicly thanked the French president for “taking a very active role” in resolving the submarine issues. Morrison’s own account shows French actions consistent with a partner trying to fix issues, rather than one who had been told its services were no longer required. In essence, Morrison now says “they knew”. Macron says “he lied”. It appears the French knew less than they thought about Australia’s intentions, up to the virtual eve of the Aukus announcement. “I think it’s clear from president macron’s statements yesterday that the level of offence is still very great,” Morrison conceded in a moment of clarity in Glasgow. So Morrison slipped and slid through the French submarine contract until he was ready to announce his nuclear partnership with the US and UK. As he slipped and slid to the prime ministership in 2018, activating a tightly held plan to come through the pack. He out-energised Bill Shorten to claim victory in 2019, in part by convincing pensioners that Labor’s franking credit reforms would leave them worse off. The man who carried coal into parliament now has a net zero pamphlet that he believes can win back voters concerned about a warming planet. The electric vehicles which he claimed would destroy the Aussie weekend are now built into his emissions reduction goals. The man who said cutting emissions would destroy the economy now argues the opposite. As emissions have fallen by 20% since 2005, our economy has grown by 45%, he says, “proving that economic growth is not at odds with emissions reduction”. And we now have a new moral reason to export coal. We’re helping the world’s poor, he said in Rome. “Don’t force up the cost,” he begged. “That is only going to hurt the people who can afford it least.” If slipperiness defines him, it is also his primary political skill. Franklin D Roosevelt’s biographer Kenneth Davis says the former US president had little time for politicians “who pursued their objectives in uncompromisingly straight lines, men who disdain(ed) cajolery and concealment and misdirection”. As Turnbull, Dutton and now Macron can attest, those who have underestimated Morrison have been left clawing at the open air. Less chameleon than oiled seal, he has already slipped them by.Saving the world’s forests will be one of the cornerstone achievements of the Cop26 climate summit, the UK environment minister Zac Goldsmith has said, with some of the biggest forested nations and consumers of forestry products signing up to an “unprecedented” conservation deal. On Tuesday, more than 100 world leaders will commit to halting and reversing deforestation and land degradation by 2030, backed by nearly £14bn in public and private funding. Major producers and consumers of deforestation-linked commodities including Indonesia, China, Brazil and the US have put their name to the deal, which aims to curtail the second largest source of greenhouse gas emissions. Lord Goldsmith told the Guardian: “This is a genuinely unprecedented package. People will be able to justify having hope [that the world’s forests can be saved]. This puts us on a road to recovery and renewal.” He said it had “not been easy” to persuade many of the countries involved to join, as the deal requires not just a commitment to halt deforestation – which has never been achieved before, despite numerous failed attempts – and provide forested countries with funds to replace the money they would have made from exploiting forested land, but also to reforming aspects of commodity markets so that buyers cannot get away with importing commodities produced from deforested land. “The different parts of the package are mutually reinforcing,” said Goldsmith. “We are sending a very serious signal to the markets, we have a good pledge from buyers. The market has been blind to the value of the environment … The [current economic] incentives to deforest are 40 times bigger than the incentives to keep healthy forests, so changing that is difficult.” The line-up of countries includes China and Brazil, as well as smaller developing countries, and some big buyers of forestry products which will clean up their supply chains. “There are some surprising countries in there, and this is a pretty bullish pledge,” said the Conservative peer, though he declined to name any countries. “We have managed to persuade some of the trickier customers to come on board.” Goldsmith, son of the late billionaire financier Sir James Goldsmith, has long been a notable environmentalist, a former owner of the Ecologist magazine and a campaigner and philanthropist for conservation projects. His political career as an MP, which included a campaign running against Labour’s Sadiq Khan to be London mayor that was marred by accusations of Islamophobia, was ended by defeat in the 2019 election. Soon afterwards he was put in the Lords, controversially, by Boris Johnson. He was charged by Johnson, an old friend and fellow old Etonian, with what he said was a personal passion for protecting nature and combating the loss of species and habitats. “Putting nature at the heart [of the Cop] has been my obsession. It’s mad that nature has always been more or less forgotten [in climate negotiations],” said Goldsmith. The difficulty of achieving the broader deal hoped for at Cop26, of drastic cuts in greenhouse gas emissions in line with scientific advice, was apparent on the first day of the summit, when more than 120 world leaders gathered in Glasgow. António Guterres, the UN secretary general, delivered a gloomy forecast of the prospects. “Recent climate action announcements might give the impression that we are on track to turn things around,” he said. “This is an illusion.” In this context, having a side deal on forestry in the bag is a major boost for the UK as hosts. However, some countries and analysts told the Guardian the agreement, while important, was flawed and lacking in some key respects, with too little cash being dedicated to helping poor countries preserve their forests, and too little emphasis on reducing demand for the commodities – such as soy, palm oil and beef – that drive deforestation in the first place. John Sauven, executive director of Greenpeace, said: “Everyone wants to see zero deforestation, not least the indigenous peoples whose homes and livelihoods are under threat. But without tackling the drivers of destruction it’s like whistling in the wind to think cash alone will work. Cattle and soya for animal feed are wiping out the Amazon and savannahs of Brazil. The industrial meat industry, like its counterpart in the fossil fuel sector, needs to come to an end.” He added: “Every climate scientist is saying we need to eat less meat. We won’t save the forests until politicians stop ignoring that message.” Indigenous leaders, who have been shown to be the best guardians of the natural world by several studies, have also said they were not consulted on the declaration, adding that many leaders making the commitment had a history of breaking promises on protecting indigenous rights. Goldsmith said the deal would benefit forest dwellers. “Indigenous people have always been seen as second tier [at Cops], they have never been given this support before,” he said. “I think for them this support will be a turning point at this Cop.” He added: “When you put it all together, it’s a robust package, trying to get as many major countries together as possible to commit to ending deforestation. But it’s worth nothing unless they back this up with policies. It will be our job to make this real.”On Saturday 29 October 2011, the day the entertainer Jimmy Savile died aged 84, a couple of comments were posted on the Duncroft School page of the networking site Friends Reunited. Duncroft was designated as an “approved school” by the Home Office, and offered residential care for “intelligent but emotionally disturbed girls”. “He died today, RIP no RIH yes rot in hell,” read one message. “Perhaps some closure for the childhoods that were ruined by this animal.” Over the next few days a handful more messages appeared: “You child molester – you were no better than all the other pervs who have been banged up … only your celebrity status saved you.” Someone else wrote how she would never recover from what “JS” did to her. Across the news bulletins and weekend front pages, Savile was being given a sendoff fitting for someone who had achieved national treasure status. As BBC Radio 1 DJ, and co-presenter of the BBC’s flagship music programme Top of the Pops, Savile became a personality in the pop music scene in the 60s and 70s; his oddness and mannerisms enhanced his celebrity. As the host of the long-running Saturday evening TV show Jim’ll Fix It, he played godfather, granting the wishes to children who wrote in. On the Monday after his death, during the news editors’ 9.15 morning meeting at BBC headquarters in west London, those present were asked to take coverage of Savile’s funeral seriously. The concern was that the news editors might sneer at Savile; they were reminded that, to much of the audience, Savile was a northern hero. He had started out working in the mines, going on to earn a knighthood and befriend royalty through his television shows and charity work. Meanwhile, George Entwistle, the BBC’s head of television, was trying to work out how BBC light entertainment would mark the death of one of its biggest stars. Entwistle was informed that there was no obituary ready to run on Savile – unusual for someone who had made such a contribution to British public life. The decision had been made by successive controllers, a colleague told him by email. Savile had a “dark side”, which meant it was “impossible to make an honest film to be shown so close to death”, his colleague said. Entwistle emailed his team: the best way forward was to avoid making anything new about Savile. Someone suggested making a Fix It Christmas special hosted by a new BBC star. All agreed. Problem solved. It’d be “a real Christmas treat”, said the BBC1 controller in an email. Rumours about Savile being a sexual predator and a paedophile had persisted for decades. In his trademark brightly coloured shell suits, scant shorts and string vests, Savile had performed his perversions almost as much as he’d hidden them. His manner almost dared people to challenge him. Because of the UK’s punitive libel laws, no one ever had. On the Monday morning after Savile’s death, in the Newsnight office at BBC Television Centre, social affairs correspondent Liz MacKean and producer Meirion Jones began to investigate Savile’s history. Jones had a personal connection to the story: his aunt ran the Duncroft School. Over three years in the early 1970s, when he was in his mid-teens, Jones visited Duncroft on weekends with his parents and his sister. They would often see Savile’s white Rolls-Royce parked outside. His parents were concerned about Savile taking the girls off site. Jones met Savile there a few times, always finding it curious how he seemed to speak in catchphrases that created what Jones described as “a screen between him and people around him”. In 1988, Jones became a journalist at the BBC. It soon became one of the stories he wanted to get a purchase on. Once social media arrived, he would search sites for references to Savile and Duncroft. In 2010, he found a memoir published online by a former Duncroft pupil, detailing abuse by a celebrity “JS”. Jones had spoken to MacKean at different times about pursuing the story, but they were at a disadvantage legally. Savile was part of the establishment, a leading charity fundraiser, and some of the Duncroft girls were offenders. Some had been abused from a young age, and had run away from care homes. No one would believe them against him. “Any witness would be destroyed in court so we’d never get it past the lawyers,” Jones told me. “It’s exactly why he targeted places like that.” MacKean, then 46, from Hampshire, had two children and worked at Newsnight part-time. As a journalist she was drawn to people on the margins – people who’d been wronged and couldn’t get justice. “She was a lucky person, highly attuned to the unlucky and the unfair,” MacKean’s friend Amelia Bullmore wrote to me. Within a few weeks of Savile’s death, MacKean had collected on-the-record testimony from 10 women who had been at Duncroft. Seven had been abused and three had witnessed abuse by Savile. It had been difficult to convince them to go public. Some told her they worried they would be seen as complicit; they were sure they wouldn’t be believed. Some feared a backlash, that people would claim they were out for something: compensation, notoriety. MacKean, a BBC journalist of 20 years’ standing, assured the women that they’d have the weight of Newsnight behind them, and the support of the BBC. But a few days before the transmission date, the Newsnight editor, Peter Rippon, told MacKean and Jones that the piece couldn’t be broadcast. He said they needed to focus on some kind of institutional failure. What about the police investigation that had been halted? MacKean told Rippon that the women’s stories corroborated one another – they didn’t need any other elements. It all stacked up. And on top of this, they had found institutional failure by the BBC. Some of the abuse had taken place on BBC premises, in dressing rooms in Television Centre, the very building in which they were standing. MacKean couldn’t know the extent to which she’d have to take on the BBC in order to make sure that the former Duncroft pupils were taken seriously. Nor could she know that she and Jones would be risking their careers. But in refusing to drop the story, they helped to change the culture about the way past sexual abuse is talked about, and survivors listened to, in the UK. The BBC is now making a mini-series about Savile. One of the few details it has announced is that Steve Coogan will play Savile. Some viewers are uneasy about the BBC putting Savile back in the limelight, and have expressed concern about how people still living with the impact of his abuse will feel about it. But the BBC feels the time is right for a reckoning, and says the drama “will examine the impact his appalling crimes had on [Savile’s] victims and the powerlessness many felt when they tried to raise the alarm”. * * * Savile’s funeral was broadcast live on BBC News on 9 November 2011. The pavements around Leeds Cathedral were thick with mourners as his gold coffin was borne past. MacKean told the documentary maker Olly Lambert in 2014 that she watched this and thought: “The difference between that and the sort of things that people now felt able to start telling us – a gulf like that – that’s a story.” Working with Jones and MacKean, BBC trainee Hannah Livingston tracked down about 60 former Duncroft pupils. Most immediately assumed the call would be about Savile. Those willing to talk were passed on to MacKean. Over long calls, MacKean began to understand how Savile masterminded the abuse. He would offer the girls cigarettes and trips to Television Centre in his Rolls-Royce. In return, they’d have to give him oral sex in a layby. Among the Newsnight editorial team there were some squeamish discussions about the Savile story. Jeremy Paxman, Newsnight’s lead presenter for 25 years, whose rigorous, curmudgeonly questioning style defined the programme, told me: “I think there were an awful lot of people who felt that it was at the tabloidy end of things.” One member of the team wanted nothing to do with it on grounds of “taste”. Some thought it was too close to Savile’s death, and sensationalist. “That was one of the arguments deployed at the time,” one former senior Newsnight journalist told me. “Newsnight was meant to be serious, high-minded journalism about politics, economics, foreign affairs and culture, and this isn’t what it should be doing.” Rippon was initially enthusiastic about MacKean and Jones pursuing the Savile story, but, as MacKean told Jones in an email after a meeting she had with Rippon and a member of his editorial team, they were “[of] course concerned about the credibility of the women”. MacKean told Lambert in 2014, during a long interview that he recorded but never broadcast: “The women we spoke to were middle-aged. The fact that they’d been in a school like Duncroft showed that their lives were on a difficult course. Perhaps they weren’t the most appealing interviewees for television. There is, within the mainstream establishment, a dislike of those sorts of people, an official indifference, or they just find them difficult to deal with. I think that’s why the BBC then found it so hard to admit that we were investigating Jimmy Savile, because there was a real embarrassment at admitting that the BBC, like all these other official institutions, had just shrugged its shoulders and turned away from people rather than listened.” The BBC said in a statement: “Savile’s actions were profoundly wrong and we are sorry for the pain caused to his survivors … Today’s BBC is a very different place, where complaints about any form of harassment are considered with the utmost seriousness.” When MacKean arrived at Newsnight in 2000 after being a presenter on BBC Breakfast News, Jones had been producing investigations for the programme for five years. He noticed that she would get stories from people who didn’t usually talk to journalists. “You could absolutely 100% trust her, and the women [from Duncroft] knew they could trust her too,” he said. “And she was totally unafraid.” While MacKean was working on Savile, I was working as a freelancer, producing another investigation with her at Newsnight. When I first met her in the office that summer, she looked at my hands, saw they were covered in scratches and asked me if I had a kitten at home. Nobody asked questions like that on first meetings at Newsnight: not personal, not domestic, not about kittens. Newsnight was a tough environment, but MacKean was disarmingly herself. She drew people out. Over the next year I would watch MacKean fight for the Savile story, see how her work went unrecognised, how she was ignored and sidelined at the BBC, and how profoundly that affected her. “She’d always struck me as a very ordinary journalist,” a former senior news executive told me. “She wasn’t ambitious or sharp-elbowed. She didn’t fill the screen.” I put it to him that MacKean’s talents for listening to sources were one of the qualities that made her extraordinary. He considered this for a moment and said: “Listening wasn’t a quality we gave much credit to back then. It should have been.” In 2010, Jones and MacKean won the Daniel Pearl award for investigative journalism for their report on Trafigura’s toxic waste dumping in Ivory Coast, co-authored with the Guardian. Paxman told me: “Meirion’s like a dog with a bone. I always took it as read that if Meirion said something was true, it was true. Even though there might be very expensive lawyers for the other side, I always believed him. And he worked with Liz. They were not what you’d call ‘clubbable’. I admired Liz very much. She was a difficult woman, but the best journalists very often are difficult.” Because Jones and MacKean had been given freedom to get on with their work in the past, when their editor questioned whether they had done enough on the Savile story, it was a shock. * * * On Monday 14 November 2011, cameraman Simon Monk picked up MacKean, Jones and Livingston from a train station in the south of England and drove them to the home of the only one of Savile’s victims they had spoken to who had agreed to record an interview on camera. Monk didn’t know what the story was that he had been booked for. “I’ve often thought about that interview,” he told me. “It stayed with me, you know, just little moments of it. I realised – I’m listening to something that happened to this lady, that I was privy to something that had maybe never been shared before.” In the car on the way back, the team were quiet at first. Slowly they prompted one another’s responses. They had all believed her. “It was subdued,” Monk said, “and I’m thinking: we’re at the beginning of something. The lid is being prised open on this. I’ve worked there for a long time and seen how people have been dealt with, especially women in the Beeb.” Monk turned on the car radio, and by coincidence the BBC Christmas schedule was being announced – including the Savile tributes. “They’ll have to cancel those now,” someone said. The team were working to corroborate as many fine details as possible from their collection of quotes by the former Duncroft pupils. Rippon asked Jones and MacKean to confirm claims that the police had investigated Savile. On 25 November, Jones received confirmation that Surrey police had investigated Savile in 2007, and that a file had been passed to the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS). Rippon gave the story a transmission date of 7 December. He wrote it on the Newsnight whiteboard, which meant it was certain to be going on air. Jones sent a draft version of MacKean’s script to the BBC Impact team, which makes sure important stories are headlined on news bulletins across the network. The Impact department expected a lot of interest, and asked if MacKean could be available for live interviews across all BBC outlets on the day of transmission. Two minutes later, Rippon sent an email to his line manager: “The women are credible and have no motive for speaking to us other than they want the truth to be known … We also think that Sky are chasing the story too so we don’t want to sit on it.” Rippon received a reply from his manager Stephen Mitchell, the deputy head of news, saying he’d call later. At the 2012 inquiry into the BBC’s conduct over the Newsnight investigation, both said they could not remember whether any subsequent conversation took place. Nick Pollard, chair of the inquiry, wrote in his review: “The inability of both … Mr Rippon and Mr Mitchell to provide any recollection of whether they did or did not speak and, if so, what was said, was frustrating.” (When I approached Stephen Mitchell for comment about this, he said: “I would refer you to the two inquiries carried out into these events and the published outcomes of these, as I recall the reports were clear on how the item was handled.”) But the next day, Rippon had pulled back. He emailed MacKean and Jones asking them to confirm if it was true that the CPS had dropped the case because of Savile’s old age, as some of the Duncroft women had been told. “That makes it a much better story,” he wrote to Jones and MacKean. “Our sources so far are just the women.” Pollard quoted Rippon’s testimony in his review: “The extent to which we had to rely on the testimony from [the on camera interviewee] was stark. She was the only victim in vision we had and would be the face of our allegations and I remained concerned about how well her testimony would stand up to the scrutiny it would get.” MacKean, however, was enraged by that phrase “just the women”. She walked into Rippon’s glass-walled office, leaving the door open. “Liz would have been grandstanding,” Jones recalled, “making sure the whole office could hear. He’d have been looking at his toes. Liz, with big arm gestures, was saying: ‘How dare you talk about “just the women”?’ … I don’t remember whether I’d ever seen her bawling out the editor before.” MacKean asked Rippon to watch their interview with Savile’s victim, but he refused. Pollard wrote in his review: “Mr Rippon told me: ‘I don’t think seeing the interview … seeing something with an eye … gives you any more help in making a judgment about whether something is true or not … I think the kind of concerns that I had, that I was weighing, would not have been swayed by having sat down and watched the interview.’ I think this is a strange thing for a television news journalist and editor to say. Common sense and experience would surely suggest the opposite.” Rippon wiped the Savile story from the Newsnight whiteboard and told Jones and Mackean to stop work on it until they heard back from the CPS. They didn’t stop. For them, the police investigation was superfluous. They had the story: Savile had been a paedophile and numerous institutions had facilitated his crimes. Jones hired a white Rolls-Royce and filmed it the next day pulling up outside Duncroft. MacKean and Jones were beginning to realise that Savile’s abuse had taken place on a bigger scale than they’d thought. “By then, we’d also heard rumours about Broadmoor, and quite serious allegations about Stoke Mandeville [hospital],” MacKean told Lambert. “Meirion thought there could be 100 victims … I said, I don’t know, but certainly dozens. And of course we’d both wildly underestimated it, as it turned out. But there was certainly enough there to think, right, a lot of institutions have questions to answer: clearly the BBC, certainly the NHS, and also the Home Office.” For the next few days, the atmosphere in the Newsnight office was tense. MacKean and Jones quietly continued working on the story as they waited to hear back from the CPS. On 9 December that email came. The CPS said they had dropped the investigation into Savile because of lack of evidence. “I knew that was the kill,” Jones said. “This statement [from the CPS about lack of evidence] specifically denied the allegation that the investigation was dropped because of his age,” Rippon later wrote in the Editors’ blog on the BBC website. “I felt it was significant the guidance was included and we had not established any institutional failure and I judged it weakened the story from a Newsnight perspective. I took the decision not to publish.” The Pollard review recorded that Rippon told them that “the decision to drop the Savile story was his, and his alone”. Pollard found that there was no inappropriate pressure or interference from BBC senior management with the editorial decision not to broadcast the Savile Newsnight programme. MacKean had to ring the women she’d convinced to trust her and tell them the story wasn’t going on air. “It was crushing and disappointing, but I didn’t accept it,” MacKean told Lambert. “Now she was on a mission to get this story out and to get the truth told, she really was,” MacKean’s wife, Donna Rowlands, told me. There were still a few weeks before Christmas, and MacKean wanted her sources’ voices to be heard before the tributes could air. She leaked the cancellation of her Newsnight investigation to the press. Reporter Miles Goslett got hold of the story and pitched it to seven Fleet Street editors. All turned it down, also on grounds of taste, and because getting into a tussle with the BBC so close to Christmas would cause problems. Even with Savile dead, the story was too much for the British press at that time of year. On Boxing Day evening, after the regional news and before the family film Madagascar: Escape 2 Africa, 5 million people tuned in to BBC One to watch the actor Shane Richie present the Jim’ll Fix It Christmas special. In the new year, MacKean and Jones, with more than four decades of service to the BBC between them, gave all their research on Savile to the BBC’s rival, the commercial channel ITV. “Now, obviously that doesn’t make us feel very good as BBC journalists,” MacKean told Lambert. “But given that by then, we really had the feeling that the BBC didn’t want to run this story, the only chance for us to get it out was going to be through someone else.” * * * On Wednesday 3 October 2012, ITV ran a documentary in their Exposure strand titled The Other Side of Jimmy Savile. Five women, two from Duncroft, spoke about how Savile had sexually assaulted them as underage girls. Not long into the 49-minute programme, the NSPCC helplines began to light up and didn’t stop ringing. And so began a gradual national outpouring of people, mainly women, talking about their own experiences of past sexual abuse, by high-profile figures, or people in their communities, workplaces or families, which many had kept silent about for decades. The weekend before the Exposure documentary aired, the tabloids had splashed on the Savile allegations. “Sensation as TV legend Jimmy Savile is accused of underage sexual assaults” was the front page of the People. The broadsheets joined in, too, but their focus was specifically on Newsnight’s dropped investigation: “BBC ditched Newsnight investigation into Jimmy Savile,” was the Times’s headline. “BBC denies cover-up over claims Savile targeted underage girls” was the Independent’s. To tell the Savile story, the BBC had been looking for a case of contemporary institutional failure. By not running it, they had created one. MacKean and Jones were now greeted by cameras and a press mob every time they entered Television Centre. The BBC press office was doing all it could to deflect the story. It put out statements saying that Newsnight had been investigating Surrey police’s Savile investigation, not Savile himself. On 2 October, Peter Rippon published the blog explaining his decision. “Newsnight is not normally interested in celebrity exposé,” he wrote. MacKean was horrified that the former Duncroft pupils, who’d trusted her with painful stories, were being ignored once again by the BBC. And now her and Jones’s work was being publicly undermined. In November, Chris Patten, then chair of the BBC Trust, and George Entwistle, since promoted to director general, were called before a House of Commons select committee to explain what had happened. Journalists were calling MacKean and Jones, wanting to know their side of the story. Jones ignored the calls at first. MacKean didn’t. MacKean told Lambert: “I remember I had a two-week period of journalists ringing up around the clock, knocking on my door at home, and there was absolutely no one at the BBC I could talk to or get any sort of advice from because we were seen as the enemy within. I remember driving home on Sunday and the phone going, and it was someone from one of the national newspapers to say that a senior member of BBC management had told him that the investigation had been run by a work experience person, and I almost drove off the road.” The BBC told me that after this year’s investigation into Martin Bashir’s 1995 Panorama interview with Diana, Princess of Wales, which identified profound failures in the application and oversight of editorial values, the BBC Board had commissioned the Serota review “to look at how to further strengthen BBC processes and practices”. The remit of the Serota review was to establish whether the BBC had learned from the mistakes of the past, and to consider whether current practice addressed the challenges that had arisen since 1995. It considered the BBC’s oversight of, and accountability for, editorial decision-making processes; the mechanisms in place for staff and others to raise concerns about editorial issues; the effectiveness of the BBC’s whistleblowing procedures; and the culture within the BBC that supported compliance with the BBC’s editorial values and standards. The Serota review was published in late October, and one of its key findings was that many BBC employees “are apprehensive that speaking up could impact negatively on their career”. Back in 2012, MacKean and Jones wrote to Rippon, Mitchell and Entwistle trying to correct what they felt were inaccuracies in the BBC’s statements. But the same BBC lines kept appearing in the press. “We were feeling huge pressure from the machine basically saying: go along with what we’re saying,” Jones said. “We were under a lot of scrutiny. There was incredible stress on both of us. And then we decided to do something which meant we’d incur the wrath of management, which was to make the [programme for] Panorama.” MacKean and Jones had convinced Tom Giles, the editor of Panorama, the BBC’s investigative current affairs programme, to make a programme about what had happened to Newsnight’s Savile investigation. They handed over to Panorama all their emails and paperwork. MacKean and Jones were told by Panorama that a senior manager had said that if they gave interviews to Panorama, they’d lose their jobs. “We stopped worrying about her BBC career,” Rowlands, MacKean’s wife, told me. “And I’m not just saying that. That was going to fall the way it fell. OK, it fell more disappointingly than we’d hoped. But the important thing was that the women were heard – that was her number one. And then number two, that the truth was told about what the BBC had done, and the cover-up.” The BBC press office was split. Part of it promoted the Panorama programme that MacKean and Jones were speaking on, while the other put out the BBC’s corporate reaction to the programme. “It was a baroque arrangement,” one former senior BBC manager said. “It felt weird, like we’d gone beyond the looking-glass,” one former senior Newsnight journalist remembered, “and we didn’t quite know what the rules were. It was very tooth and claw. You could see there were desperate people among management.” The weekend before the Panorama investigation was broadcast, Jones received a call from a journalist with a “tipoff” that someone from the BBC press office had told him that the reason Newsnight hadn’t run the Savile investigation was because Jones was trying to conceal the fact that his aunt had been complicit in Savile’s abuse. Jones received official permission to deny it from senior news editor Peter Horrocks, who had come over from the World Service to take on editorial oversight of the Panorama film to avoid a conflict of interest, as senior BBC news managers were the subjects of its investigation. On 21 October, the Mail on Sunday ran the story, and noted that the “BBC civil war intensified,” as the BBC press office and a BBC journalist gave out information that entirely opposed each other. “It’s just massive pressure,” Jones told me, “when it feels like all your bosses, the whole press office, were fighting a war against you. I would have collapsed over it if I had been on my own – and they would have got away with their pack of lies. But it felt like Liz and I were covering each other’s backs. And there was never a feeling that Liz would crack. She was rock solid on this.” On Monday 22 October, the Panorama film, Jimmy Savile: What the BBC Knew, was broadcast on BBC One at 10.35pm. On the programme, MacKean said the BBC had been “misleading” the public. Viewers watched as the BBC seemed to be criticising itself. Meanwhile, MacKean amplified her criticisms of what she saw as the BBC’s deafness to the victims of past sexual abuse. She said: “[The] women collectively deserved to be heard, and weren’t heard, and that was a failure. We’d convinced them to talk to us, we’d believed them, and we let them down.” Rippon stepped down as the Newsnight editor a few hours before the Panorama film went out. (Pollard would later write in his review that Rippon was already “becoming something of a ‘fall guy’”.) The BBC put out a statement saying that the BBC Newsnight investigation had not started out by looking at Surrey police. It was a small admission, but on that point the record had been corrected. “We were both pretty smashed up after all that,” Jones told me. He remained on a short-term contract with Panorama while MacKean returned to Newsnight alone. “Overnight my relationship with the BBC changed,” MacKean told Lambert. “All of a sudden I was persona non grata, and people who knew me wouldn’t talk to me. I’d sort of sit down and all the usual chit-chat of an office seemed to just fall away.” MacKean felt that for many in management, and colleagues who were fearful of management, she was now tainted. “It became a world where people were disappearing – you didn’t know if all your bosses were going to be sacked,” a former senior Newsnight journalist told me. He talked about the awkwardness of bumping into MacKean and Jones at the time: “You didn’t know what to say. You didn’t know what they wanted, or how far they wanted to take this.” MacKean was hurt. “She wasn’t a rebel. So to suddenly be so outside the tent was quite hard,” Rowlands explained. ‘She was so determined that all the truth would come out and all the people who’d lied would be held accountable. But it suddenly put her in a position that wasn’t comfortable for her. Because really, I mean, it sounds corny, but she was a team player. You know she’d always liked the collegiate nature of the BBC.” Her former colleague Jackie Long told me: “It was the one period in the time I knew her that she sounded at all fragile. That inner confidence was rocked.” * * * Dee Coles was abused by Savile in his campervan when she was 14, while on holiday with her mother in Jersey. When she saw that the Exposure documentary was coming out, she noticed scepticism in some of the papers, and worried that the women coming forward wouldn’t be believed. She wrote to the independent news production company, ITN, and in early October 2012 spoke about her own abuse by Savile on ITV news. She felt MacKean and Jones’s intervention on Panorama was crucial for building victims’ confidence if they were going to come forward. “Nobody else was fighting that particular corner.” Coles said she saw interviews with people who had been at the BBC when Savile was alive saying they hadn’t seen anything, or there was nothing they could have done. “And so it became massive that someone with a journalistic background who had nothing to gain and everything to lose said [that Savile abused children]. It underpinned the whole thing going forward, because otherwise it would just be a bunch of women saying ‘me too’ before it was hash-tagged. It was so courageous.” “A lot of how the BBC behaved was as other institutions behaved,” MacKean told Lambert, “whether the courts, the police and NHS hospitals, even within families, people making the complaints are sidelined. They’re disbelieved. And in that way, the BBC behaved exactly as other institutions did.” A mental shift was now taking place. In a rushed attempt to catch up, Newsnight tried to do a film about another sexual abuse case involving a wealthy industrialist, based on victim testimony. But after the accuser said he got the wrong person, the BBC issued an apology. On 11 November 2012, Entwistle, the BBC director general, resigned. The Pollard review was commissioned by the BBC to look into “the management by the BBC of a Newsnight investigation relating to allegations of sexual abuse of children by Jimmy Savile”. Pollard, a journalist at Sky, took the chair on 16 October 2012 and collected testimony from all the BBC players involved. On 18 December 2012, he released his findings. MacKean and Jones turned up at the door to Pollard’s press conference in Broadcasting House. A press officer stopped them from entering. “We were shocked,” Jones said. “But we couldn’t do anything about it.” MacKean and Jones stood together at a television set in another part of the building and watched the press conference, live on the news, together. Pollard told the room: “The Newsnight investigators had got the story right. They had found clear and compelling evidence that Jimmy Savile was a paedophile. The decision by their editor to drop the original investigation was clearly flawed, though I believe it was done in good faith.” After being barred from Pollard’s press conference, MacKean and Jones decided to address the members of the media who were waiting on the forecourt outside Broadcasting House. A BBC press officer told them that their statements needed to be approved first by the acting head of BBC News. MacKean turned and said: “I think you’ll find they won’t.” She and Jones walked out through the revolving doors to the microphones and stood in front of the flashing cameras. MacKean said: “I think the decision to drop our story was a breach of our duty to the women who trusted us to reveal that Jimmy Savile was a paedophile … Our editor didn’t watch the interview with our main witness. Nick Pollard did, and found her credible and compelling, as did we … I welcome the recommendation that the BBC should trust its journalists.” MacKean and Jones were both invited to individual meetings with the then-acting (and now current) director general of the BBC, Tim Davie. Jones said: “We were both half-expecting that he might say: ‘We’ve got new hands on the tiller, it’s all going to change. Congratulations for going after that really important story. And – I’m sorry.’ But we got the opposite of that. It was new face, same suit.” In a statement, the BBC said: “In response to Pollard’s findings, BBC management dealt with the issues appropriately at the time setting out a number of actions including the replacement of the senior editorial team at Newsnight; the introduction of regular reports from the Director-General to the BBC Management board about the highest risk programmes and investigations across the BBC.” Newsnight moved into Broadcasting House in central London in mid-October 2012. The old Television Centre in White City had been sold, and would later be rebuilt into a complex of high-end apartments and restaurants. MacKean was asked to stay behind, sitting in Paxman’s old chair, ready to present the programme should the satellite link fail in the new studio. MacKean called it the “Miss Havisham” role – she’d done it before when presenters were on location. But as she sat there alone in the empty studio, an understudy, it was her story that made the headlines. The Metropolitan police had launched Operation Yewtree on 9 October to investigate Savile and other establishment figures, and 450 people would come forward to give testimony about being abused by Savile. The NSPCC said that in November and December 2012 it intervened to protect 800 more children than in a similar period in previous years. And since its establishment in 2013, the child sexual abuse review panel has sent 78% of cases referred to them to be reopened by the police or CPS because of flaws in the original investigations. MacKean and Jones had reframed the Savile story. It could no longer be dismissed as a celebrity sex exposé. Now the victims were at the centre. From that moment on, when women spoke out about past sexual abuse, the media, the police and the courts were prepared to listen. “I think the scandal really did change things,” a senior journalist told me. “In our world, the idea that you wouldn’t run a story where you interviewed victims is now very unusual. Certainly if you have lots and lots of adult women saying something like that – you would run that story now. Weinstein was done partly by the New Yorker and the New York Times – the most heavyweight outlets in the world now do that kind of story.” MacKean left the BBC in 2013. She went on to make award-winning documentaries for Channel 4’s Dispatches, but she missed the daily grind of the news and her world at the BBC. In 2017, she and her friend and former Newsnight Northern Ireland producer Michael Hughes were watching the BBC’s general election coverage together. “Liz was sad about it,” Hughes said. She wished she was mucking in, reporting the results with her colleagues on election night. “She always had her head held high, but I think she was sad that the Beeb hadn’t fought harder to keep her.” In August 2017, at the age of 52, MacKean had a stroke and died. I had seen how MacKean’s sense of justice, courage and incisiveness had set off a chain of events that helped to bring justice, and reduce isolation, shame and repression for countless women across the UK and beyond. When I miss Liz’s friendship, I look online for an account of what she helped to achieve through her work on Savile, but I can never find one. So here it is. • Follow the Long Read on Twitter at @gdnlongread, listen to our podcasts here and sign up to the long read weekly email here.Meta PCs, an Arizona-based company that sells computers, laptops and software for gamers was an unremarkable retail outfit a week ago. Then on Thursday, Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg announced his company would be changing its name to Meta and it found itself in an IP war with tech’s biggest behemoth. Lucky for Meta PCs, it’s already a few months ahead of Facebook in having the name trademarked. According to a document shared by TMZ, the company filed for its trademark in August, a little over a year after it was started. Zack Shutt, one of the founders of Meta PCs, told the Guardian that the company was registered in November of last year, and their team was unaware about Facebook’s plans to use “Meta” in any part of its rebranding until last week. Shutt, along with co-founder Joe Darger, told TMZ they won’t sell the name for less than $20m if Facebook CEO Mark Zuckerberg tries to get the name. Shutt declined to further comment on this to the Guardian, citing legal concerns. Facebook did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comments, but someone affiliated with the company told TMZ that they are not too worried and they have the required rights to acquire the name. Mark P McKenna, a professor at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) School of Law, says even though Meta PCs has made an application to trademark its name, there are loopholes that may allow Facebook to acquire the name. One such measure is filing an application in another country and using that application date to file in the US – a practice often used by big companies. “They look for a little country without a searchable system and then file there,” he told the Guardian. “That would be a way for them to have an earlier date.” He added that trademark registration doesn’t define rights of a company in the US in this regard. “In the US, rights aren’t created by trademark registration – the rights arise out of use,” he said. So it remains to be seen how this tug of war will pan out, especially given Meta PCs would be up against a giant like Facebook. Schutt was unable to share information such as the value of the company, but said they’re a small organization with only 25 employees. “We’ve bootstrapped this company with our own personal funds. When we learned Facebook chose the same name, it was obviously a concern that we would lose whatever organic reach we had worked hard to build,” Shutt said, adding that they have “sizable investments” in branded content and influencer marketing in the works. Despite this looming concern, the company is finding fun ways to acknowledge the situation. On Thursday, Shutt shared a video making a parody announcement similar to the one Zuckerberg made when sharing the new name: “To reflect who we are and what we hope to build I’m proud to announce that we are now Facebook,” Shutt says in the video. In another tweet, they photoshopped Zuckerberg holding their product: Facebook’s announcement about its new name has already sparked a flurry of response – from many ridiculing its scope to the revelation that the word means “death” in Hebrew.Deadlines meant I saw ITV’s twisty police corruption drama The Tower as a rough cut, featuring on-screen notes about final editing perfections, computer-generated backgrounds, extra lines of dialogue – and the instruction: “Hide pregnancy bump.” This related to the increasing evidence of Freddie, now four weeks old, and sleeping between feeds in a pub garden near the London home of his mother, Gemma Whelan, who is amused to hear of this prenatal technology. “Wow!” she says. ‘“How are they going to do that? Paint it out? Or cut in a waistline from earlier?” Despite high-level acting credits – including Yara Greyjoy in Game of Thrones and Kate in BBC Two’s Upstart Crow – the 40-year-old says she is never recognised in the street: “People sometimes say, ‘Do I know you from the bus stop?’ or, ‘Were we at school?’ That’s it really.” Whelan enjoys her ability to transform into her her characters, whether with Yara’s breastplate, war paint and mouthy scowl – “it would be almost insulting to be recognised from Game of Thrones” – or, in BBC One’s The Moorside, as Karen Matthews, the Yorkshire woman jailed for faking the abduction of her daughter, so physically transformed that it fooled Whelan’s mum. “She said: ‘Strange they used so much original footage of her!’, and I said: ‘That’s all me, Mum. There is no original footage.’” Whelan is taking minimal maternity leave partly because she is self-employed but also because, like most actors, she endured a year during lockdown of not doing very much. A West End version of Upstart Crow was shut down three weeks into the run, after which she spent “a year doing audiobooks and voiceovers”. She then filmed next year’s second series of BBC One’s Gentleman Jack – playing Marian, the sister of Anne Lister – before The Tower. The main shoot lasted through the second trimester. With actors who are visibly pregnant when their characters are not, the convention has been to shoot them mainly from the neck up. “Yeah. It’s a great way of getting loads of closeups!” laughs Whelan who, during the final season of Game of Thrones, was carrying Frances, now four. “But there also were a lot of wide shots in The Tower. I think you’d only notice if you knew I was pregnant and, if you do notice, women have babies, who cares? It was refreshing to be able to not worry about it.” Whelan’s domestic juggling starkly contrasts with DS Sarah Collins in The Tower, who has no visible private life. “She’s very moral, very black and white. There’s very little nuance in her judgment.” Viewers may be reminded of Adrian Dunbar’s Supt Ted Hastings in Line of Duty, and Whelan admits the similarity: “Absolutely. They swore an oath to keep the law and so they do. She doesn’t care about being a people-pleaser, which I think a lot of women are written as – and, actually, a lot of women are – but I like that she’s very front-footed and doesn’t mind pissing people off.” Adapted by 24 screenwriter Patrick Harbinson, from a series of novels by former Met detective Kate London, The Tower goes out at a time when, after the murder by a serving police officer of Sarah Everard, the reputation of the force is as low as it’s ever been. But, like Line of Duty, The Tower shows good and bad policing. “Yes. Exactly,” says Whelan. “Most of the cops are trying to do their best, but some aren’t; there are wrong ’uns.” As with all current TV productions, The Tower had a Covid-safe set, with testing mandatory and jabs encouraged – a difficult decision for Whelan at a time when medical evidence on safety during pregnancy was sketchy. Stressing that she is not telling others what to do but sharing her own thought processes in a dilemma that many face, she says: “I’m double-vaxxed, and had both while I was pregnant. I spoke to the midwife and doctors at length, and read all the stories about the huge number of American pregnant women who had been jabbed without incident. And I knew if I got Covid in the third trimester it could be very serious. It’s not an easy decision but I felt comfortable to make it and we’re both fine.” Another question of film-set safety has arisen since the revelations about Harvey Weinstein and other showbiz predators. Whelan says that she has never experienced any threats or assaults, but the mood of shoots has noticeably changed. “There’s a very different choice of language now. If anyone makes an innuendo, everyone shuts down. I think, five or 10 years ago, if there was a double entendre, everyone would jump on the bandwagon and see how many laughs they could raise. I remember when an actor would have a microphone fitted, and sometimes you have to root around the waist. And, in the past, there’d be all this, ‘and while you’re down there, hur, hur!’ But now you don’t have to play along with things like that.” In the past, it was common for actors, saying hello or goodbye to colleagues, to exchange embraces of a level some married couples never reach. But first #MeToo and then Covid-19 have ended that. “All the squishy-squishy, huggy-huggy stuff has stopped. But I don’t miss it. You have to be a bit more genuine now if you’re saying hello. You can’t hide behind a big hug. And there’s no question mark over it: Do we double kiss? Do we hug? Clasp hands? No, we just say hello to each other.” Although DS Collins’s workaholism prevents her having sex in The Tower, an intimacy director is credited for couples who do. Presumably, when Whelan was playing the energetically bisexual Yara in Game of Thrones, actors were just left to get on with it? “Almost literally. They used to just say, ‘When we shout action, go for it!’, and it could be a sort of frenzied mess. But between the actors there was always an instinct to check in with each other. There was a scene in a brothel with a woman and she was so exposed that we talked together about where the camera would be and what she was happy with. A director might say, ‘Bit of boob biting, then slap her bum and go!’, but I’d always talk it through with the other actor.” In the 2012 second season (her first) of Game of Thrones, Yara and Theon (Alfie Allen) had one of TV’s most talked-about sex-scenes (retrospectively revealed to be incestuous) sharing a horse-ride including a reach-round move that would bring immediate disqualification in dressage. “Alfie was very much, ‘Is this OK? How are we going to make this work?’ With intimacy directors, it’s choreography – you move there, I move there, and permission and consent is given before you start. It is a step in the right direction.” With Yara, Shakespeare’s Kate, and now DS Collins, Whelan has repeatedly played spectacularly strong women. “That seems to be what casting directors see in me.” Possibly because there is something sharp and sardonic about her? “Maybe. I think I may give off a ‘don’t fuck with me’ vibe. There’s definitely a defiance.” And has that always been there? “My mum says I’ve always been astonishingly wilful and stubborn. But it seems to come out more in the acting. In real life, I’m quite apologetic, ‘I’m so sorry to take up your time, thank you so much for getting me a tea,’ and so on. But, in my work, I feel that’s where I belong and have a right to be there.” She may have inherited performing genes from parents who met in an amateur dramatics production of Eugene O’Neill’s Desire Under the Elms in Birmingham. Living there and in Leeds and London has given her access to a useful range of regional accents, but she would like to test her American: “I’d love to do something in America. I went up for a film there with Frances McDormand, but didn’t get it. It’s my next ambition.” She is about to film a small role in another ITV police drama, DI Ray, starring Parminder Nagra, and hopes that the Upstart Crow play will return to the West End next year. Combining this workload with family life is possible because her husband, Gerry Howell, a standup comic retraining as a therapist, shares childcare, but also because productions are more baby-friendly. “I haven’t seen a creche on set. But, even with my first baby, breastfeeding was never an issue. People would say, ‘Just go when you have to go.’ But I think you have to meet them halfway. I don’t think, after they’ve set up an elaborate shot, you can say, ‘Right I’m off!’” The Tower is on ITV on 8, 9 and 10 November at 9pm.In 2007, Vincent de Rivaz, the then EDF chief executive, said Britain would be “cooking our Christmas turkeys” with electricity from Hinkley Point C nuclear station by 2017. Instead the first concrete was poured that year and the turkey is now scheduled for late 2026. In the race against time to avert dangerous global heating, the UK government has decided to back an untried reactor from Rolls Royce. The first of these could be “plugged into the grid by 2031”, according to Nuclear Industry Association. Internationally average planning time for reactor proposals is 10 years, plus another decade for building, and that is for already proven designs. The 16 planned Rolls Royce reactors are still on the drawing board. The arguments about where they could be sited are beginning. Apart from other possible objections the favoured UK coastal locations are vulnerable to sea level rise, erosion and storms. Faced with the well-documented delays and drawbacks to nuclear programmes it is perhaps not surprising that there is no other country taking part in the Cop26 process in Glasgow relying on multiple new nuclear reactors to get to net zero carbon targets by 2050. Even without our plentiful opportunities to exploit wind, solar, wave and tidal power many countries feel they do not need nuclear power to reach their goals.This morning, at the all-important Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow, the prime minister is urging world leaders to commit to take radical action to reverse the catastrophic degradation of the world’s forests. It is hard to exaggerate the importance of what he is asking. Put simply, there is no credible response to the climate crisis – or to so many of the biggest challenges we face – that does not involve protecting and restoring nature on a massive scale. That shouldn’t need saying, but modern industrial society is only just beginning to comprehend, let alone internalise, what indigenous peoples have always known: our lives and economies, our cultures and identities, are indivisibly connected with the natural world. Globally, nature-based solutions such as forests, mangroves and peatlands could provide about a third of the most effective and cost-effective solutions to the climate crisis that we need now – as well as helping communities adapt to the changes that are now inevitable. But currently, they attract just 3% of total global climate finance. That makes no sense at all. If we were to lose any of the world’s great forests, we would have zero chance of stabilising the world’s climate, of staying within 1.5C of warming, of reversing the catastrophic loss of wildlife. And the damage we are doing is catastrophic. We lose about 30 football pitches of forest every single minute, destroying complex natural systems that sustain hundreds of millions of people. But the flipside is that by scaling up our efforts to protect and restore nature, we are not only tackling the climate emergency, but poverty, extinctions, even pandemics. That’s why, as holders of the Cop26 presidency, we have put nature at the heart of our response to the climate crisis, and why Boris Johnson is demanding action today. The UK has built a coalition of countries all committed to ending deforestation by the end of this decade. More than 100 countries have signed our Glasgow leaders’ declaration on forests and land use, representing 85% of the world’s forests – that’s an area of more than 13m sq miles. On their own, such declarations are not enough, but we have also mobilised unprecedented finance commitments – $19.2bn, including $12bn from governments, for our global forest finance pledge, at least $7.2bn of private investment and billions of dollars from philanthropists. As part of that, we have formed an alliance between donor countries and the long-overlooked Congo basin – with at least $1.5bn pledged for this biodiversity jewel that is the second largest tropical forest in the world. And we have pressed the big multilateral development banks, including the World Bank, to commit not only to aligning their policies with the Paris goals, but to reconciling their entire portfolios with nature. It is right to insist that the public money we invest through them should support the public good, not undermine it. Currently, incentives in favour of destroying forests outstrip incentives to protect them by 40 to 1. So we are using every lever we have to increase investment from all sources – public, private and philanthropic – to shift those incentives towards renewal. We have secured a public commitment from the world’s biggest buyers of commodities that they will stop buying produce that has been grown on deforested land. So even countries that have been unwilling to address deforestation will struggle to ignore the signal this sends them. And because commodity production is responsible for the overwhelming majority of deforestation, we have assembled 28 key producer and consumer countries representing three-quarters of global trade in products such as palm oil, soya, cocoa, beef and timber to commit to breaking the link between agricultural commodity supply chains and deforestation – as we are doing through legislation here in the UK. In addition, leading financial institutions, in charge of about $8.7tn of assets, will commit publicly to eliminate commodity-driven deforestation from their portfolios, to support the shift towards the sustainable production of agricultural commodities and, crucially, to disclose fully the progress they make. We are rallying donors to invest in high-integrity carbon markets so we can recognise and reward those countries that are keeping their forests intact, as well as helping others to move from deforestation towards renewal – with $1bn and counting secured through a new programme called Leaf. Finally, if we want to protect and restore nature at scale, we need to back the indigenous communities that have defended their forest homes for generations, without meaningful support or recognition and often in the face of chronic danger. Indigenous people’s lands are home to more than a third of the world’s intact forest landscapes and almost a quarter of the carbon stored in the world’s tropical forests. And today, we have secured $1.7bn to help those communities secure tenure of the land that is by rights already theirs. Of course, we know well that promises are only valuable in so far as they are honoured, and that the gap between where we are now and where we need to be by the end of this decade is vast. So in the weeks, months and years ahead, the UK will do everything we can to maintain momentum, inject real accountability and catalyse action. But combined, the commitments to protect the world’s forests made at Cop26 in Glasgow today go far, far beyond anything we have seen before, and represent the turning point we urgently need for our forests, and by extension for our shared future. Zac Goldsmith is the UK’s international environment ministerAP Bio 9.35pm, Sky Comedy Class resumes as Mike O’Brien’s previously cancelled comedy is revived for a fourth season. Disgraced Harvard scholar Jack Griffin (Glenn Howerton) is still half-heartedly “teaching” his class of curious characters at Whitlock High School, when an oncoming tornado causes everyone to freak out. Cue a nonsensical sequence of daydreams brought to life. Mostly harmless fun that requires minimum investment. Hollie Richardson It Takes a Flood 9pm, ITV Oscar-winning director Kevin Macdonald gives a powerful insight into the real cost of flooding in this film, which is part of ITV’s Climate Action Week. Seeing the water rise on mobile-phone footage filmed as people battle to save their homes serves as a sobering reminder that one in six houses is now at risk. Hannah Verdier Insecure 9pm, Sky Comedy The flawless final season continues with Issa’s ambitious work plans coming up against some obstacles – and there’s more drama when a determined designer she has put her reputation on the line for decides to change course. Meanwhile, Molly’s mum offers some unsolicited advice about her love life. HV Impeachment: American Crime Story 9.10pm, BBC Two Bill Clinton (Clive Owen) feels the heat as rumours of his affairs pick up pace in the press and the case of Paula Jones (Annaleigh Ashford) reaches the supreme court. Beanie Feldstein’s portrayal of Monica Lewinsky provides much-needed heart amid the politics, alternating between naive, shrewd and – in this episode – heartbroken. Henry Wong What We Do in the Shadows 10.05pm, BBC Two Matt Berry, Kayvan Novak and Natasia Demetriou return with a third season of the bizarre but quite brilliant vampire mockumentary. The opener sees Guillermo’s fate hanging in the balance as the vampires receive a promotion. HR Stath Lets Flats 10.15pm, Channel 4 The stakes just got higher for Jamie Demetriou’s Stath: he’s now a dad, and he desperately wants to be a good one. But things only get worse for the down-on-his-luck letting agent as he starts a violent feud with a rival agency. HR Live sport Uefa Champions League football, Malmö v Chelsea 5pm, BT Sport 2. Coverage of the Group H match from Eleda Stadion in Malmö.‘I do sometimes feel like a cliche,” says Rich Jones. We’re in the cafe at his gym and he is in workout gear. It’s true, something about the language and the before and after pictures from his physical transformation – severely overweight to lean and chiselled – would appear familiar from thousands of adverts and magazine spreads, if it wasn’t for one thing; Jones got into the best shape of his adult life after he passed 50. “On 9 August 2019, I walked in here. I was 54 and 127kg [20st].” He worked out at least six days a week, for 90 minutes or more at a time. “I immersed myself in everything, I did gym, I did classes, Pilates, I even did barre,” he says. Within eight or 10 weeks, he was able to stop taking painkillers for a shoulder injury. He now cycles and runs on top of his gym sessions. “It’s just a habit – I brush my teeth every day, I go for a run every day.” This new, dramatic fitness coupled with a weight loss programme (Jones lost 43kg (6st 11lb) in eight months) has been transformative in ways that don’t show in pictures. “I enjoy the feeling of being able to walk upstairs and not getting out of breath, of being fit and strong,” he says. The effect on his self-image was equally dramatic: “It changed how I think about myself. I didn’t realise how you feel about the world, how you interact with people, is so tied to your body image.” Now on the dating scene after a separation, he is bursting with new-found confidence. What combination of factors leads anyone to go all out at the gym, become a marathon runner or walk miles a day after the age of 50? Motivation is complex, and people differ, but the fact that mortality is nibbling at your heels, midlife restlessness has set in and with it the desire for reinvention, alongside a shift from active parenting or full-time work, may all contribute. Sometimes, a low-level unease gradually crystallises into a sense of urgency. “I had this sense that if I didn’t do something soon, it would be too late,” says Jones. Timing, he thinks, is key. Having retired early from his job as a chief information officer for a police force, the time was right. “I didn’t need to work, so I was my project – I was my work, really.” Not every super-fit person over 50 has a clear “push”. Mags Cook wasn’t particularly looking to lose weight or get fit. “I was always quite a busy person – I didn’t sit around too much,” she says. A retired teacher, Cook, 69, only started running properly at 59 when a friend encouraged her to try parkrun, the national weekly free fun run. “My husband died in 2006 and it was a good thing to know I’d be doing it every Saturday.” She enjoyed it, and her son-in-law suggested she join a running club. “I thought it was the most hilarious idea, because I was coming up to 60 and didn’t think of myself as a runner. But it was the best thing I’ve done – it was amazing.” Cook runs three or four times a week, and says: “Please don’t be too impressed, I don’t go fast or anything.” She is being modest – she has completed two marathons and a triathlon, for which she took swimming lessons to learn front crawl, and rode a bike for the first time since childhood. “I thought: ‘Might as well have a go,’” she says. The triathlon meant open-water swimming. “I cannot tell you how terrified I was … but, actually, after the swim I was completely elated that I’d done something I didn’t think could do.” While getting fit was not the end in itself for Cook, she can feel the difference now. “When I started running, I couldn’t do more than 50 metres without collapsing, but you discover you don’t have to run fast all the time – you can just keep going.” For Shashi Hussain, 53, staying sane rather than getting fit motivated her to start a walking regime in the first Covid-19 lockdown. “I’m quite sociable and being locked in my house, not being able to meet my friends and family, I found it really tough, so I decided to turn it into some sort of positive.” She began to walk daily, using the time to call friends and family to catch up. Gradually she went up from 5,000 steps to 10,000, “then 12,000, then 15,000; now I do anything between 20,000 and 30,000 steps a day”. It’s a significant time commitment: Hussain is an NHS manager, and splits her daily step count into a walk before work, one at lunchtime and more steps after work. She walks the streets and parks around her home in Essex, often combining exercise with errands, exploring new areas or taking photographs. “I’ve turned it into a bit of a learning exercise; I’ve learned so much about plants and flowers.” She has also lost weight, gone through two pairs of trainers and transformed her fitness. “My husband has always walked really fast. Before, I’d almost have to run to catch up with him, but he sees a difference in my breathing, my walking – I’m not out of breath.” For both women, the mental benefits have been crucial during the pandemic. Cook’s running club set members running tasks during lockdown: “They kept us going, it was brilliant. It really made lockdown so different.” “For my mental wellbeing, it’s been the best thing ever,” says Hussain, who has surprised herself with her unwavering commitment. It’s almost a compulsion: if her step count is lower at weekends, she sometimes goes back out when her husband is asleep. “It has become part of my life.” For Cook: “It has made me braver, I think.” While Cook, Jones and Hussain may be in the best shape of their lives, the same is not true of everyone in their age group: 42% of over-55s are inactive, compared with 29% of UK adults, according to Sport England research. Perhaps that is not surprising, when the fitness industry often appears to be tailored to the young. Chris Zaremba is very aware of that. Another convert to super-fitness after 50, he is a personal trainer who specialises in the over-50s. He coined the term “gymtimidation” to describe how many older people feel about fitness clubs. “A new gym opens in your town and, guess what, they are playing loud music, there are loads of mirrors and industrial grungy design – it’s not welcoming for anybody over 40, which is really stupid.” Jones agrees: “You think they’re judging you.” He tried and disliked other gyms (“just a room with kit and pumping music”) before finding a small, supportive one. At 50, Zaremba himself was “allergic to exercise” and very overweight; his first experiences in the gym were typically off-putting. “Everyone there was already several times fitter than I was,” he says. But he conquered his misgivings in spectacular style: he has run marathons and a triathlon, and in 2014 won the world championships in both fitness and muscle modelling (similar to bodybuilding). His recent book, Fat to Fit at Fifty, describes his journey and provides training tips. Getting fit after 50 is an optimistic act; a positive statement of intent for the second half of your life. “I hear time and time again: ‘It’s too late for me to start,’” says Zaremba. “I say, no, it’s not. I did not exercise at all when I was 50 and by the time I was 55, I was one of the healthiest 55-year-olds on the planet.” Most of his clients have gentler aspirations. “It’s about maintaining independent living for longer; being mobile, living a happy, independent life.” Is there a risk that extraordinary stories such as Zaremba’s might discourage rather than inspire? “Headlines like: ‘Anyone can run a marathon’ are not fair because it’s not actually true,” says Dr Lucy Pollock, a consultant in geriatric medicine and author of The Book About Getting Older (For People Who Don’t Want to Talk About It). But getting fit after 50 need not mean becoming a ropey-calved cycling obsessive in Lycra or signing up for the Marathon des Sables. “I think depictions of older people getting fitter fall into two camps,” says Kate Dale of Sport England; its Active Ageing campaign funds projects that target inactivity in older people. “It’s either chairobics stuff or you’ve got marathon runners, like the Skipping Sikh. He’s amazing, but you don’t have to go to one of those extremes, you can find what’s right for you.” This is vital because, as Pollock’s book highlights, research shows that activity can improve longevity and, crucially, quality of life for older people, including the group she describes as the “super old”. One of the best parts of her job, Pollock says, is seeing someone very fragile, with poor mobility, regain strength and the ability to move independently. “It’s amazing how quickly small amounts of exercise make a difference. There are lots of people who are never going to be able to do a squat again – that doesn’t mean they can’t do anything.” Brian Nathan can’t do a full plié (pretty close to a squat, but much more elegant), but at 82, he goes down on one leg at a time at his Silver Swans class, a Royal Academy of Dance initiative for over-55 ballet beginners and returners. Nathan started three years ago. “I thought: ‘I’ve got to exercise’, but I loathe exercise and hate ploughing up and down a swimming pool, so what is there in the dancing world?” He finds it “impossibly difficult”, but says: “What is marvellous about the teachers of Silver Swans is that they understand we are old and don’t make us relentlessly go on and on.” An accomplished ballroom dancer in his youth (“I discovered girls love dancing so it was simple: become a decent dancer”), Nathan also played cricket and rugby. But with six children and a successful tool-and-equipment hire business, “it petered out”. Now, though, his weekly regime puts mine to shame. “On Monday, I do old gits cricket and old gits tennis – it’s brilliant. Tuesday, I have a rest, Wednesday, I do Move to the Musicals (another Royal Academy dance class), Thursdays I rest again and Fridays I do ballet.” Nathan says he has improved. “I’m motivated to try and get better because I love trying to be graceful to music – and totally failing; I still want to try every week. We were walking this morning, and walking as a ballet dancer walks is hard. I can remember trying to do it three years ago and I couldn’t; I thought good God, I’m better at it. I can see the point, you know.” There are as many ways to get moving, and what works will depend on individual circumstances and health, resources, time and inclination. “It’s about forgiving yourself to some degree,” says Pollock. “Accepting your limits and working within them.” For those who are ready to take on a challenge, Zaremba recommends trying to incorporate some resistance work as well as an activity that raises the heart rate (he is another parkrun fan). It’s important, he says, to try and fight sarcopenia, the process of losing skeletal muscle mass as we age (Pollock also recommends light weights, perhaps using a tin of beans). Flexibility, mobility and coordination work can also be improved hugely in later life and have day-to-day benefits, in staying agile and preventing falls. This can be quite modest: Zaremba recommends doorframe stretches as a good simple starter. However gentle your exercise regime, advises Pollock, give yourself credit as you improve. “Notice that you’re better at it this week than last week. Give yourself a pat on the back and notice how far you have come in a very short time.” As an additional bonus, the fitness efforts of people over 50 seem to have a powerful trickle-down effect on friends and family. Cook has converted several friends to running and runs with her daughter; Hussain has inspired her friends. “A lot of people have started doing it with me, which is brilliant.” Even her mother, who is 76, now walks 10,000 to 15,000 steps a day. “She says I’ve really helped her because otherwise, she’d have nothing to do.” “I wouldn’t call myself a role model in any way,” says Jones, “But both my boys in their early 20s now take better care of themselves. I think there has been a kind of shared awakening.”There’s a defining moment early in Jean-Pierre Jeunet’s Amélie when Amélie Poulain (Audrey Tautou), a painfully shy and uncommonly adorable waitress at the Two Windmills cafe in Montmartre, arranges the return of childhood treasures to a middle-aged man who’d hidden them in her apartment building 40 years earlier. She has gone through an exhaustive search to find this man, meeting all manner of eccentric Parisians along the way, but she eventually summons the right person to a phone booth and watches the tears roll down his cheeks as this tin full of trinkets unleashes a flood of memories. As she glides blissfully through the frame, the narrator says, “Amélie has a strange feeling of absolute harmony. It’s a perfect moment. A soft light, a scent in the air, the quiet murmur of the city. A surge of love, an urge to help mankind overcomes her.” Amélie is not really a film about love, as much as its heroine does to manufacture it for others — and finally, winsomely, for herself. And Amélie is not really a film about altruism, either, given how much time she spends tormenting the nasty greengrocer (Urbain Cancelier) who abuses his sweet, simple-minded assistant (Jamel Debbouze). It’s really a film about perfection, a fantasy about how a messy world can, through force of will and timing and deftness of touch, be harmonized down to the second. There’s a mechanical quality to the film that’s completely at odds with the spontaneity and surprise of authentic passion. That “strange feeling of absolute harmony” is the metronomic ticking that Jeunet manufactures here – satisfying perhaps, but in no way romantic. Yet 20 years later, Amélie does feel like an important shift in film-making style, a natural bookend to Moulin Rouge earlier in the year. The medium was entering an era of extreme plasticity, where the world could be bended and refined down to the pixel, and engineered to achieve moments of pristine, storyboarded flawlessness. There’s quite literally not a hair out of place in Amélie – Audrey Tautou’s immaculate bob is the greatest achievement in French hairdressing since Anna Karina’s bangs in Vivre Sa Vie – but the cold order of the film should not be mistaken for swooning romanticism. Amélie also recalls a classic Onion headline that predates it by two years: Romantic-Comedy Behavior Gets Real-Life Man Arrested. Among the details in the restraining order against this man is that he’d stalked a woman for two months, spied on her and tapped her phone, and “tricked her into boarding Caribbean-bound jets”. Amélie may have a more delicate touch and a timidness that relegates her to the sidelines of her own life, but the film celebrates a quirkiness that’s millimeters away from derangement, as she makes elaborate interventions on people’s lives and teases the man she desires with Rube Goldberg contraptions that don’t pay off until she’s ready. To a degree, Jeunet’s Paris doesn’t need Amélie to syncopate to a pleasing rhythm, as he delights in the random, unrelated events around the fertilization that led to her birth nine months later. Raised as an only child whose sole friend is a “suicidal fish” that leaps out of its bowl, Amélie grows into a passive, self-effacing adult who comes to realize that she can shape the destinies of those around her without making herself visible. And so, she returns those childhood trinkets to the middle-aged man. And she persuades the hypochondriac cashier (Isabelle Nanty) at the cafe to take notice of the regular (Jeunet favorite Dominique Pinon) who always sits across from her station. And she honors her father’s dreams of world travel by stealing his garden gnome and having a flight attendant send back Polaroids of the gnome at various landmarks. And she gets a key to the mean grocer’s apartment and messes with his head by switching his toothpaste with foot cream or swapping out his slippers for a pair a few sizes too small. And on and on and on. Amélie inevitably takes an interest in arranging happiness for herself when she spots a handsome young man named Nino (Mathieu Kassovitz), who has made a hobby out of collecting discarded shots from under photo booth machines. Their courtship is all gestures and delayed gratification, all so beautifully staged that the audience is never invited to imagine what a real relationship between the two of them might be like. It is the ultimate romantic comedy in that respect, imagining nothing worse than a series of contrived obstacles keeping two people from a future of uncomplicated bliss. It’s an extremely seductive fantasy for many, buoyed by the undeniable brio of Jeunet’s film-making. The difference is that Jeunet’s previous fantasies with co-director Marc Caro, the 1991 black comedy Delicatessen and the surrealist 1995 science-fiction City of Lost Children, have a much darker tone to bring them back down to earth. There’s no doubt that Jeunet succeeds in turning this hidden corner of Montmartre, relegated mostly to the denizens of an apartment building and a cafe, into a community of oddballs bound closely together by dazzling orchestration. The experience intends to be a sustained magic act, but it’s more often sickly sweet. As Amélie, Tautou does well to suggest the loneliness and fear at the core of her character while still inviting the audience to play co-conspirator to her behind-the-scenes machinations. But Jeunet doesn’t appreciate her human dimension, to say nothing of the other characters, who are defined by silly likes and dislikes and weird patterns of behavior, but feel similarly trapped in his grand design. It’s hard not to feel manipulated by Jeunet in the same elfin way his heroine intervenes in people’s lives. The intent may be benevolent, but you’re still getting jerked around.Top story: ‘Zero chance if we lose the great forests’ Hello, Warren Murray here to embiggen your knowledge of current affairs. World leaders have agreed a deal that aims to halt and reverse global deforestation over the next decade as part of a multibillion-dollar package to tackle human-caused greenhouse gas emissions. By signing the Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on Forest and Land Use, presidents and prime ministers from major producers and consumers of deforestation-linked products will commit to protect forest ecosystems. Boris Johnson will unveil the agreement at the Cop26 summit in the presence of the US president, Joe Biden, the Prince of Wales and the Indonesian president, Joko Widodo. Writing in the Guardian today, the UK environment minister Zac Goldsmith hails the forests deal as “unprecedented … Globally, nature-based solutions such as forests, mangroves and peatlands could provide about a third of the most effective and cost-effective solutions to the climate crisis that we need now – but currently, they attract just 3% of total global climate finance. If we were to lose any of the world’s great forests, we would have zero chance of stabilising the world’s climate.” The commitment comes as more than 120 world leaders meet in Glasgow to thrash out fresh commitments on cutting greenhouse gas emissions, amid concerns that key countries have failed to step up. In developments so far, India has pledged to reach net zero emissions by 2070 – seen by experts as a realistic commitment, but 20 years behind the 2050 date agreed by other countries; while the the Queen called on leaders to “rise above the politics of the moment, and achieve true statesmanship”, for the sake of future generations. * * * Fishing talks ‘need to continue’ – Emmanuel Macron has shelved his threat to clog up UK exports and ban its fishers from landing catches at French ports from this morning in a dispute over access to British fishing waters. A proposal was put forward by Macron’s government late on Monday and discussions resumed. “The talks need to continue,” Macron told reporters on the sidelines of the Cop26 climate conference in Glasgow. David Frost, the UK’s Brexit secretary, is to meet Clément Beaune, the French minister for EU affairs, in Paris on Thursday to discuss possible ways out of the crisis. * * * ‘Devastating’ – Thousands of babies in England are being born prematurely, smaller than expected or stillborn because of “alarming” and “devastating” socioeconomic and racial inequalities, a study has suggested. Research involving more than 1m births suggests socioeconomic inequalities account for a quarter of all stillbirths, a fifth of preterm births, and a third of cases of foetal growth restriction (FGR) in which babies are smaller than expected for their gestational age. One in 10 stillbirths and almost one in five FGR cases are due to racial inequalities, the study suggests. Prof Jan van der Meulen of the London School of Hygiene &amp; Tropical Medicine, a co-lead author of the study, said: “National targets to make pregnancy safer will only be achieved if there is a concerted effort by midwives, obstetricians, public health professionals and politicians to tackle the broader socioeconomic and ethnic inequalities.” * * * Less than smart – The construction of smart motorways should be paused until promised safety improvements have been delivered and there is more evidence to assess the risks, MPs have urged. The transport select committee criticised as premature the decision by Grant Shapps in March 2020 to press ahead with the controversial motorways, which manage road speeds through electronic signs and do not have a hard shoulder. The report said available evidence regarding safety was “limited and volatile”, and urged greater powers for the Office of Rail and Road to block new road schemes until it was satisfied of their safety. They are calling for more emergency refuge areas never more than one mile apart, and every 0.75 miles where possible. The highway code should also be updated with instructions to drivers to create corridors to allow emergency services through. * * * Bosnian peace under threat – Christian Schmidt, the UN-backed high representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, has warned that the country is in imminent danger of breaking apart. The Bosnian Serb leader, Milorad Dodik, has threatened to force the Bosnian part of the armed forces to withdraw from the Republika Srpska – the Serb half of Bosnia – by surrounding its barracks with Serb troops. If the Serb separatists carried out their threat, more international peacekeepers would have to be sent in, Schmidt said in a report seen by the Guardian. Russia has threatened to block this week’s annual renewal of the peacekeepers’ mandate unless the text cuts out any reference to the UN high representative, who oversees the 1995 Dayton deal that keeps the peace in Bosnia. * * * Meta versus Meta – Meta PCs, an Arizona-based computer retail company, has found itself in a potential intellectual property war with Facebook after Mark Zuckerberg decided to use the name Meta for his social media conglomerate. Meta PCs is reported by TMZ to have filed for its trademark in August. Founders Zack Shutt and Joe Darger have told TMZ they won’t sell the name for less than $20m if Zuckerberg tries to get it. Facebook did not respond to the Guardian’s request for comments, but someone affiliated with the company told TMZ they were not too worried and had the required rights to acquire the name. Today in Focus podcast: Climate action far from Glasgow Ridhima Pandey in India, Iris Duquesne in Canada and Raina Ivanova in Germany tell Michael Safi about their attempts to force their political leaders to change course on tackling the climate crisis. Lunchtime read: Fitter than ever in their 50s Rich started working out, Mags started running and Shashi started walking three times a day. It is possible to reach new goals as you get older and it is not only your physical health that benefits, writes Emma Beddington. Sport Antonio Conte has agreed to take over as Tottenham’s manager on a contract to June 2023 and is ready to sign the deal subject to final details following the sacking of Nuno Espírito Santo. Ole Gunnar Solskjær conceded “one swallow does not make a summer” after Manchester United’s 3-0 win over Tottenham, and said criticism fuels his drive for success. England took complete control of their T20 World Cup group by beating Sri Lanka by 27 runs on a steamy, stressful night in Sharjah – an experience Jos Buttler declared would serve to make them even stronger. Max Kilman and Raul Jiménez scored for Wolves in a 2-1 win against Everton which sent Bruno Lage’s side seventh in the Premier League. England players have struck a new pay deal with the Rugby Football Union that will see Eddie Jones’s squad earn around £70,000 each if they win all three of their autumn internationals. Andy Murray spurned a remarkable seven match points as he crashed out in the first round of the Paris Masters to German lucky loser Dominik Koepfer. Formula One will hold six sprint race meetings next season, the sporting director, Ross Brawn, has confirmed. Business The Square Mile has been rocked by the resignation of Barclays boss Jes Staley over his description of his relationship with the late disgraced financier Jeffrey Epstein. Our City expert Nils Pratley says that after already running into flak for trying to unmask a whistleblower, the American chief executive “had to go”. The FTSE100 is set to slip 0.2% this morning while the pound is on $1.365 and €1.176. The papers Our print edition of the Guardian leads today with “Cop26: world leaders agree deal to save Earth’s forests”. The Telegraph has “Rise above politics for the sake of our children”, summarising the Queen’s video address to leaders in Glasgow, which the Express calls an “emotive plea to save our ‘fragile’ planet”. “Answer the call of future generations” is how the Times presents it. “Green queen and a deeply personal ultimatum” – the Queen shares the Daily Mail’s front page with “MPs’ brakes on smart m-ways” which, like every second thing that happens in politics, the Mail claims as a vindication of its own position. The i has that as “Stop smart motorways: safety data incomplete, warn MPs”. The Financial Times leads with “Barclays chief Staley to step down following Epstein investigation” – the paper cites “a regulatory investigation into the way he described his relationship” with the disgraced financier and sex offender. The FT’s reporting, like ours, points out that Staley intends to contest the findings and that Barclays said the investigation did not conclude that Staley “saw, or was aware of, any of Mr Epstein’s alleged crimes”. The Sun says “Phil the Green” after HM’s “tribute to ‘dear’ duke and his eco fight” and somehow this warrants a full-length photograph of the Duchess-of-Cambridge-known-mostly-as-Kate. “Height of hyCOPrisy” – the Metro points out, as many inevitably have, that bigwigs have arrived on board private jets, superyachts and accompanied by motorcades (remembering too that Boris Johnson is flying home afterwards on a private plane). The Mirror leads with “My beautiful death” about Dawn Voice-Cooper’s final journey, to a Swiss assisted dying clinic. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendAustralia’s 2.3 million children aged five to 11 years may be able to receive the Pfizer vaccine against Covid-19 before the end of 2021 if Australia follows the lead of the United States. On 29 October, the Federal Drug Administration approved Pfizer’s mRNA vaccine for emergency use in American children aged five to 11 years. If it is recommended by the US Centres for Disease Control, which meets this week, the vaccine will be available immediately for 28 million eligible children aged five to 11 years in the US. Pfizer’s application for use in Australia Pfizer supplied initial data on the vaccine for five to 11-year-olds to Australia’s Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) on 26 October. During the health minister’s press conference the next day, the head of the TGA, Professor John Skerritt, said “it will take a few weeks [for approval of the vaccine for 5-11-year-olds] but I would hope that we get there by the end of November”. Here’s the crux of the issue about Covid-19 vaccinations for younger children. Australian and international data demonstrate children in this five to 11 age group typically get mild disease; unwell with fever, vomiting, and cough, but worrying parents. However, some do get very sick, need hospitalisation, ICU, get long Covid and rarely, can die. The US has had 558 Covid-19-associated child deaths (0-17 years) and 94 were aged five to 11, Canada has had 17 deaths in children (under 18 years), and Australia has had two deaths in children (in their teens). Yet, according to the Indonesian Paediatric Society, Covid-19 has caused death in more than 1,245 Indonesian children, half of whom were under one year of age. Australia however has had far fewer cases of Covid-19 than most countries globally. Although severe outcomes from Covid-19 are more typical in children with underlying conditions, that is not always the case, and up to 30% of children who become severely ill have no known risk factors. So, we have vaccines. Pfizer’s is the first trial of a Covid-19 mRNA vaccine for this age group. There were no serious adverse events due to vaccination reported in the trial but we know that mRNA vaccines have, very rarely, caused myocarditis and/or pericarditis in teens and young adults at a rate of one or two per 100,000. The risk of developing myocarditis/pericarditis from the vaccine is much less than with Covid-19 itself: the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (Atagi) notes the benefits of vaccination outweigh risks in all age groups. Many countries have already started vaccinating younger children against Covid-19. For instance, Slovakia launched Pfizer vaccination for vulnerable five to 11-year-olds on 9 September. Cuba has been vaccinating children aged two to 10 with Cuban-developed vaccines. China has been vaccinating vulnerable three- to 17-year-olds since June using Sinovac, and will soon mandate vaccines to attend school. Chile and Cambodia have also been vaccinating six- to 12-year-olds with Sinovac since September. The United Arab Emirates has been giving Sinopharm to three to 17-year-olds since August and India approved their Bharat Biotech’s Covaxin Covid-19 vaccine for two to 18-year-olds two weeks ago. The impact of Covid-19 on young children In the current surge of cases in the UK, school-age children are about 15 times as likely to be infected as 80-year-olds and are believed to be driving the high UK case numbers. Similarly, and consistent with international data, children under 10 are the fastest growing age group contracting Covid-19 in Australia. To date in Australia, 21,616 children aged under nine years and 46,297 children under 19 years have tested positive for Covid-19; with about 2.5% to 3% of these children requiring hospitalisation. This is similar to the US, where about 2% of children with Covid-19 required hospitalisation, out of the 6.3 million American children aged under 18 who tested positive. There have been 5,217 cases of the rare Multisystem Inflammatory Syndrome following Covid-19 infection in children in the US. Children with Covid-19 can transmit the infection. It is particularly difficult for household members to keep social distance from a sick young child. In New South Wales alone, 67 schools have been closed so far during term four because of a Covid case in a student and/or staff. Kids (and teachers) must take time off school if infected with Covid-19 or are a close contact of a positive case. Parents must take time off work to care for their sick and/or isolating children. Few good quality data are available on long Covid in children, so we don’t yet know the real risk. Estimates of prevalence of long Covid in children and adolescents range from 0% to 27% with the true prevalence likely about 4%. Affected children report ongoing symptoms such as extreme fatigue, disturbance of taste and smell, headaches, and “brain fog’”. Anticipated uptake of the vaccine for younger children Currently there are no alternatives to the Pfizer vaccine for young children though Moderna’s is currently under trial. The AstraZeneca vaccine is not being trialled in this age group. Atagi may initially recommend the vaccine only for children aged five to 11 years with specific risk factors, children living in a household with a vulnerable family member, or children living in a Covid-19 “hotspot”. This approach was used in the initial rollout of the vaccine to teenagers in both the UK and Australia, with vaccine access later opened to all. Vaccination remains a key tool against Covid-19. In the US one third of parents with children five to 11 plan to vaccinate as soon as possible and Australia has an enviable record in vaccination uptake (44% of teens (12-16 years) are already fully vaccinated), so this bodes well for our future with Covid-19. We just need to ensure that vulnerable groups are not left behind and that we assist in vaccinating countries in our region. • Professor Alexandra Martiniuk is an epidemiologist at the University of Sydney. Professor Elizabeth Elliott is distinguished professor of paediatrics and child health at the University of Sydney and consultant paediatrician Sydney Children’s Hospital Network, Westmead • This piece was amended on 3 November to correct the number of children aged 5-11Toyota has released details about its first mass-produced electric vehicle in a significant step for the world’s second-biggest carmaker. The bZ4X is an SUV with optional rooftop solar panels that will be sold in both front-wheel or all-wheel-drive variants. The public had its first look at the concept for the bZ4X – “bZ” stands for “beyond zero” – at the Shanghai motor show in April this year, but Toyota only published the details of the car on Friday. The announcement is a step forward for Toyota, which has been slower to move into purely battery-powered electric vehicles than its competitors, relying heavily on hybrid technology instead. While the car isn’t Toyota’s first electrified vehicle – that title was held by the short-lived RAV4 EV – it marks the first electric vehicle that will directly compete with industry rivals such as the Hyundai Ioniq and the Tesla Model Y. Toyota already produces the second-generation Mirai, an electrified vehicle powered by a hydrogen fuel cell. The bZ4X will be launched in Europe on 2 December, with orders to be placed by reservation. It is expected the model will enter series production from the middle of next year across “all regions worldwide” – though the precise timing, price and variants available has yet to be released. Toyota expects this will form an extended range of 70 electrified vehicles by 2025. Subaru helped developed the vehicle and is expected to reveal its own EV model next year. It is anticipated the bZX4 will arrive in Australia by late 2022. As Australia’s most popular car brand, it is expected the model will help Toyota take a dominant position in the country’s growing electric vehicle market, as its competitors have been put off by a lack of clear political leadership in making the transition. Hybrid vehicles accounted for nearly a third of Toyota’s total sales in Australia this year. The bZ4x will be the first of 15 planned zero-emissions vehicles offered by Toyota, including seven bZ models. The front-wheel drive version comes with a 150kw motor with 265 Nm of torque that is capable of zero to 100km/h in 8.4 seconds. The all-wheel-drive model comes equipped with two 80kW motors that produce a combined 160kW and 336Nm of torque, capable of zero to 100km/h in 7.7 seconds. Both variants will have a top speed of 160km/h, and will come with a 71.4kWh battery offering a range of roughly 500km. Toyota says the 150kW DC charger will allow the batteries to be recharged to 80% in 30 minutes. Solar panels can be built into the roof for use while driving or when parked. Toyota says these panels will add an extra 1800km of driving distance each year, while allowing the car to be charged when parked or where there are no charging stations easily available. At 4.69m long, 1.65m high and 1.86m wide the bZ4X will be similar in size to the Hyundai Ioniq. While the company has not released complete details of the interior, among the more unique aspects is the steer-by-wire system which works without any direct mechanical link between the steering wheel and the tyres. The technology is similar to the fly-by-wire system used by modern jet aircraft and means the driver will only receive feedback from the road, as they will not feel vibrations from the tyres via the steering wheel. This aircraft feel is extended with the option for a “yoke” steering wheel similar to the Tesla Model S. Toyota says its version will deliver better performance with 150 degrees of lock so the driver will not have to change hand positions when turning.The BBC received about £300,000 in advertising revenue last year from Saudi Arabia’s national oil company, Aramco, despite BBC director general Tim Davie calling on every arm of the broadcaster to “dial up the focus on sustainability” and reduce net greenhouse gas emissions. Although the BBC does not carry advertising in the UK, much of its overseas output is supported by commercials. Big fossil fuel companies have spent approximately $660,000 (£483,000) with the BBC on US-focused digital adverts since 2018, according to projections produced by the advertising data firm MediaRadar. Most of this came from the national Saudi oil company – although BP, Exelon and Phillips 66 are among the other fossil fuel business estimated to have spent five-figure sums advertising on the BBC’s digital outlets. The real figure for how much the BBC is making from large fossil fuel companies could be much higher when other forms of advertising are taken into account. Last month the BBC said it would be trying to eliminate “fossil fuel usage across its operations” as part of a “deep decarbonisation” strategy to hit net zero by 2030, but the corporation has been accepting money from companies that take oil and gas out of the ground. “We have clear guidelines around advertising which are publicly available,” said a BBC spokesperson. “We take care with all of our advertising to ensure it is not misleading.” Davie has emphasised the need to increase the corporation’s commercial revenues, including from outside the UK, to make up for the real-terms cuts to the licence fee income imposed by the British government. Despite continuing to accept money from big fossil fuel companies, the BBC is among the online publishers who have also benefited from the increase in advertising around environment-related material in recent weeks, as corporations rush to promote their green credentials before the Cop26 summit in Glasgow. The BBC has struck deals with the international investment arm of the Scottish government to make a series of programmes on how to reduce carbon in the buildup to Cop26. There is also BBC material sponsored by US supermarket giant Walmart “looking at nine countries’ progress on climate since signing the Paris Agreement”, as well as episodes of a show called Follow the Food: The Carbon Challenge about food security, sponsored by Corteva Agriscience. The Guardian stopped accepting advertising from oil and gas companies two years ago, although most other leading news outlets continue to take substantial sums. Using the same estimates from MediaRadar for US-focused digital advertising bought by big fossil fuel companies, the Washington Post has taken $12.8m since 2016, Politico took $9.5m, CNN took $6.6m, and the New York Times took $4.5m. The Washington Post, Politico and CNN did not respond to a request for comment. The New York Times repeated its commitment to journalism covering the climate crisis, but does not have a policy against accepting ad money beyond their general guidelines: “All advertising is clearly labeled, entirely separate from our newsroom and plays an important role in helping to fund our independent journalism and the continued expansion of our coverage on the biggest stories of our time, including climate change, across a breadth of analysis and formats.”South Downs Way, Sussex Holly Tuppen, sustainable travel writer Growing up in London’s suburbs, romping around the South Downs was about as wild as it got. Thirty years on, the landscape is unchanged, yet every walk brings a new discovery – and now I live in Brighton I’m finding you really can holiday very close to home. On a recent two-day, 25-mile hike from Ditchling Beacon to Arundel with the kids, we discovered Steyning’s carefully crafted woodland mountain bike trails, and benches with “poem boxes”, inviting anyone to leave words conjured by the view. The night before, with 15 miles under our belts, we rested sore feet and carb-loaded at Springwells, an ivy-clad B&amp;B in the middle of the village, where flint cottages glimmer in the moonlight, evoking a bygone era. The South Downs is not an untouched wilderness, but that’s part of the appeal; its gentle folds are like a slumbering green giant curled up between our human busyness, inviting us in for respite when needed. The closeness to city and sprawl means car-free fun is simple and varied. From Brighton, the 79 bus goes to Ditchling Beacon, where there are views across the Weald to the north and, south, out to sea. From there, we stomp back to the city, criss-crossing footpaths with names like Granny’s Belt and Bushy Clump over the downs and through Stanmer Park woods, eco-minded allotments and the newly spruced-up walled kitchen gardens, One Garden. Often we are waylaid by industrious and intriguing goings-on (last week, we clinked back into Brighton with a crate of cider from Stanmer Organics after helping out with some apple pulping); no two walks are the same, which is why we keep coming back. Holly Tuppen is the author of Sustainable Travel: The Essential Guide to Positive-Impact Adventures (£18, Quarto) The Netherlands Fatima Ibrahim, co-director, Green New Deal UK I’m globally minded, and love to travel and engage with other cultures, but I’m worried about the impact of travel on the climate, so the question of how we remain connected to the world without harming it is important to me. One of my favourite places to visit is the Netherlands – it’s so easy to get to from the UK with a direct Eurostar service (plan ahead to grab tickets for about £35 each way: from London it’s quicker than getting to Edinburgh) or even ferry. But what I love is that the country prioritises people over cars, giving you the ultimate freedom to roam safely on a bike. In London, where I live, the lack of cycle lanes makes me too scared to get around on a bike, but in Amsterdam the world is mine to conquer. I recently did a four-day trip with some friends. We set our sights beyond the city and cycled through forests, orchards and quaint towns, through the Utrecht region, Gouda and Woerden and back. It was all much more accessible than with a car and felt like a real adventure. We didn’t plan much but found beautiful places to stay, such as an Airbnb in a flower nursery with old-school caravans, and, in Woerden, a historic fortified town with the Oude River flowing around the centre, we stayed in the Stadshotel right in the main square. We found Michelin-starred restaurants, castles and lakes, and really got off the beaten track. We’re all so used to flying, and with flights more often than not still cheaper than the train – a systemic issue because of poor infrastructure and tax breaks on flying – a major rethink of travel needs to be had. But, thanks to new train routes, we can start travelling with smaller carbon footprints without compromising on what holidays should be – adventurous and fun. Green New Deal is a non-profit working for social, economic and climate justice Ireland Alan Watson Featherstone, ecologist and founder of Trees for Life Usually when I travel it has to do with connecting to nature. I discovered way back that being in untouched landscapes nourished me in ways nothing else did. It’s a basic human need that many people in our modern, urban-dominated world aren’t aware of – we need nature to replenish us. I live in Scotland, and Ireland is one place I’ve enjoyed visiting. I travel by car and ferry from Stranraer to Belfast: it’s only a couple of hours by ferry so an easy trip. Killarney national park in County Kerry is really beautiful. It has one of the largest remaining oak-dominated temperate rainforests in the British Isles. These forests used to be part of the landscape in south-west England, Wales and western Scotland but now there are only tiny pockets left. There are small mountains, several lakes, beautiful old trees and ferns – and an interesting mix of species, such as the strawberry tree (the little fruits look like strawberries, if you use your imagination), as well as a yew wood, Reenadinna, one of just three pure yew woods in Europe. This year Killarney was damaged by fire, though – another impact of the climate crisis, with increasing dry weather. Further north, in County Clare, the Burren has a fascinating landscape. It’s a large area of limestone pavement, with spectacular grykes caused by erosion channels, and it supports a rich variety of plants and wildlife. I saw a hummingbird hawk moth there, and there are numerous fossils visible in the limestone. Neither the Burren nor Killarney is truly wild, but they do have beautiful, diverse nature. My travels have always been very purposeful, combining work with a holiday – and I think people need to consider how they travel more than ever. With video meetings being so widely used we don’t need to travel for business, and we need to make leisure travel purposeful, too. There is so much to see in the British Isles, even though it is one of the most nature-depleted areas of the world – and we need to encourage people to join rewilding and conservation projects to help places recover. People are starting to realise that they don’t need to travel far for great walks and cycling routes, and to watch birds and plant life. There is a real opportunity because of the pandemic and climate crisis to rethink how we travel (although the decrease in passenger fuel duty on domestic flights in the UK announced in the budget this week sends out totally the wrong message). Trees for Life works to restore the Caledonian Forest in the Highlands Northern Highlands, Scotland Jay Griffiths, environmentalist and author Every swim in a lake, or loch, feels like a small but perfect break, a pocket-holiday. The wetsuit is the key: in a wetsuit I swim all year, feeling amphibious as an otter. But I never actually swam with otters before I came to Aigas, a centre for environmental conservation in the Highlands. Yesterday morning, right outside the glass doors of the log cabin on the loch where I’m staying, a sparrowhawk hunted a bat, mantling over it and feasting. The day before that, I swam here surrounded by four otters, looking like small brown dolphins as they arched their backs and batted their tails and played. On previous visits I have seen a golden eagle and pine martens and beavers. This morning, an otter with a glinting silver fish in its mouth swam across the loch. Where yesterday a rainbow soared over the heather, today a raven croaked and a red kite circled. Swimming near the shore, I slowed to watch two red squirrels using a pine tree as a helter-skelter. Each creature is triumphant in its place and time. Each swim is an immersion in the beauty of the living world, leaving my psyche rinsed and my best dreams clarified. Jay Griffiths is the author of many critically-acclaimed books including Why Rebel (£7.99, Penguin), £7.43 at Guardian Bookshop Pembrokeshire James Wallace, environmentalist and CEO at Beaver Trust Pembrokeshire is a haven for ecologically minded people seeking digital freedom and wild blue-green sea, purple stone and yellow gorse. For more than 40 years, my twice-yearly sanctuary has been the environs of Europe’s smallest cathedral city, St Davids, built to honour a big-G god, loved by worshippers of small gods that lurk beneath waterfalls and flit between trees. After decades of family holidays, boys’ weekends and solo escapes, my favourite place to stay is Treginnis Uchaf. Framed with red windows and wagging dogs, this organic National Trust sheep farm is run by Aled and Stacey Davies. Whether in a camper van gazing across Atlantic sunsets or roasting toes by the self-catering barn fire, there is nowhere so peaceful. Without a puff of fossil fuels, I can spend weeks strolling along dramatic cliffs clothed in sea pinks, spot seal heads a-bobbing in the swell, dangle mackerel tails from my rod or fail again at surfing at Whitesands Bay. All under the watchful gaze of the sleeping dragon hill, Carn Llidi. I could spill secrets about the Sloop Inn, one of Cerys Matthews’ favourite places, high-adrenalin coasteering adventures with TYF, David and Freya Dixon’s Albion Gallery or boat trips around Ramsey Island’s seabird colony. But you will discover your own gems if you visit this land of red-billed choughs, ancient burial chambers and without a hint of Costa del Cornwall’s traffic. The Beaver Trust is a nature restoration charity Isles of Scilly Mya-Rose Craig, ornithologist and environmentalist Idyllic sandy coves, a turquoise sea against a rugged backdrop: you could be in Corfu. But this is the Isles of Scilly. In autumn, the islands 28 miles south-west of Land’s End are a magnet for rare birds. My first visit was at age nine days, when my parents, keen birders, visited to see a rare lesser kestrel that had arrived from the continent. I have a photograph of my sister holding me up to a telescope. The birds brought my family to Scilly most Octobers, to have a quiet time doing little except digging in the sand and walking the islands’ 16 sq miles in search of the big prize: an American bird blown off course. The islands are a great choice for a sustainable break. An overnight train from London to Penzance connects with the Scillonian, the passenger ferry to the main island, St Mary’s. From there you can get shuttle boats to the off-islands. St Agnes, where the Troytown campsite is next to a beach, is my favourite island. Troytown Farm sells milk, butter, cream and ice-cream; the island shop sells local bread, eggs, crab, fruit and vegetables and Coastguards Café has great locally sourced food with a sea view. Mya-Rose Craig runs the blog Birdgirl and is president of Black2Nature The Peak District Helen Clarkson, CEO, The Climate Group I spend a lot of time in the Peak District. I love walking and it’s so accessible from lots of parts of the UK. There’s a railway between Manchester and Sheffield following the Hope Valley in the middle of the national park, and you can do lots of different walks right from the stations. So you could happily base yourself in Hathersage or Edale and have plenty to occupy you for a weekend or a week, using the train to get around. If you get off at Edale you can hike up Kinder Scout. In 1932 the mass trespass on Kinder Scout was one of the most successful acts of civil disobedience in the UK and a critical moment in securing the right to roam. So it’s a really important place for everyone who loves walking, and reminds us we haven’t always been able to take those rights for granted. From the next station, in Hope, you can walk a path that follows an ancient Roman road, and where there have been reported sightings of the ghosts of Roman legions. Or further along, in Hathersage, you can visit the (supposed) grave of Robin Hood’s second-in-command, Little John. What is not a myth is the number and quality of the pubs, so plenty of places to put your feet up at the end of any walk (and probably dry off). The Climate Group is an international non-profit that works with business and government leaders around the world to address the climate crisis Western Highlands, Scotland Neil Ansell, environmentalist and author When I was younger I travelled relentlessly, for years, stopping only long enough to earn enough money to get back on the road. It couldn’t even be described as backpacking; normally I carried nothing more than a bedroll, and slept at the side of the roads I was hitchhiking on. My travels took me through well over 50 countries, but my favourite place remained the Highlands. More recently I spent a year repeatedly visiting an area of the western Highlands known as the Rough Bounds, a rugged series of peninsulas divided by deep lochs, short on roads but surprisingly well-wooded, and went on to write a book about the place. The book came out, but the visits never stopped; sometimes alone, sometimes showing my daughters the delights of bothy living, and, most recently, with colleagues looking at land suitable for regeneration of the remarkable relic coastal oak woods that are such a feature of the area. I don’t drive, and all of my visits are conducted by public transport, by train and bus and then on foot. It is frustrating that this journey would be vastly quicker – and cheaper – were I to fly, but I no longer feel that I can justify flying unless there is absolutely no other option. But I have found a way to resolve this issue; I am about to move to the area, so it will be on my doorstep. Neil Ansell is the author of several books including The Last Wilderness (£10.99 Tinder Press; £10 Guardian Bookshop) and The Circling Sky (£18.99 Tinder Press; £16.52 Guardian Bookshop)Are we doomed, or is there still a chance to save civilisation? It’s easy to veer between despair and slender hope, when the UN says emissions that need to fall by half this decade are only on course for a cut of about 7.5%. How helpless we feel when big emitters refuse to attend Cop26. What an unconvincing “one minute to midnight” call to action from Boris Johnson, who is cutting foreign aid and the cost of domestic flights while mulling a new coalmine and a Shetland oilfield. The absurd Brexit fishing spat makes a mockery of exhorting other world leaders to lift their sights to the horizons of the climate crisis. The scale of what’s needed is politically unfathomable. Yet Johnson pretends answers can be conjured up “without so much as a hair shirt in sight”. In thundering, prophetic form, a recent article from George Monbiot set him right: the world’s richest 1% emit 35 times what each individual should use to ensure global heating does not exceed a 1.5C rise. The super-rich use their fortunes to shape the political agenda, diverting our attention from the true climate culprits with the “micro consumerist bollocks” of ditching coffee cups and plastic bags. “We will endure only if we cease to consent,” Monbiot writes – and he’s right. But as ever the political problem is how to get the world’s people to rebel. In Britain, voters increasingly care about the climate; it has risen to a close fourth place behind the leading concerns of Brexit, Covid and the economy. Concern is strongest in London and the south of England (33% compared with 24% nationally), social grade AB (34%), and the 25-34 and 35-44 age groups (31% and 35% respectively). When cowardly politicians fail to lead, the question is how to use every imaginable instrument to engage everyone all the time. Greta Thunberg is a remarkably wise campaigner, who understands the politics of persuasion. Yes, it’s necessary that some people get annoyed with school strikes and road blocks, she told Andrew Marr on Sunday, but with this important message: “There is no final tipping point where everything is lost. If we miss 1.5C then we go for 1.6C then 1.7C. It is never too late to do as much as we can.” That’s a vital thought to ward off despairing nihilism. Here’s one action that will be necessary: carbon taxes. Writing in the Financial Times, the economist Tim Harford recently suggested that every product needs a carbon price attached, sending a signal not just to the buyer, but right down every supply chain to use less energy in growing, manufacturing and transporting a product to attract less tax. That will be necessary. But any climate-abating tax brings on green crocodile tears for poor people, often from the same Tory MPs who just voted to remove the £20 universal credit uplift. The claim that carbon taxes would disproportionately affect the poorest people was what killed off the fuel price escalator – a yearly tax increase devised by the Tories in 1993 to discourage driving – after owner-driver hauliers blockaded oil refineries in 2000. When the climate demands that fuel taxes rise, politicians make them fall. There are subtler ways to impose carbon taxes. In 2006, the former Labour environment secretary David Miliband put forward a radical scheme for tradable personal carbon allowances (PCAs). Everyone would have a carbon allowance to spend on heating, petrol or flying, issued by a central carbon bank. The national allowance would shrink each year to cut personal carbon emissions. The well-off use the most carbon – they have big houses, drive SUVs and fly frequently – while half the population never flies, and many live in flats or small homes. Some 17m households have no car. Carbon credits would be tradable, so those using least could profit by selling some of their allowance, while heavy users would have to buy their spare credits via the carbon bank. This policy could be a potential win-win-win: it would fix an annual reduction in carbon emissions and redistribute cash from the extravagant to the carbon thrifty in this most unequal country. Above all it would engage everyone to think hard about their carbon consumption, giving them an incentive to save or profit. Miliband’s speech advocating the scheme labelled it “a thought experiment”, as it was way out ahead of timid government policy. But four official feasibility studies were commissioned. Some suggested the measure was too technically difficult, but that was before the first iPhone, let alone the supermarket smart cards that count each purchase. Some warned of the bravery this untried system would require. Others said it was a clunky, bureaucratic way to impose carbon taxes – but that misses the key point of engaging every citizen: VAT is invisible to most shoppers. Prof Paul Ekins of University College London’s Institute for Sustainable Resources was consulted on an official Defra report in 2008 which found the idea feasible and relatively fair, but decided it was too radical for the government, who dismissed it as “an interesting concept ... ahead of its time”. Ekins and other researchers now think its time has come. By the time feasibility reports emerged, Miliband had moved to the Foreign Office, but he remains convinced PCAs could make a key contribution, though like any single action, “this is no silver bullet,” he told me: the heaviest lifting must be done by governments and industry more than individual consumers. “It’s a nudge – but with teeth and carrots.” Of all the colossal transformations needed, the hardest will be changing public attitudes. PCAs could kickstart public demand for the big capital collective programmes that would be necessary to conserve allowances, such as district heating schemes, rather than every flat or terraced house buying an expensive heat pump. “People are desperate to do something, but too often they get trivial advice, such as pre-rinsing dishes before putting them in the dishwasher. A personal carbon allowance system would tell them what they could do to make a real difference,” Prof Ekins says. At the heart of behaviour change is an “I will if you will” certainty that demands tough government action. By adding in the true price to the planet, PCAs challenge the notion that economic growth in a developed country is the only goal. Do I think this government of the rich for the rich would do it? No chance. But I think it could be popular. There would be more winners than losers. And PCAs would be a fairer way to lower emissions in a transition that will inevitably require hair shirts for some – despite Johnson’s magical thinking. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist This article was amended on 4 November 2021 to clarify that Prof Paul Ekins was consulted on the 2008 Defra report on carbon taxes, but was not a co-author as an earlier version said.There was a fair amount of pet regret when the lockdowns ended; helplines were inundated. They rarely reported what the questions were, but you can guess: “How much love will ever be enough for this dog?”; “How can I tell if my cat’s being sarcastic?” In fact, the most regretted pet was a rabbit. People get them for children, but it’s a terrible fit, because there is nothing rabbits find more annoying than children. They also hate being picked up, stroked, handled in any way, regarded or addressed by name. “Let your rabbit come to you,” all the literature says, leaving experience to teach you how that sentence ends … “which it never will.” Yet over time, inevitably, you fall in love with the rabbit. I can’t explain it. It’s something in the way they move. Every hop is like a Disney movie. It’s like falling in love with a dancer from Strictly. They don’t even know you exist, but every little thing they do is lovely, so what are you gonna do? No point fighting it. One other thing the manuals don’t mention so often – rabbits die. They die constantly. They die of nothing. They die because they ate their own fur and it tangled their intestines. They die because a cat gave them a mean look. That is why they breed so fast, because they are not going to make even the most rudimentary effort to survive. My last but one rabbit to die – Peachy – went so fast from hopping to expiry that by the time I got him to the night vet, she said: “What do you want, an autopsy?” Mr Z and I went straight to the pub with our empty pet basket and had a pint in silence, me crying, as if we were doing insanely attention-seeking mime (which you might say is all mime). Fruity died on Thursday, I think because a cat looked at him funny. You are meant to have small pets to teach children how to cope with death. In fact, all any of us have learned is to fear death, fear it mightily, like the devil. If you want to have something die and not care, I suggest buying a locust. • Zoe Williams is a Guardian columnistThere are calls for Priti Patel to withdraw or justify claims she made before parliament that most people who travel to the UK in small boats are not genuine asylum seekers. Two Labour peers, David Blunkett and Shami Chakrabarti, have also questioned whether the home secretary has evidence that backs her claim that “70% of individuals on small boats are single men who are effectively economic migrants”. There is deepening concern from refugee charities that the government is feeding an untrue narrative that claims migrants who travel to the UK by boat are undeserving of sympathy. At the Lords home affairs and justice committee last week, Patel was questioned about her new policy of deeming any person who arrives in the UK to claim asylum after passing through a “safe” country as “inadmissible” – meaning their claim will not be considered. Describing the people who would fall into this category, she said: “In the last year, 70% of individuals on small boats are single men who are effectively economic migrants. They are not genuine asylum seekers.” Home Office officials were asked to provide data that backed up the home secretary’s assertions. A source from the department said that of 8,500 people arriving by small boat in 2020 87% were men and 74% were aged between 18 and 39 – but did not provide evidence related to their asylum claims. A Home Office spokesperson said: “France is a safe country; people should claim asylum in the first safe country they reach rather than making dangerous and illegal crossings.” Lady Chakrabarti, the former head of Liberty and a member of the committee, said Patel’s comments should be properly explained, corrected or withdrawn. “Both the refugee convention and the lives of desperate people are too precious for the home secretary’s 70% statement to go unchallenged,” she said. “Is the Home Office really saying that most single male asylum seekers or most people crossing the Channel are ‘economic migrants’ and unworthy of refuge? If yes, what happened to giving anxious scrutiny to every individual claim for asylum?” Lord Blunkett, the former Labour home secretary who asked Patel the question that provoked the “70%” response, said the government could struggle to justify the figure because officials were still processing a backlog of asylum claims. “It is not surprising that the Home Office has not responded [to the Guardian’s request to justify the 70% claim] given that the backlog of cases is so extreme. The latest figure I saw was 125,000, which exceeds many previous years. “There is a presumption being made by the home secretary about their claims before they have had an opportunity to make their claims. Until the backlog is massively reduced we won’t know about those arrivals who come over the summer,” he said. In oral evidence to the home affairs select committee in September 2020, Abi Tierney, the director general of UK Visas and Immigration, stated that of 5,000 people who had crossed in 2020 until the date of the committee meeting, 98% had claimed asylum. Published Home Office data shows that many of those arriving on small boats whose claims were deemed inadmissible originate from conflict zones such as Iran, Iraq, Afghanistan and Sudan. Dr Peter Walsh, a researcher at the Migration Observatory at the University of Oxford, said: “A majority of asylum claims (including those of people who arrived in the UK by small boat) are ultimately successful. Specifically, the Home Office reports that 59% of claims filed in 2017 to 2019 inclusive were ultimately successful, accounting for appeals. “It is reasonable to suppose that Channel migrants will be more likely than other asylum seekers to have their asylum claims granted. This is because the nationalities that are most common among Channel migrants – like Iranian, Syrian, Afghan and Yemeni – have a higher-than-average likelihood of ultimately being successful. It is not clear what evidence exists to support the claim that 70% of Channel migrants are economic migrants. But on the basis of the available data, it seems unlikely that no more than 30% of Channel migrants would have their asylum claims accepted.”My next-door-neighbour is 91 and has lived on his own for the past few years since his wife passed away. Over the summer he started receiving letters about a parking fine, sent to another man’s name but at his address. The company is adamant that the DVLA records this vehicle as registered at his address. It won’t accept there is no such person living there. It is being handled by a firm of solicitors called QDR, with the threat of bailiffs being called in if this person doesn’t pay. My neighbour is very nervous he will get bailiffs on his doorstep. MB, Falmouth You need to reassure him that there is nothing QDR can do to him because he is not the owner of the vehicle or named on the letters. In the unlikely event that they secured a county court judgment, and a bailiff turned up, they would have to leave as soon as he, or you, explained that the person on the document has never lived there. I asked QDR to check the electoral roll and respond to your letter, but it sent a stock email. It is not helped by the fact that your neighbour is not the person they are trying to find. You could write to the DVLA; however, your letter will join the backlog probably building up at its Swansea HQ. If you had a response in six months I would be amazed. If you/he has notified QDR that this person doesn’t live at his address, there is not much more you can do. Tell him to pass all letters from the solicitors to you and just chuck them in the bin. They will probably get bored with this soon and give up. We welcome letters but cannot answer individually. Email us at consumer.champions@theguardian.com or write to Consumer Champions, Money, the Guardian, 90 York Way, London N1 9GU. Please include a daytime phone number. Submission and publication of all letters is subject to our terms and conditions.The Pixel 6 is Google’s affordable flagship phone for 2021 and proves to be a leader in the field with a top-class camera and a new advanced chip at its heart – while undercutting most of the competition on price. The phone costs £599 ($599/A$999), which is £250 less than the Pixel 6 Pro, while still offering 90% of what you get with Google’s top model. It has a 6.4in 90Hz OLED screen that is flat, not curved at the sides. The display is slightly less sharp, slower and smaller than that on the 6 Pro, but is still very good with excellent brightness and viewing angles. The sides are painted black aluminium, the back is glass, and there is a large camera bar design similar to the 6 Pro. Despite the reduced screen size the Pixel 6 is not a small phone and is only 1.1mm narrower and 3g lighter than its bigger sibling. Those with smaller hands will struggle to hold it in one hand without an attachment. Specifications Screen: 6.4in 90Hz FHD+ OLED (411ppi) Processor: Google Tensor RAM: 8GB of RAM Storage: 128 or 256GB Operating system: Android 12 Camera: 50MP + 12MP ultrawide, 8MP selfie Connectivity: 5G, eSIM, wifi 6E, NFC, Bluetooth 5.2 and GNSS Water resistance: IP68 (1.5m for 30 minutes) Dimensions: 158.6 x 74.8 x 8.9mm Weight: 207g Tensor chip Along with the Pixel 6 Pro, the Pixel 6 is the first phone to feature Google’s custom Tensor processor. It matches rivals from Qualcomm and Samsung on speed, but is better optimised for Google’s various AI systems. Battery life is good but not great, lasting about 34 hours between charges, putting on par with rivals from Samsung and but some way behind 46-hour iPhone 13. That was with the screen on for about five hours in various messaging, note-taking and utility apps, the browser and taking about 20 photos, spending about two hours on 5G and the rest on wifi. Sustainability Google does not provide an expected lifespan for the battery. Those in similar devices typically maintain at least 80% of their original capacity after 500 full charge cycles. The Pixel 6 is generally repairable by Google and third-party repair shops. Screen repairs cost £129, back glass repairs cost £139 and battery replacements cost £89 out of warranty. The Pixel 6 contains 100% recycled aluminium in its frame, accounting for about 14% of the phone by weight. The company publishes environmental impact reports for some of its products. Google will recycle all Pixel devices free of charge. Android 12 The Pixel 6 ships with Google’s latest Android 12, which includes a load of customisation options and refinements. For more, see the Pixel 6 Pro review. Google will provide at least three years of major Android updates and monthly security fixes. It will then provide an additional two years of updates with the “frequency and categories of updates depending on the hardware capabilities and needs”. Samsung supports its top phones for four years, while Fairphone is aiming for six years and Apple supports its iPhone for up to seven years. Camera The Pixel 6 has the same 50-megapixel main and 12MP ultrawide camera as the 6 Pro and produces very similar results. That makes it one of the very best cameras you can get on a smartphone, particularly at under £600. It lacks an optical zoom camera, and while Google’s up to 7x digital zoom is one of the best, it is no substitute for optical magnification. The 8MP selfie camera is good, producing detailed shots with lots of drama, but occasionally the images were a bit soft, particularly in lower light levels. Observations Call quality and 5G reception was good, as was Bluetooth performance to several sets of headphones. The bottom corners were noticeably hard, digging in more than other devices in my palm when holding it one-handed. The volume and power buttons work well but are a little loose, allowing them to rattle a bit. Price The Google Pixel 6 costs £599 ($599/A$999) with 128GB of storage. For comparison, the Pixel 6 Pro costs £849, Pixel 4a costs £349, the OnePlus 9 costs £629, the Samsung Galaxy S21+ costs £949, the Xiaomi 11T Pro costs £599, the iPhone 13 costs £779 and the Fairphone 4 costs £499. Verdict Where the Pixel 6 Pro is about competing on an equal footing with the top smartphones on the market, the Pixel 6 offers all of what makes Google phones great while significantly undercutting the competition on price. You get snappy performance, decent battery life, Google’s top new chip and a slick experience packed with all the software bells and whistles you can’t get anywhere else. Google’s local AI-powered voice and keyboard typing is quite something, and you will get at least five years of security updates from release. Plus the phone has the main and ultrawide lenses of Google’s next-generation class-leading camera system. The lack of an optical zoom and slightly picky fingerprint scanner can be forgiven for the price. Costing just £599, the Pixel 6 is priced more in line with Chinese challenger brands than the top Samsung and Apple devices with which it competes favourably. That makes the Pixel 6 is a real bargain for a top-flight phone. You have to spend considerably more to get a better Android phone than this. Pros: class-leading camera, great screen, excellent performance, good battery life, recycled aluminium, five years of security updates, Android 12, impressive local AI features, very competitively priced. Cons: fairly slow charging, no optical zoom, fingerprint scanner can be picky, no face unlock option, only three years of Android version updates despite five years of security support. Other reviews Pixel 6 Pro review: the very best Google phone Pixel 4a review: the best phone Google has made in years OnePlus 9 review: a good, well-priced top-spec smartphone Galaxy S21+ review: the big-screen Samsung phone for slightly less Apple iPhone 13 review: cheaper, longer lasting and better camera Fairphone 4 review: ethical repairable phone gets big upgrade • This article was amended on 2 November 2021 to clarify that the Pixel 6 also has wifi 6E connectivity.It was a transformation as outlandish as anything in his fiction. In late Victorian Kent, Herbert George Wells was a shopkeeper’s sickly son threatening to kill himself if he couldn’t study science rather than fester in a hated apprenticeship. By the 1900s, not yet 40 and already with a string of future sci-fi classics to his name (The Time Machine, The Invisible Man, The Island of Doctor Moreau), he was en route to global stardom, hobnobbing at the White House and settling into life as a Jaeger-suited serial shagger who, 5ft 8in on his tiptoes, bedded a roll call of contemporary literary talent, from Dorothy Richardson to Rebecca West, all while playing a growing field of publishers and agents eager for a storytelling gift powerful enough to sow panic that Earth was under alien attack, at least among listeners to Orson Welles’s 1938 radio broadcast of The War of the Worlds. As Claire Tomalin’s sprightly new biography points out, Wells only turned to writing because dodgy lungs forced him to give up teaching, yet cork-lined isolation was never to be his lot. When sex with his first wife, Isabel, proved disappointing, he got divorced, having already set up with a student, Amy, whom, astoundingly, he renamed Jane. Once she was pregnant with their first child, he argued (apparently successfully) that he should be free to sleep around while she kept house, because she was “fragile” and he required a “complete loveliness of bodily response”. Nor was Wells for monogamy in prose. Initially seen as an English Jules Verne on account of his futuristic early fiction, he soon switched to comic social realism fed by a class-climber’s eye for detail (Kipps, Tono-Bungay), all the while churning out journalism, reviews, historical and scientific textbooks and political tracts. His influence on George Orwell wasn’t only down to his fiction – a germ of Nineteen Eighty-Four lies in Wells’s When the Sleeper Wakes, about a man who rises from a 200-year slumber to find London under fascist rule and ravaged by air war – but also in his persona as a public intellectual ready to hold forth, whatever the issue of the day. Having cut his teeth during a late Victorian print boom fuelled by the growth of the reading public, he was well placed to take advantage of the era; he even got to know his second wife while commuting on the newly opened District line. A certain shamelessness aided Wells’s rise: who else would have thought to ask the prime minister for a stipend? (Balfour said no, in part because Wells was already earning more than a grand a year, a healthy six-figure sum today.) Most of all, there was Wells’s hunger for work: bashing out 7,000 words a day, he never shook the jobbing writer’s fear of going under, a prospect made stark when a loyal confrère died of pneumonia at 30. Tomalin wonders aloud how Wells managed, while laying out abundant evidence of how the sausage was made. Witness her paragraph on the death of his mother in June 1905: “She had fallen down the stairs at Easter… Wells went over and found a nurse to help out, but he was too busy to stay and was not there when she died. He arrived soon afterwards and cleared up her affairs. Then back to work. In October 1905, Kipps was published and sold 12,000 copies before Christmas – good news for Wells’s finances.” Tomalin leans heavily on Wells’s 1934 memoir An Experiment in Autobiography, which sometimes lends a dutiful air to proceedings, particularly during the scene-setting of the early years. A bigger problem is the way paraphrase can slip into endorsement. Comparing Wells with his contemporary George Gissing, Tomalin says that Gissing let himself “be humiliated and defeated – by women and by life – while Wells knew how to work for success, how to enjoy women and the world and how to fight and – usually – to win”. Yet such terms of approval sit ill with Wells’s conduct as portrayed here, not least because one of Tomalin’s coups is to quote from his unpublished letters to Amber Reeves, a midlife lover who was a Cambridge student half his age: “Didn’t I have Isabel because I wanted her and chucked her because I wanted to and have Jane? I never gave up anything I wanted (and I ain’t going to do so now).” When Reeves was pregnant, Wells’s wife bought the baby clothes; when Wells’s stay with Reeves at a French villa didn’t work out – apparently she was no good at keeping house – he made good on his outlay by bringing Jane and his sons there instead. Tomalin’s decision to restrict herself to the “young” Wells never strikes the reader as anything but pragmatic, despite her explanation that she found herself particularly drawn to the phase of his best-remembered fiction. In any case, Tomalin keeps pace with her subject into midlife, in part, she says, because he continued to behave like a young man, which is rather a polite way to call him immature. Perhaps the psychic dislocation of rapid celebrity meant he never felt quite secure. The notion, given voice in 1909’s Tono-Bungay, that “every human being had a ‘place’. It belonged to you from your birth like the colour of your eyes”, was one his personal striving – the philandering and politicking as well as the fiction – always sought to undo. During one of the bouts of sickness that pockmarked his youth, he feared he might die a virgin without becoming famous; achievement unlocked, to say the least, but at what cost? Tomalin’s generous reserve lets her reader decide. • The Young HG Wells: Changing the World by Claire Tomalin is published by Viking (£20). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyThroughout the 2021 United Nations climate change conference, the Guardian will be publishing the stories of the people whose lives have been upended – sometimes devastated – by the climate breakdown. Vanessa Nieuwenhuizen, Samoa It was the day before we were supposed to fly to Australia for a family reunion and Christmas in 2012, so it was a very exciting day to start off with. There was a cyclone due to hit Samoa. It started to rain really heavily and by the afternoon we started seeing water rising just around the house. At around 4.30, I heard my husband screaming outside and I knew something was very wrong. By the time I made it outside, there was a massive gush of water coming towards our house, like an inland tsunami. My husband yelled to grab the kids. My baby was sitting on the toilet. I grabbed him by the arm. The water was rising so quickly that by the time we made it out of the house, the water was up to our hips. We were already struggling. We have four children and so my husband and I had one child on each arm as we waded through the water. There was one point where my husband and I looked at each other and in my anxious mind I thought: please, please, Heavenly Father, don’t let us have to make a decision to let one of our children go. We all made it through, thank goodness. But the thought of having to let go of one of our children, I wouldn’t wish it upon any parent. We made it into the workshop, and climbed the stairs towards the little storeroom. Our entire house was gone, our cars had been washed away, big machines in our workshop that had been bolted to the ground had washed away – that’s how strong the water was. We stayed up in the storeroom for several hours, wrapped in old, dirty curtains to keep ourselves warm. I remember thinking: if we make it out alive, how and where are we going to start all over again? We had an amazing life in Samoa but after we lost everything in that flash flood, we decided to move to Australia. Australia has been kind to us, but as much as we say this is home, Samoa will always be home. I miss Samoa. Every occasion, my thoughts turn to home, and I still cry.It has been called Pakistan’s answer to Dubai, a brand new multitrillion-rupee development of towering skyscrapers, futuristic domes and floating walkways. But Ravi Riverfront City, described as the “world’s largest riverfront modern city” also faces accusations of rampant land grabs by prime minister Imran Khan’s government, which has championed the project. Hundreds of thousands of farmers who could never afford to live in the modern urban utopia are now at risk of eviction. As well as the human cost of the development, being built on a 40,000-hectare (100,000-acre) site adjacent to Pakistan’s megacity of Lahore, many fear it will wreak environmental devastation to the Ravi river, currently undergoing ecological restoration, and surrounding forests. According to the government, the new city will be an alternative to London and Dubai for Pakistani and foreign tourists, create millions of jobs and alleviate pressure on land in Lahore. Khan has been supportive of the project, describing it as “essential” for Pakistan’s development. The government says $8bn (£5.8bn) in foreign money has now gone into the project with the biggest investors coming from China. However last month, a Lahore high court judge found “gross irregularities” in the Ravi riverfront project and said it would benefit land developers. To oversee the implementation of the city, the Ravi Urban Development Authority (Ruda) was established last year. But in a move that opponents described as “draconian and unprecedented”, the government bestowed complete legal immunity to Ruda so that no lawsuit or legal challenge could be filed against the project or anyone working on it. The government has also applied Section 4, which means it can legally acquire any land for public purposes, even though Ravi Riverfront will be a commercial enterprise. In recent months, thousands of farmers and residents on the land where the city is to be sited have gathered to voice their opposition. The Punjab state government responded by pressing charges against 90 of the protesting farmers. Of the 41,000 hectares (102,271 acres) the government will acquire on behalf of the private developers, 85% is agricultural land occupied by almost a million farmers, labourers and business owners. Many claim that the government is refusing to pay market value for farms, instead declaring their land almost worthless. “The government is snatching our land for urban development and displacing us from farms we have occupied for centuries,” says Chaudhary Mahmood Ahmed, 65, a fourth-generation farmer whose land lies within the 46km-long stretch of the river where the new city will be built. Ahmed says 50 people depended on his farm for their livelihoods and compared the actions of Imran Khan’s government to those of the East India company, the British trading company that notoriously colonised parts of India in the 18th and 19th centuries. “They are snatching land from poor people,” he says. “It is unacceptable to us.” Muhammad Munir is among those who have been growing potatoes and livestock feed for decades. He says the area’s farmers are essential to supply the 13 million people of Lahore with fruit and vegetables, as well as 70% of the city’s milk. Munir says: “The government has been declaring our fertile lands as barren so that they can snatch them from us for pennies. We would die and kill for our lands. This is a life and death situation for us.” Many speak bitterly of land being snatched away to benefit Pakistan’s elite. “The government is taking the roof from over our head. They are offering so little as compensation,” says Bushra Bibi, 65, who lives with her five children in a one-room flat on designated Ravi Riverfront land. “We cannot rebuild a house with this tiny amount we will be given. We will become homeless.” While the project was first conceived by a previous government in 2013, it was declared impractical and dropped. An initial feasibility study found it would be almost impossible to supply enough water to the development without $3bn in new infrastructure. But with Pakistan’s economy nose-diving and the government keen for projects to boost recovery, the Ravi Riverfront project was picked up again by Khan’s administration two years ago and given the green light. Mian Mustafa Rasheed, head of the Ravi Urban Development Victims Committee, says it is a plan solely for “industrialists and the land mafia who have close ties to Khan’s government”, and alleges that the authorities “have been threatening people individually to stop them protesting against the project”. The government and Ruda did not respond to multiple requests for comment. However, speaking to Pakistan newspaper Dawn, Ruda chief executive officer Imran Amin said that “we have started implementing the compensation package prepared specially for the landowners and affectees of the country’s first and biggest urban project”. The true environmental impact of the project is still not known as no assessment has been carried out. WWF-Pakistan has already submitted a challenge to the project, stating that the plans to “concretise the natural floodplain of the river” was in “clear violation” of the recommendations of the Ravi River Commission, a body with a legal mandate from the high court to restore the natural ecology of the river. “Lahore is already famous for its pollution but if they build this Ravi Riverfront development next to it, pollution will just double,” says Rafay Alam, a lawyer and environmental activist. “It is just so absurd.”The leaders of both major New South Wales parties won’t commit to tightening rules around ministers’ use of private phones until the state’s anti-corruption body releases its report into the conduct of the former premier Gladys Berejiklian, which the watchdog says won’t be until at least after February next year. On Tuesday the premier, Dominic Perrottet, told reporters he and many other MPs in NSW use a private phone to keep “professional work separate” from their private life. He was responding to questions in the wake of evidence before the Independent Commission Against Corruption that the former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire urged Berejiklian to “get a private phone” after he was summonsed to appear before the body in 2018. Icac also heard Maguire told Berejiklian “they can read texts” and suggested she download Chinese messaging app WeChat. Perrottet said on Tuesday he did not know about WeChat, but he was aware many MPs use WhatsApp for private communication. While Perrottet said it was “important that information that is relevant to ministerial decision-making is conducted in accordance with rules that are in place”, he stopped short of committing to changing the rules on the use of private communication methods including encrypted messaging apps. While Perrottet said he believed the NSW ministerial code of conduct was “incredibly strong” he also said the government would consider changes. But only if it came with a recommendation from Icac. “If [the ministerial code] needs to be [reviewed] from time to time, based on changes in technology, the government will always look at it,” he said. “One of the important roles that Icac also play is in corruption prevention and providing advice to government, which they do from time to time on the changes [that] should be made and I would assume that would also include potential changes to the code of conduct.” On the final day of its hearings into Berejiklian’s conduct, the former NSW premier told the inquiry it was common for MPs to have private phones, and that she had often been encouraged to use one by colleagues. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The NSW opposition leader, Chris Minns, also stopped short of calling for changes to the code on the use of phones. “At the end of the day ministerial communication and communication on behalf of any member of parliament is subject to oversight by investigative bodies and I think every MP knows that,” he said. “We’d wait for the Icac findings to come down before I make a policy change or recommend [one] to the NSW government but you know we’re public officials and that needs to be at the forefront of our mind when we’re making decisions.” But those findings won’t be made public for some months. On Tuesday the watchdog released a timetable saying submissions from the inquiry’s counsel assisting, Scott Robertson, were not due until 20 December. The submissions in reply from lawyers for Berejiklian and Maguire were not due until 14 February 2022. Icac has been the subject of fierce criticism in some quarters over the timing of its inquiry into Berejiklian, which prompted her resignation as the state navigated the end of its long Covid-19 lockdown in October. On Friday the commission’s inspector, Bruce McClintock SC, tabled a report in the NSW parliament which revealed that he had decided to conduct an investigation into the decision to launch the inquiry after receiving “several complaints” about the decision. “The Icac itself has informed me that it too received complaints from members of the public in relation to this matter,” he wrote in the report. But having reviewed the watchdog’s conduct, McClintock found it had acted “lawfully and in conformity” with the act, and was not unreasonable. He also dismissed complaints about the timing of the investigation, saying Icac could have been accused of “partiality” towards Berejiklian if it did not launch the probe. “Having concluded that there was sufficient basis to investigate the matters in question further and hold a public inquiry, I believe the commission was correct to proceed as it did,” he wrote. “Had it failed to do so, it could itself have been justifiably accused of failing to perform its statutory functions and, indeed, of partiality to the premier.” During his first press conference as premier, Perrottet said changes to the watchdog’s power were not a priority for him, and on Tuesday he said he would not comment on the body’s powers until after its report was complete. “The independent commission needs to have, free from political interference, the opportunity to conclude its work and to provide a public report and when they provide a public report, we’ll consider that report and if there’s any action … we need to take, we will,” he said.Britain and France have been at loggerheads over post-Brexit fishing licences for UK waters since the start of the year. Talks are continuing but both sides have threatened action – and mistranslations have not helped. What’s at the heart of the row? Under the Brexit trade and cooperation agreement (TCA), French fishers may continue to fish between six and 12 miles from the UK shore and off Guernsey and Jersey until 2026 if they have a discretionary licence issued by Britain. To be granted that licence, they must have previously fished in those waters between 2012 and 2016 – but the two countries disagree over the evidence required for past activity, and how much of it should be needed. France says that for the six-to-12-mile zone and off Guernsey and Jersey, 210 licences have so far been granted whereas it requested 454. Authorities say only about 20 of Boulogne’s 112-strong fleet are permitted to fish in that zone. The UK says it has granted about 1,700 licences, or 98% of EU applications. But that figure includes licences to fish in Britain’s exclusive economic zone between 12 and 200 miles from the coast, which were automatic under the terms of the TCA. The nub of the argument is that in the disputed zones (six-to-12 miles, and around Jersey and Guernsey), the TCA defines which boats qualify for licences through their past activity – but it does not specify exactly what proof is required. What are both sides threatening? France says the rules imposed by the UK, Jersey and Guernsey are unfair to smaller boats, which typically do not have the GPS equipment to prove past presence in UK waters. Britain says it is entitled to ask for the evidence it wants. The French president, Emmanuel Macron, called on Monday for further talks, lifting a threat to ban UK boats from unloading at some French ports, carry out extra licence checks, tighten controls of trucks and reinforce customs and hygiene controls from Tuesday. Both sides seem to believe the other has – or is about to – breach the terms of the TCA. France’s Europe minister, Clément Beaune, said on Sunday that the UK had failed to issue a “significant amount” of licences and was “targeting one country”. This was “not a technical issue, it’s a political choice and a breach of the TCA”, he said. Britain’s foreign secretary, Liz Truss, on Monday gave France 48 hours to withdraw its “completely unreasonable” threats, warning that the UK could otherwise “use the mechanisms of our trade agreement with the EU to take action”. What happens next? It depends how talks go, what, if any, measures France implements, and how the UK chooses to respond, but either or both parties could enter the TCA dispute settlement process. This would entail first going into consultations, then, if those fail, triggering arbitration. If one side is found to have breached TCA, it must comply with the ruling within a reasonable period or risk the winning side withdrawing TCA benefits. Given the rhetoric from both sides, and the domestic political advantage to be won from playing tough, it is hard to see a rapid de-escalation. There may be little appetite in the EU27 for a fish war, but there is also a sense Britain is pushing its luck too often. Matters have also not been helped by mistranslations. Boris Johnson on Sunday cited a letter from the French prime minister, Jean Castex, to the European Commission president, Ursula von der Leyen, which he said called on the EU to “punish” Britain. Other reports said the letter asked the EU to “cause damage” to the UK. The phrase might be better translated as: “It is vital to show European public opinion that respect for commitments entered into is not negotiable, and that it is more detrimental to leave the EU than to remain in it.” The point was unfortunately phrased, but has been made by many EU leaders since the Brexit referendum.Debate has reignited over how well (or not) Australia handled the September announcement of the Aukus pact – and its subsequent withdrawal from a lucrative French submarine contract. While the French government claims it was blindsided by the move, the Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, maintains he acted appropriately and in the country’s national interests. Ahead of the G20 summit in Rome, the US president, Joe Biden, publicly observed to the French president, Emmanuel Macron, that the episode had been “clumsy”. On Sunday night, as the forum drew to a close, journalists asked Macron if he thought Morrison had lied to him about the plan. “I don’t think, I know,” he replied. On Monday, with leaders now gathered for Cop26 in Glasgow, Morrison shot back, telling reporters he refused to “cop sledging of Australia”. But while the diplomatic row has dominated headlines in Australia, French media have not so far showed much interest in the matter. “La crise des sous-marins” seems to be largely a footnote when discussing deteriorating US or cross-channel relations. On Friday, after Biden said he had been “under the impression that France had been informed”, Le Monde called his claim “somewhat astonishing”. Commentators on the Fox News-style CNews this week referred to the broken submarine contract as a “humiliation”, a “diplomatic thrashing”, and proof of US disregard for France. On Monday morning, Le Parisien’s report noted principally that the incident “sparked a quarrel with the US”. On Monday afternoon, financial journal Les Echos referenced the submarine debate as a sign of London’s “perfidy” and desire to make trouble for Europe – but made no mention of Australia. On Monday night, Ouest-France reported on Morrison’s stand without further analysis. One French commentator did notice how “furious” the prime minister was over Macron’s accusation. But with Cop26 under way, Morrison’s comments otherwise got little attention in the French press. Television network BFMTV noted that Australia’s “torpedoing” of the contract had strained France’s relations with the UK, aggravating tensions over the fishing licences – but otherwise made no mention of Morrison. ‘Frexit’ champion François Asselineau has meanwhile suggested Biden lied to Macron – that Morrison’s comments indicate “Biden was obviously fully informed” that France had not been kept in the loop. While French outlets were somewhat restrained, News Corp Australia tabloids went to town: “PM’s fury at French whine” the Herald Sun’s headline read, while the Daily Telegraph went with “The frog of war”.Barclays has financed more in fossil fuel projects than any of the UK’s largest banks in the months leading up to the Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow, according to a report by climate finance campaigners. The bank financed $5.6bn (£4.1bn) for new fossil fuel projects from January 2021 to the eve of the UN climate summit, Market Forces found, despite growing international warnings that any new fossil developments would destroy any chance of avoiding a catastrophic climate breakdown. Barclays’ multibillion pound support for fossil fuel projects was ranked ahead of that of HSBC, which financed $5.3bn this year, and Standard Chartered, which made $4.3bn available. The report found Barclays financed a $194m bond to the Canada-headquartered pipeline company Enbridge, which part-owns the controversial Dakota access pipeline which is expected to carry enough crude oil to produce the emissions of 30 coal plants every year. It also said the bank provided $200m to MEG Energy, which extracts Canadian tar sands oil, one of the most polluting fuels on the planet. The report also revealed how HSBC and Standard Chartered participated in a $6bn bond issuance to Saudi Aramco, the world’s most polluting company, and that HSBC financed a $1.5bn bond to Qatar Petroleum, which owns the world’s biggest gas field. The three banks have extended financing to fossil fuel companies despite committing to net zero carbon emissions from financing activity by 2050 and issuing warnings that no new fossil fuel projects are compatible with keeping global heating in check. The report’s findings came ahead of a series of Cop26 events scheduled for Wednesday that are intended to mobilise public and private finance to help tackle the climate emergency. Mia Watanabe, a campaigner at Market Forces, said: “Despite their warm words, these banks continue to finance fossil fuel companies and projects that are destroying the world’s hopes of meeting climate targets.” In a stunt to mark the latest report, Market Forces held a Formula One-style “prize giving” for the banks’ “race to disaster” outside Barclays’ Glasgow offices, which is a stone’s throw from the Cop26 venue. A previous annual report by the group that tracked global fossil fuel financing found that in the five years after the signing of the Paris agreement, the three banks combined financed more than $257bn in the coal, oil and gas sectors. That report found Barclays was the world’s seventh-biggest fossil fuel funder, and the biggest in Europe, while HSBC was ranked 13th in the world. Although Standard Chartered trailed at 34 globally, it is also the top UK financier of new coal plants in Asia, according to Market Forces. The latest report follow news that Jes Staley has stepped down as the chief executive of Barclays after an investigation by City regulators into how he described his relationship with the billionaire sex offender Jeffrey Epstein. Standard Chartered said last week that it would set “ambitious new targets” to reach net zero from financed activity by 2050, including interim 2030 targets for the most carbon-intensive sectors, that were aligned with the International Energy Agency’s scenario for a net zero energy system by 2050. The global energy watchdog said in May that there could be no new oil, gas or coal development if the world was to reach net zero by 2050. Only days later a UN report warned that fossil fuel production planned by the world’s governments “vastly” exceeded the limit needed to keep the rise in global heating to 1.5C and avoid the worst impacts of the climate crisis. “The science is clear – banks that keep funding fossil fuels can’t be climate leaders,” Watanabe added. An HSBC spokesperson said the bank was “firmly committed” to aligning its provision of finance to net zero by 2050 or sooner. “We have committed to phase out thermal coal financing by 2030 in EU and OECD markets and by 2040 globally and to set out short and medium-term transition targets for the oil and gas and power and utilities sector. We expect to provide between $750bn and $1trn towards the net zero-transition by 2030,” the spokesperson added. A Barclays spokesperson said: “We are aligning our entire financing portfolio to support the goals of the Paris agreement – significantly scaling up green financing, directly investing in new green technologies and helping clients in key sectors change their business models to reduce their climate change impact. By 2025, we will reduce the emissions intensity of our power portfolio by 30%, and reduce absolute emissions of our energy portfolio by 15%.” • This article was amended on 3 November 2021 to include a statement from Barclays that was not available at the time of publication.Scott Morrison has been accused of putting his personal political interests ahead of healing Australia’s diplomatic rift with France, after the leaking of a text message from Emmanuel Macron to the prime minister. The release of a text received two days before the Aukus announcement – when the French president asked Morrison whether to expect good or bad news on the submarine project – was “highly unconventional behaviour between state leaders”, a leading foreign affairs analyst said. The Morrison government also pushed back at the US government on Tuesday, with the defence minister, Peter Dutton, saying Australia’s key security ally was “kept informed of our every move” in a “no-surprises strategy” in the lead up to the deal between the two countries and the UK. The Australian newspaper on Tuesday reported details of a 15-page confidential agreed communications timeline that the article said undermined claims by the US president, Joe Biden, that he did not know Australia had not informed France earlier about the cancellation of the French submarine contract. The extraordinary rift between Australia and France flows from Macron’s accusation that Morrison lied to him over plans with the US and the UK to acquire nuclear-propelled submarines. Morrison rejected the claim and said he was “not going to cop sledging of Australia”. Sydney’s Daily Telegraph and the Australian Financial Review reported Macron had texted Morrison two days before the Aukus announcement in mid-September to say: “Should I expect good or bad news for our joint submarines ambitions?” The leaked message – shared to reinforce Australia’s position that France wasn’t blindsided about the cancellation of the A$90bn submarine deal – also appeared to confirm Macron did not know which way Australia would go shortly before Aukus was unveiled. It was also reported Macron told Morrison in June, “I don’t like losing,” after the Australian prime minister raised concern in Paris about whether the 12 planned conventionally powered submarines were still suitable for Australia’s strategic needs. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Labor’s foreign affairs spokesperson, Penny Wong, said Morrison was “willing to trash alliances and partnerships for personal political interests, instead of simply admitting this could have been handled better”. “Mr Morrison needs to explain how selective text messages between him and the French president, and the contents of a confidential 15-page document negotiated in secret between President Biden’s National Security Council and Australian and British officials ended up in Australian newspapers,” Wong said. “Mr Morrison needs to rule out that this backgrounding came from him, his office or his government. His furious attempts at damage control will only make world leaders trust him less.” Morrison’s office on Tuesday declined to respond to Wong’s comments, pointing to the prime minister’s comments a day earlier. Morrison was asked in Glasgow on Monday: “Why did you decide to leak that text message?” The prime minister did not directly contest the claim, but said he didn’t intend to “indulge your editorial on that”. Morrison told reporters Macron “was concerned that this would be a phone call that would result in the decision of Australia not to proceed with the contract”. Morrison said the French defence system “flew into action” the day after his dinner with Macron at the Élysée Palace in June to seek to address issues with the project – including sending a French admiral to Australia “to try and save the contract”. The French embassy in Canberra did not comment on the release of the text message, although the ambassador, Jean-Pierre Thébault, is due to address the National Press Club on Wednesday. Comment has also been sought from the US embassy and the White House. Earlier, a senior White House official declined to clarify who Biden was referring to when he told Macron in Rome last week: “I was under the impression that France had been informed long before that the deal was not going through. I, honest to God, did not know you had not been.” Biden’s national security adviser, Jake Sullivan – when asked on Monday about Morrison’s handling of the matter – replied: “We should look forward and not backward.” Hervé Lemahieu, the research director at the Sydney-based Lowy Institute, said Australia had every right to decide to rescind the French contract and to enter into Aukus, but the communication with France “could have been handled with a bit more deft and diplomacy”. Lemahieu said the alleged release of the texts was “highly unconventional behaviour between state leaders” and reflected “how personalised the squabble has become”. “I think the key variable here is that both president Macron and prime minister Morrison are two men who face elections in 2022, and they both see the fracas as a blow to their prestige and their personal standing and they are primarily speaking to a domestic audience here, rather than to each other.” Lemahieu said he had been monitoring French news stories in recent days “and this is a bigger story in Australia than it is in France”. He said the handling of the communications with France was “as much an American mismanagement as an Australian one” – as the US is a formal treaty ally of France. Lemahieu said Biden had “basically decided that it was worth pushing Australia under the bus in order to salvage” the US relationship with France. The former Liberal prime minister Malcolm Turnbull – who announced the partnership with France to acquire submarines in 2016 – said Morrison “should apologise” to Macron “because he did very elaborately and duplicitously deceive France”. The former Labor prime minister Kevin Rudd said the situation had become an “extraordinary mess” where “we now have got heads of government, effectively, leaking against each other, in order to establish what transpired in these informal text messages between heads of government”. “Mr Morrison is now digging an even bigger hole for himself, not just in relation to the French, by effectively himself accusing the French president of lying, but also (in) extraordinary background briefing about the failure in Mr Morrison’s view of American officials to properly apprise the United States president of the nature of the cancellation of the French deal,” Rudd told the ABC.The Melbourne Cup’s reputation may be a little scratched but plenty of Australians still like to give it a trot. Attendances at meetings have been dwindling and fewer Australians are gambling on horse races – but those still having a punt are spending more. The Australian Hotels Association, meanwhile, has reported that pubs and restaurants are doing a roaring trade. A major report released by Gambling Research Australia in October found 16.8% of Australians gambled on horse races in the past year, down from 22.4% a decade before. But turnover keeps increasing, from $22.9bn in 2010-11 to $26.9bn in 2018-19 (adjusted for inflation). CQUniversity senior postdoctoral fellow in the experimental gambling research laboratory, and co-author of the report, Dr Alex Russell, says the apparent discrepancy is due to people turning off gambling, but those left behind being the heavy gamblers. “The people who are still betting are betting a tonne,” Russell said. “A lot of that is driven by more and more online gambling – it doubled in the past decade.” Russell said people have realised that gambling is not just a harmless recreational activity but something with damaging effects on people and animals. “We’re just seeing more and more people saying ‘I bloody hate gambling’, or ‘I’m sick of all the ads’,” he said. “The other thing about the Melbourne Cup and horse racing is it comes with the animal cruelty issue.” There have been seven horse deaths in the past six years at the big race, prompting Racing Victoria to introduce new safety measures. Animal rights protesters targeted it again this year, joined – inexplicably – by anti-lockdown activists. In an article in The Conversation, Russell pointed to an analysis of Melbourne Cup tweets last year that had #nuptothecup, #horseracingkills and #animalcruelty in the top 10. Attendances at the Cup were steadily declining before Covid changed everything. From a high of 122,736 (when Makybe Diva won in 2003), the numbers hovered at just over 100,000 in the early 2010s before sinking to 83,471 in 2018 then 81,408 in 2019. Covid meant there were no spectators last year and a cap of 10,000 people this year. Television audiences have also been declining, the Nine papers reported last year, although Channel 10 said people were live-streaming the event instead. Gerard Daffy from online sports betting site TAB said the cup might have “lost a bit of its gloss”, blaming an increasing number of international entries. But, thanks to the pandemic, Australians are dominating again. He said Incentivise (the pre-race favourite who came second behind Verry Elleegant) was a “headline act … a horse from Queensland that’s come from obscurity”. “The Melbourne Cup’s the Melbourne Cup,” Daffy said. “It’s the race that stops the nation, it truly does, and it always will.” The Australian Hotels Association chief executive officer, Stephen Ferguson, said while race-day crowds were on “an inchingly slow decline”, pubs and restaurants had held their ground. That was true this year, bearing in mind capacity restrictions, he said. “The Melbourne Cup is the starting gun for the run into Christmas,” he said. “It always is. It’s one of the biggest days of the year. It’s a festive day, full of bookings. People are social animals, they’re looking to get out there and connect. Who wants to get on a train to Flemington when you can sit in a pub?” Russell said for many people, Melbourne Cup betting was just a once-yearly bit of fun. “It’s an excuse to take the day off, go to the pub, get dressed up,” he said. “It’s still got that about it, but a lot of people have had their eyes opened to all the stuff around it.” In Australia, Gambling Help Online is available on 1800 858 858. In the UK, support for problem gambling can be found through GamCare on 0808 8020 133. In the US, the National Council on Problem Gambling is on 800-522-4700Chinese authorities have been accused of “continuously stymying” attempts by foreign media to cover the Winter Olympics, by denying or ignoring requests for access and following, harassing and abusing journalists. In a scathing statement on Tuesday, the Foreign Correspondents Club of China, which acts on behalf of foreign media in China, called for transparency and clarity from China’s national Olympic organising committee. The club also accused the committee of failing to uphold the International Olympic Committee’s charter requiring it to ensure the fullest media coverage possible for the widest global audience. The Games are due to take place in Beijing in February. “Our members’ repeated inquiries towards [Beijing Organising Committee for the Olympic Games] on how international media can report on the Games have been met with conflicting answers or neglected completely,” the FCCC said. “FCCC members report spending weeks trying to obtain contact details for BOCOG media facilitators, only to receive dismissive or inaccurate information from them.” The FCCC said in the past year foreign journalists had been largely unable to access press conferences or events that were open to domestic media, including the arrival of the Olympic flame. It said many press dates were not publicised, or announced with only a few hours’ notice. “Foreign journalists who attempt to register for events are denied because BOCOG limits attendance to only their chosen media outlets, claim the event is full, or because they require participants to submit Covid test results within an impossible timeframe of only a few hours.” The FCCC provided several testimonies, including from a US journalist who said they were stopped and questioned by police after they tried to take photos with their phone of a venue, from a public road. Another broadcaster said it was called by an organiser of an Olympic venue tour and shouted at over a report that mentioned human rights boycotts. “We haven’t been given access since,” the broadcaster said. A European newspaper reporter who attempted to visit venues after BOCOG failed to grant access was stopped at the entrance to winter sports slopes in Chongli and Yanqing. “This lack of access means Chinese state media claims about the environmental sustainability of venues are impossible to verify,” the reporter said. The FCCC said the conditions for visiting accredited foreign journalists were also unclear, including whether they would be allowed to travel within and outside Beijing, and what quarantine measures were required of them. China is committed to a zero-Covid strategy and has enacted a “closed loop” management system for the Games, within which all participants and employees can only move between Games-related venues for training, competitions and work on a dedicated transport system. China’s relationship with international media has plummeted in recent years. Many in-country positions – including for major outlets such as the New York Times, Washington Post, and Wall Street Journal, and all Australian outlets – remain empty after Beijing expelled or forced out dozens of reporters in 2020. It has since processed very few visa applications for journalists outside China hoping to go in, and dozens remain outstanding, leaving outlets with inadequate teams to cover the event. The FCC called on the BOCOG to provide transparency and clarity for international media, process outstanding visas, improve access and permission to press events and venues, and to appoint dedicated media communications officers who provide real assistance. “With less than three months remaining before the start of Beijing 2022, there is still tremendous uncertainty over how and if foreign correspondents will be able to cover the Games,” the FCCC said. The BOCOG has been contacted for a response.In Seattle, some police detectives stepped into patrol cars over the last month for the first time in more than a decade, according to Sgt Randy Huserik, who has been with the department for 28 years. The department has been short-staffed since 18 October, when the city began enforcing a mandate requiring officers to get vaccinated against Covid-19. But while the Seattle police union warned that the mandate would lead to “an alarming escalation in crime” and “an untenable public safety crisis”, Huserik said the department’s staffing strategy had allowed it to continue to properly respond to 911 calls. “We haven’t seen a significant need for detectives to be donning their uniforms and heading out and handling 911 calls,” Huserik said. “It’s only been a few [people] here and there.” Cities around the US have implemented similar mandates – and faced the same sort of backlash from police unions who have predicted chaos – but the warnings that the mandates would deplete police departments and make cities more dangerous have not yet proven true, according to policing and public health experts. Chuck Wexler, the executive director of the Police Executive Research Forum, which advises police departments across the country, described the warnings from police unions as “bravado”. “This isn’t asking cops to work extra hours without getting compensated,” said Wexler. “This is about a public health emergency, and this isn’t about taking away rights. This is about protecting cops from dying” from Covid, which has killed almost 500 officers in the United States over the last two years, about five times the number who died from gunfire, according to the non-profit Officer Down Memorial Page. On Monday, New York began enforcing its vaccinate mandate for city employees, which meant about 9,000 people who refused to get the vaccine were placed on unpaid leave, representing about 6% of the city workforce, according to NPR. Mayor Bill de Blasio said on Monday that 91% of city employees had been vaccinated, the New York Times reported. That included the New York police department, the largest in the country, in which 85% of officers have been vaccinated, up from 70% just a couple of weeks ago. Other cities, including Seattle and Los Angeles, have seen the same increase in vaccinations before mandate deadlines, as workers decide they would rather get the shot than lose their jobs or be placed on unpaid leave. In Seattle, 92% of the police department is fully vaccinated, according to the city. Twenty-two employees are partially vaccinated, and 100 others have requested an exemption. To combat the staffing shortfall, Seattle’s mayor, Jenny Durkan, announced last week that the city would begin offering a $25,000 hiring bonus to experienced officers or 911 dispatchers. “We are encouraged by the mayor’s support because we have been pursuing hiring incentives,” Huserik said. But Mike Solan, president of the Seattle Police Officers Guild, condemned Durkan’s announcement, telling Fox News that she had already betrayed police officers by implementing the vaccine mandate and not supporting them during protests after George Floyd was killed in 2020. Despite the fierce battles over vaccine mandates, public health experts say they are effective. “As the deadline for the mandate gets closer, even people who said initially they are not going to get the vaccine, they begin to move and do get vaccinated,” said Sandra C Quinn, a professor of family science at the University of Maryland School of Public Health who has studied the role of communication in vaccine acceptance. Adam Galinsky, a social psychologist and expert in leadership and ethics at Columbia University, said the last-minute decisions to get vaccinated could be attributed to people’s tendency to avoid actions they might later regret. With a mandate, the decision is somewhat taken out of their hands. “Mandates work – especially mandates around public health,” Galinsky said. “Even when people whine … and say they are going to quit, most people don’t.” Despite the uptick due to the mandates, some public health experts worry about the long-term consequences of the requirements on healthcare and society, including potentially greater opposition to other vaccines, said Katrin Schmelz, a behavioral economist and psychologist at the University of Konstanz. “Vaccination mandates will increase vaccination rates and on the other side of the scale, it could increase hostility towards the government and aggression and affect compliance with other Covid measures,” said Schmelz, who lives in Germany, which does not mandate Covid vaccines. “It’s not just: we enforce [the mandate] and are on the safe side, and all the problems are solved.”US employers are recruiting teenaged workers to solve their difficulties in hiring and retaining workers, and some Republicans and industry groups are pushing for looser child labor laws to allow those industries to put teens to work for longer hours. Businesses around the United States that have advertised hiring 14- and 15-year-olds through the pandemic’s “labor shortage” include several restaurants in Pennsylvania, a Pumpkin Patch in Liberty, Missouri, a Burger King in Ohio, and a McDonald’s in Oregon. Employers such as Chipotle have expanded recruiting efforts this year to target younger workers. Other restaurants and employers such as amusement parks and seasonal businesses around the US have touted their reliance on teenage workers under 18 as a labor shortage solution. A restaurant in Arkansas, noting it had struggled to hire and retain workers, recently offered to pay its teen workers for one hour to do homework before their shift. Teenage employment in the US surged to more than 32% in summer 2021, the highest level since 2008, and for the first time in history the unemployment rate for 16- to 19-year-olds fell below the rate for 20- to 24-year-olds. In a recent op-ed for a local Pennsylvania newspaper, Darcy Leight, a junior in high school, argued the claims of labor shortages and staffing issues in the food service, recreation and tourism industry had driven teenagers to work more and longer hours past summer employment periods. “A job I intended to work strictly during the summer has somehow found its way into my fall schedule and has become almost equivalent to academics on my priority list. And I don’t even know how it happened,” she wrote. “The coupling of a job anywhere from five to 35 hours a week along with being a student is extremely stressful.” The labor shortage concerns have galvanized an effort by some elected officials – mostly Republicans – to scale back some child labor regulations. Three Republicans and one Democrat in the Ohio state senate have recently introduced a bill to expand the hours minors under the age of 16 are permitted to work in the state, from 7pm to 9pm during the school year with a parent or guardian’s permission. In Wisconsin, Republican state senators recently approved a bill, SB332, and sent it to the Wisconsin state assembly. The bill would expand permissible work hours for minors under the age of 16. Supporters of the bill, which include Republican legislators, the Wisconsin Restaurant Association and other industry groups, have argued the bill could help small businesses that are experiencing hiring and staff retention issues amid some industries experiencing labor shortages throughout 2021. Under current law, minors are permitted to work from 7am to 7pm from labor day to 31 May and 7am to 9pm from 1 June to labor day. The bill would expand those times and dates from 6am to 9.30pm on a day preceding a school day and 6am to 11pm on a day preceding a non-school day, and expand weekly hours from three hours during a school week to 18 hours. Wisconsin Republicans have successfully passed several bills in the last decade to weaken child labor laws, including in 2011 eliminating limits on the number of hours and days minors, ages 16 and 17, could work, eliminating work permits for 16 and 17-year-olds, and replacing all uses of the term “child labor” in state employment statutes with the term “employment of minors” in 2017. “The passage of this bill would be a slippery slope for eliminating child labor practices in Wisconsin and in the United States in general,” said Stephanie Bloomingdale, president of the Wisconsin AFL-CIO, which opposes SB332. “Young teenagers need to have good work experiences that help them to learn work ethics and valuable skills, but at the same time, recognizing they also are kids that need time to study, to sleep and to prepare their minds for their future.” Reports of labor shortages have received significant coverage throughout 2021, with employers and industry groups often blaming unemployment benefits for difficulties in finding enough workers, though ending unemployment benefits did not result in a mass influx of Americans returning to work. Several solutions that employers have turned to amid labor shortage concerns through 2021 include prison labor, recently released prisoners and immigrant visa programs. Labor groups and workers have characterized the labor issues as a result of low wages, Covid-19 safety concerns, rampant poor working conditions and a lack of childcare and paid sick leave throughout the US. “The notion that we would be solving some economic turmoil by allowing the expansion of child labor hours, is at best, ridiculous, and at worst, very detrimental to young people,” said Debra Cronmiller, executive director of the League of Women Voters of Wisconsin. Scientific research has shown working long hours while attending high school can have negative academic and behavioral impacts on teenagers. Dr Kathryn C Monahan, a psychologist who researched the impact of work on adolescents while at the University of Washington, explained much of the research on adolescent employment has focused on formal types of employment that generally occurs at age 16 and above. “What this bill does, I think, is it opens up and it encourages young teens to enter into that workforce,” said Monahan. She noted a lack of scientific research on how work affects teens this young, and what impact earning income at such a young age may have on other negative behaviors, such as dropping out of high school and substance abuse. “The second thing that concerns me about this is the sleep issue,” Monahan added. “ I can imagine the kid getting home later on a school night … because that’s when that child uses that time for homework, for catching up with friends, and so you’re going to get an even further delay out in terms of sleep, while school is going to stay constant in terms of those really early wake up times.”The end was very quick but it had been coming for a long time, maybe even since the day Nuno Espírito Santo was appointed as Tottenham manager. It was clear to everyone that he was fifth-choice at best, hired after attempts to lure Antonio Conte, Mauricio Pochettino, Paulo Fonseca and Gennaro Gattuso failed. “It’s an enormous pleasure and honour to be here,” Nuno said on 30 June, when his appointment was announced, adding: “There’s joy and I’m happy and looking forward to starting work.” But in the next four months there was very little joy or happiness. After a promising start – albeit through some fairly lacklustre football – with three wins in three league games, it imploded faster than anyone could have predicted. In the day-to-day business Nuno never won over the players. There were no personal clashes as such. It was more that his way of dealing with things did not work with this group; his character did not fit. He never got into the heart of this squad. It is possible that Spurs’ botched attempts at hiring so many other managers before Nuno played into this. The fact that he was given a two-year contract was also a sign that Tottenham did not quite believe in him – so why should the players? Nuno was acutely aware of this and it did not take long before things came to a head. The end of the transfer window was a huge let-down for the former Wolves manager, who had wanted a midfielder and a back-up forward to support Harry Kane. The fact that neither arrived proved to Nuno what he knew deep down: that he was a stopgap. At the same time the club grew more and more frustrated with his tactics and some of his selections. The game against Arsenal towards the end of September was a disaster, Spurs looking rudderless as they fell to a 3-1 defeat. Nuno was endearingly honest afterwards. “The performance was not good,” he said. “The gameplan was not good. I take responsibility because the decisions were not right.” One such defeat was bad enough but when a second arrived against Manchester United on Saturday – a team that had just lost heavily to Liverpool and were low on confidence – it was too much for the chairman, Daniel Levy, and managing director of football, Fabio Paratici. They already knew in their hearts that Nuno was not the long-term solution but had planned to give him more time to turn things round. They knew that he had not inherited an easy situation with Kane wanting to leave and below par at the end of the previous season. But the nature of the performance against United prompted them to meet on the Sunday to discuss the situation. There was anger over the display and the attitude of some players but also over some of Nuno’s tactical decisions, such as replacing Lucas Moura with Steven Bergwijn in the 54th minute. The meeting lasted more than five hours and it was decided that Nuno and his coaching team had to go. One reason was that Paratici, soon after the game, had made contact with Antonio Conte, the man they wanted to replace Nuno. It had been felt that convincing Conte to take the Spurs job would be akin to mission impossible, especially as he had turned them down in the summer. But Paratici had one main advantage – he had worked with Conte before. They were at Juventus from 2011 to 2014 with excellent results, winning the league every season and having a shared approach to football and recruitment. Conte had previously been considering only the Manchester United job in the event that Ole Gunnar Solskjær was sacked but phone calls to Conte and his advisers on Saturday night changed that. The talks continued throughout Sunday, Paratici trying to convince the former Chelsea manager that the Spurs project was worth buying into: the same project he had turned down in June. This time they offered him more decision-making power when it comes to signings in January and next summer and, most importantly, that this Tottenham will be made by Antonio Conte – and no one else.I am a man in my 30s and have recently admitted to myself that I cannot form an intimate sexual relationship. I am not, and never have been, interested in sex for its own sake; I want trust and intimacy even more than sex, although I hunger for both together. I have been close with potential partners many times, but each time I get to the point where the other person wants to progress to sex, I freeze and cannot carry on, until one of us breaks it off. I then hate myself for not following through yet again. I lost my virginity in my 20s with my first partner, whose sexual needs and energies far exceeded mine. We would have sex several times a week, or even several times a day when the occasion permitted, and I felt abused and trapped. I lost interest in him and could not perform in bed. I broke off the relationship quite soon, but he was very savage and took revenge by telling some of my friends about my failings as a lover. The pain and the shame of this exposure still haunt me. I try not to dwell on it, but how can I get past this endless cycle of failure? Your body is protecting you from psychological pain or harm, shutting down to stop you going through the motions of sex when you don’t want it. This is often the case when a person cannot “perform” and it should never be seen as a failure. Healing from such a painful first experience with a partner takes time. It is important to recognise that your needs regarding true connection, trust and intimacy – and your distaste for “casual” sex – are valid and important. You know what you really want, and you know when it does or doesn’t feel right to proceed to having sex, so be confident. Don’t let anyone belittle you for it or coerce you into bypassing your feelings. Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. If you would like advice from Pamela on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Each week, Pamela chooses one problem to answer, which will be published online. She regrets that she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure discussion remains on topics raised by the writer. Please be aware there may be a short delay in comments appearing on the site.In one of his most celebrated paintings, O the Roast Beef of Old England, William Hogarth appears as himself, sketching the fortifications at Calais at the very moment of being mistakenly arrested as a spy in 1748. It is not what you would call a subtle scene. The raggedy French soldiers are on their last legs, barely sustained by watery soup, while a gaggle of fishwives resemble the flounder they are selling from their tatty basket. There’s a fat, greedy friar trying to get his hands on a sumptuous joint of beef which has just been unloaded and is on its way to one of the many English restaurants that thrive in Calais (only 200 years earlier the town had belonged to Britain). Spying, by implication, is not something that Britons resort to, although the figure of Hogarth busily sketching to one side is a warning not to dismiss John Bull as dense. The “Old England” Hogarth conjures up here is affluent, abundant and free. The French, meanwhile, are reduced to a series of humiliating stereotypes: silly, salacious and in thrall to the absolutist Roman Catholic church (you can just make out some gorgeously attired priests and abasing peasants in the background). It is easy to see why Hogarth is so often positioned as the founding father of a particular strand of art which is essentially British: figurative, storytelling and not afraid to poke fun at itself. His most famous social satires including A Rake’s Progress and Marriage A-la-Mode are often read as a cross between a Shakespearean comedy and a Carry On film, with more disguises, reversals of fortune, libidinous ladies and drunken lads than you can shake a bottle of gin at. However, Tate Britain’s new exhibition Hogarth and Europe sets out to show that the artist was far from anyone’s idea of a “little Englander”. Rather, he saw himself, and was in turn seen, as a keen citizen of a rapidly globalising marketplace. Not only did Hogarth travel in Europe, but scores of Italian and French painters came to work in his native London, setting up powerful networks of cross-pollination, mutual support and occasional thievery. Even those artists who were happiest staying home were now able to keep a careful eye on the competition. Engraving, a technology that Hogarth embraced, allowed accurate copies of masterworks to circulate far and wide, creating a new virtual community of art workers. In this new context, O the Roast Beef of Old England starts to read quite differently. In the luscious still-life details – especially that beautiful marbled beef – Hogarth’s work owes a clear debt to Jean-Baptiste-Siméon Chardin, the French Academician whose work he had recently seen in Paris and whose luscious still lifes he knew so well. Then there’s the way that Hogarth uses the recognisable topography of the gate of Calais as a framing device, which places his painting firmly in the emerging genre of city views, currently being brought to perfection by Canaletto who was living and working in London. Recent scholarship, meanwhile, has revealed that Hogarth’s savage anti-Catholic imagery was borrowed from his many Huguenot friends, French Protestant refugees who had fled religious persecution to London. The figure of the fat, greedy friar was modelled by Hogarth’s old friend and master engraver John Pine, a man believed to be of African descent, one of the 3% of London’s population that was black at the time. Finally, the reason Hogarth’s Old England picture achieved such saturation was thanks to the way it was reproduced on punchbowls and vases painted in China for the English market. By setting Hogarth’s work alongside his European contemporaries Chardin, Pietro Longhi, Cornelis Troost (sometimes called “the Dutch Hogarth”), Giuseppe Crespi and Nicolas Lancret, the Tate curators are hoping for unexpected connections, echoes and even dust-ups. A case in point: when the Venetian painter Jacopo Amigoni won the job of decorating the stairs in the new buildings for St Bartholomew’s hospital in London in 1730s, Hogarth bustled in and insisted on doing the job without payment. There was a limit to how friendly one could be expected to be towards the competition. What bound these men together, and occasionally led to them falling out, was their shared understanding of what it meant to be an artist in this modern world. “Hogarth and his contemporaries were the first creative freelancers,” explains co-curator Martin Myrone. “Artists were no longer bound to royal or aristocratic patronage, but were free to set up on their own.” (The same went for musicians such as the Mozart family who toured Britain under their own steam, rather than at the behest of king or empress). Gradually new spaces opened up for independent artists and their studios. In London it was Long Acre, in Paris the Rue St-Jacques. Commercial neighbourhoods now took the place of royal courts and elite academies in the role of building relations between clients, suppliers and the artists themselves. No one was better poised to take advantage of these shifts than Hogarth, who was born in London in 1697. His hopeless father aspired to be a man of letters but ended up imprisoned for debt after the failure of a coffee shop in which the customers were required to speak Latin. Young William was initially apprenticed to a silver-plate engraver but soon broke from his master – something that would have been professional suicide only 50 years earlier – to set up as an independent copperplate engraver producing book illustrations, tickets and trade cards. Hogarth’s trajectory as a self-published artist carved out new routes to financial success and creative independence. What’s more, his written reflections on the art world combined with his determination to ensure artists’ copyright (successfully made law in 1735), showed a keen sense of how creative workers needed to protect themselves from commercial exploitation and risk. All this comes across in his famous self-portrait The Painter and His Pug. X-rays have revealed that Hogarth started off painting himself as an artist in the grand manner, with a wig and formal coat with gold buttons. Around 1745, possibly following a trip to Paris, he dramatically changed direction and showed himself as a working professional in an informal jacket and cap. He even includes his scar. The way he emphasises the similarities between his own smudgy, snub-nosed face and that of his pug puts one in mind of Lucian Freud’s paintings in which human and animal bodies are placed on a continuum. And the fact that Hogarth chooses to be painted with a pug – a Dutch breed that originated from China – cuts across any sense of him as a bluff patriot who would only pose with a British bulldog. Hogarth brought this same enlarged sense of selfhood to his portraits of women. Until now it was only princesses and empresses who were painted, their bodies used as fleshy Christmas trees on which to dangle the symbols of their husbands’ wealth. But Hogarth does something quite different, intent on searching for what makes a woman her own person. His most famous painting is of Miss Mary Edwards, an heiress who inherited about £8m in today’s money, at the age of 23. She married a nobleman called Lord Anne Hamilton (his Christian name makes the whole thing even more intriguing) who agreed to take her name. But when Lord Anne started running through Mary’s fortune she insisted on a separation and managed to prove that her marriage was invalid, despite making her son illegitimate in the process. In this portrait, not seen in Britain for a 100 years, Hogarth shows Mary surrounded with the symbols of a genderless independence: a gun dog, a celestial globe, portrait busts of Alfred the Great and papers which include a proclamation of individual rights. She gazes fearlessly at the viewer, a new woman for a new world. That same marked sense of individuality is apparent when Hogarth paints his sisters. Subjectivity was no longer the sole preserve of the rich and the aristocratic but could be embodied by middle-class women too. His pictures of Mary and Anne are not glamour portraits but accurate likenesses, instantly recognisable as his siblings by their snub noses and soft jaws. The women have the tough wary faces that come from being brought up with a spendthrift father. They know what it is to go out to work – together they run a children’s clothing shop – and they know how much money is enough. Equally striking are Hogarth’s portraits of his servants whom he draws as individuals, rather than “types”. The Tate curators suggest that Hogarth may well have been inspired by images in Jean-Antoine Watteau’s sketchbook, in which the French artist, normally associated with whimsical fêtes galantes, practises drawing people of African descent. While the Tate show is eye-opening in the way it repositions Hogarth the bluff patriot as a knowing European, it would be quite wrong, Myrone says, to call him a revolutionary. The progressive left has always had much invested in Hogarth as a class warrior and fearless critic of developing capitalism. Narratives including A Harlot’s Progress and Marriage A-la-Mode offer a fierce critique of men and women debased by their new appetites for gin and sex, but above all for the piles of stuff – silk shawls, cones of sugar, showy geegaws – that were pouring into Britain as a result of its developing empire. But to suggest Hogarth hated capitalism would be as misleading as insisting on him as a proto-Brexiteer. His first loyalty remained always to himself. In 1757 he was delighted to take over the role of Serjeant Painter to the king from his brother-in-law, much as his closest European ally Chardin happily accepted a state pension. The Hogarth who emerges from this exhibition is neither saint nor sinner, left or right, but a modern artist who knew at any given moment where his best interests lay in a rapidly changing world. • Hogarth and Europe is at Tate Britain, Millbank, London SW1, from 3 November to 20 March 2022.Last week in Sudan, two years disappeared in a flash. Two years of working to bring Sudan in from the cold after almost three decades of isolation. Two years of trying to establish a civilian government. Two years of mourning those who had died in Sudan’s revolution to oust Omar al-Bashir. And two years of tentative hope that perhaps these deaths had not been in vain. In the end, all that mattered was that it was two years during which the military grew tired of partnering with civilians in a transitional power-sharing agreement. Last week, the army seized power in a coup that erased everything the Sudanese people had gained since Bashir’s military government was toppled in 2019. That revolution had reignited hope for democratic rule, not only in Sudan, but across the Arab world. In hindsight, its short-lived nature seems inevitable. Sudan’s uprising may have removed Bashir, but behind him sat a military and security state with deep roots and complex economic interests. When it became clear that the Sudanese people were not going to tolerate another military figurehead as a replacement for Bashir, an agreement with civilian parties resulted in a transitional power-sharing arrangement that should have paved the way for elections. One could argue that it was naive to expect the military and its associated allies to merely hand over power and withdraw to the barracks. But it also seemed unfathomable that they would make such a brash, regressive move as they have. The country’s newfound stability is still in its infancy. The military now faces international condemnation and diplomatic crises. The coup has severed attempts to reintegrate Sudan into the international community. Debt relief has been suspended, leaving the economy on its knees. The US cancelled 700 million dollars worth of aid only 24 hours after the coup. Yet these calculations do not concern militaries who are bent on extraction in a country that does not need to thrive for its overlords to prosper. An alliance between a large army of mercenaries, the Rapid Support Forces (RSF, the formalised and uniformed version of the Janjaweed that terrorised the Darfur region), the army, and remnants of business interests from the Bashir regime now has the country in a tight grip. They will run Sudan as the host body for a partnership of parasites. Without facing the checks of transparency or accountability, Sudan’s new ruling club will be able to divide the country’s infrastructure, seizing raw materials such as gold, and selling them to regional allies. They will have the firepower to suppress rebellions in the country’s marginalised regions. By doing dirty, lucrative deals with Gulf allies, they will be able to alienate whomever they please in the west. RSF forces have already sold Sudanese soldiers – some of them children – to the UAE and Saudi Arabia to provide support for their wars in Yemen. Flogging Sudan’s resources and people to the highest bidder is too lucrative a business to give up for a few hundred million dollars of western aid. In that sense, Sudan’s revolution, like all revolutions, was not only against one regime, but many. It took aim at the corrupt legacies and arrangements that were manifested in a single dictator – Bashir – who was vested with power by his large network of enablers. At every stage of the uprising since 2018, the Sudanese people have discovered another despot behind the despot. Behind Bashir stood a phalanx of generals who had come to power when many of the protesters on the streets had not even been born. Behind the generals was the mercenary army, and behind the mercenaries towered the allies of the counterrevolution, Sudan’s allies in the Middle East and north Africa: Saudi Arabia, the UAE, and Egypt, which wanted to ensure democratic civilian rule never became a reality on their doorstep. Condemnation from the US and censure by the UN merely bounces off the iron realpolitik that sustains Sudan’s coup. In a way, it is a miracle that the Sudanese revolution succeeded at all, that it lasted a whole two years before the army moved once again. It is a testament to the number and indefatigability of the protesters, who kept spilling on to the streets in 2019. They not only removed Bashir, but dictated the shape of the transitional government that followed him. Millions of Sudanese people stared down the barrel of what seemed like certain failure, and persevered. Last week they did so again, taking to the streets in their millions to reject the coup and demand the return of the civilian government, and the release of many of its members, including the prime minister, Abdalla Hamdok, who are in detention or house arrest. The Sudanese waited 30 years for a revolution, only for three to come at once. Last week, protesters were shot and beaten once again, and the dead and wounded fell on the streets of Sudan’s cities. Once again, an anxious standoff is taking place between Sudan’s people and an army and alliance of security forces that has only two choices: bend to the will of the Sudanese, or massacre them. The soldiers and military men think there might be a third option – to bide their time and hope that the protests run out of steam as the new military government settles in. That seems unlikely. But even if the coup prevails, it will be an uneasy win, enfeebled by constant policing and suppression of dissent. Civic resistance to the coup might appear frail when compared to the might of the generals and their backers, but the military is up against a people who are determined never again to be ruled by force. Their determination seems as limitless as the army’s appetite for power. Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnistAnd with that, we will wrap up the blog for today. Here is what went down: Former prime minsters Malcolm Turnbull and Kevin Rudd laid into Scott Morrison’s handling of the French submarine deal, with Turnbull urging Morrison to apologise, and Rudd saying he is “out of his depth”. The federal opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, accused Scott Morrison of “gaslighting and backgrounding” against the French president, Emmanuel Macron. Victoria recorded 989 new Covid cases and nine deaths, NSW recorded 173 new cases and four deaths, and the ACT recorded eight new cases. NSW brought forward a series of freedoms, but delayed easing restrictions for the unvaccinated, as the state aims to hit 95% double dose. The Queensland government will forge ahead with its Covid-19 quarantine camp near Toowoomba despite reports the federal government wants to scale down a facility being built in Brisbane. The Victorian opposition leader, Matthew Guy, has advised the former shadow attorney general, Tim Smith, that he will not return to the frontbench and should resign at the next election. The Reserve Bank of Australia announced it is keeping the official cash rate at 0.1%, while downplaying the threat of inflation. The federal shadow climate minister, Chris Bowen, earlier joined the ABCs Patricia Karvelas on Afternoon Briefing, and typically began by taking a swipe at the PM. Karvelas initially asked him about a discrepancy between what the PM had told the Cop26 summit about Australia’s climate targets, and what he has announced as government police. Bowen said it was “extraordinary”: He says one thing at home and another thing abroad and one thing to one audience at home and another thing for another audience. It is an indicator on climate, he has no policy, he’s just trying to find a way through, it points to his fundamental lack of honesty both at home and abroad. The NSW Liberal senator Hollie Hughes is performing paid consulting work for a for-profit biofuels company, as disclosed on her register of interests through a trust assisting “charitable organisations”. Hughes has insisted she properly declared her interest as a potential beneficiary of the SLN Services Trust, claiming her work for PBFH Pty Ltd will help the Australian company setting up in Papua New Guinea to “reinvest in local communities”. You can read more in the report from Paul Karp here: South Australia has happily recorded another day with zero new cases: The NZ Herald is reporting that the top of Northland will go into alert level 3 from tonight, after concerns emerged of undetected transmission. Philip Lowe, governor of the RBA, has been holding a webinar to explain the board’s decisions at its monthly board meeting today. The central bank chief has made it clear the RBA is not about to lift its cash target rate, dismissing market predictions of a rise as soon as next March “as a complete overreaction to the recent inflation data”. That refers to the CPI data for the September quarter that came in at 3% for the headline rate, and 2.1% for the underlying rate. “Given our forecasts it’s still entirely plausible that the first increase in the cash rate will not be before the maturity of the current target bond [with a maturity date of April 2024],” Lowe said. It is also now plausible that a lift in the cash rate would be appropriate in 2023. In our central scenario, underlying inflation reaches the midpoint of the 2%-3% range only in late [20]23. Wage rises had not been in the 2%-3% range for about a decade, and “things would have to change dramatically” for the bank to revise its view. “We really want to be sure we can deliver this 2.5% rate of inflation” before the RBA acts, he said, adding the bank does not have a specific target for wage growth itself. One reason for caution is that the Covid pandemic might not have finished in terms of its ability to throw the economy off track. “One source of such a shock would be a new strain of the virus or a decline in vaccine effectiveness,” Lowe said. In this case, the cash rate would need to remain at its current level for longer than otherwise. Lowe added that today’s meeting was focused on the decision to drop its yield curve control for the 2024 bond, and it did not discuss the housing market “in any detail”, he said. “At the moment, I don’t have any concerns about the deterioration in lending standards” for home loans, Lowe said. About 5,000 teachers in NSW have not advised the education department of their vaccination status, the department’s chief people officer Yvette Cachia told a budget estimates hearing earlier today. The deadline for teachers being vaccinated is Monday, when all school staff are required to be double vaccinated or risk being banned from school. They also risk being investigated for non-compliance, with disciplinary action and termination possible outcomes. The department has also engaged a recruitment agency to hire 30 full-time investigators, who will work alongside the internal investigations unit, to examine complaints against school staff. Cachia said it was, to some degree, a pre-emptive move: We are engaging with an external recruiter to provide a small surge capacity, pre-empting that we may … have a number of non-compliance episodes or incidents to investigate. A lot of these times we can work things out and that teachers where possible will be able to go back to the classroom. There’s a number of reasons for non-compliance, and there are some small sharp investigations required. Restrictions will ease further in schools from Monday, with assemblies and presentations allowed outdoors, day excursions and sport permitted, with music ensembles allowed only for those wearing masks. Rudd did not stop there. Speaking to the ABC’s Patricia Karvelas, Rudd was asked if Morrison had done enough to advise France of his decision, with the former PM indicating Morrison should have leaned on his diplomatic apparatus. Rudd: Mr Morrison is now digging an even bigger hole for himself, not just in relation to the French, by effectively himself accusing the French president of lying, but also [in] extraordinary background briefing about the failure in Mr Morrison’s view of American officials to properly apprise the United States president of the nature of the consolation of the French deal’s cancellation. With all these backgrounding efforts, we have a far worse set of diplomatic consequences in terms of Australia’s good standing in Washington and Paris and our good name as a reliable international partner whose name can be trusted. Rudd echoed the other active ex-PM, Malcolm Turnbull, who has been calling on Morrison to issue an apology, and went a step further in saying the road forward is to re-tender the deal: They should go to the next necessary thing to get this show back on the road which is to reopen the tender. If you are saying you need nuclear powered boats, the bottom line is, the French make these nuclear powered boats, in fact the French tender or the French company builds nuclear powered boats for the government of France, for which the Australian conventional vote was supposed to have been an adaptation. Mr Morrison [has said] he is reluctant to do that because he has promised a sweetheart deal to the British, to his Conservative mate, Boris Johnson, so the British get the edge over the French or anybody else in terms of the supply of future nuclear powered vessels to the Royal Australian Navy. The bottom line is our national security interest should be attended to by a proper, sober decision-making process over time, not this series of random political acts by a prime minister who finds himself, in my judgement, increasingly out of his depth on ... questions of foreign policy. Former prime minister Kevin Rudd is on the ABC’s Afternoon Briefing, and has been typically scathing in his assessment of current PM Scott Morrison’s handling of the French submarine deal. Rudd was asked what he thought of the ongoing tension between Morrison and French president Emmanuel Macron: I think we have had a vote of short-term political interest, in terms of Mr Morrison’s government, as opposed to the long-term national security interests of Australia. If you are prosecuting a serious national security agenda on the question of next-generation submarines, there are professional diplomatic channels through which these matters should be dealt with. Rudd goes on to discuss the leaks of private messages between the leaders, and his opinion of the “backgrounding” done in the name of the PM: The bottom line is the continuation or cancellation of a $90bn submarine contract is not to be the stuff of text messaging. That’s why you have formal correspondence between heads of government, on matters of such fundamental importance to both countries, that’s why we have this rolling ambiguity about who said what and when. If Mr Morrison is serious about this, let him produce a letter he wrote to Mr Macron prior to his public announcement of the so-called Aukus arrangement and explained why he wouldn’t have welcomed the French to participate in a re-tendering given the French are capable of providing nuclear powered submarines as well. Had that been done based on normal, professional diplomatic advice in dealing with matters of high national security involving our country, the French and the United States, we wouldn’t be in this extraordinary mess we are today where we now have heads of government, effectively, leaking against each other, in order to establish a what transpired in these informal text messages between heads of government. After the RBA’s statement, the dollar fell against the US currency and the stockmarket rose as investors were relieved the central bank was not more aggressive in its comments about the outlook for inflation and the potential for an early rise in interest rates. Maxime Darmet, the director, economics at Fitch Ratings, said “it’s really like the first step we think towards the normalisation of [Australia’s] monetary policy settings, which had been very loose since the pandemic”. Darmet said the indications the bank would wait until as late as the end of 2023 to be sure inflation would remain in the 2-3% target range was “not a big change” from previous comments about waiting until 2024. However, he said should the recovery remain strong we could expect more adjustments sooner than the RBA forecast. “It’s very possible that in the next meeting they would think it would be 2022,” he said. The RBA had been relatively “dovish” in its signalling that it was not worried about inflation. However, it also couldn’t be seen to be too slow either in responding as central banks in the US, Canada and soon the UK prepare to wind back support for the economy. “You’re seeing so much pressure on prices at a global level with energy prices spiking, with supply bottlenecks persisting and so on,” Darmet said. “It’s a very dovish central bank but starting gradually to come around to the new reality that inflation is going to be probably higher than they expected.” While mortgage holders can take some relief from today’s RBA comments that an interest rate rise isn’t around the corner, Australia and other nations have allowed housing prices to rise too far too fast for the overall health of the economy, not to mention housing affordability for those not in the market. “Low interest rates are the main channel through which people are taking on more debt,” Darmet said.”[It] can become a concern in terms of not only affordability for low-income households, but also it creates a lot of potential financial instability and risk. “And this is something many central banks are not taking too seriously,” the Fitch analyst said. Western Australia police are getting closer to identifying every single person who was in the area when Cleo Smith disappeared, and have said they believe an “opportunistic” abductor kidnapped her. The acting police commissioner, Col Blanch, was on ABC Radio earlier today, and said police were getting closer: And we’ve tracked down people that we didn’t know, we’ve found them and we have eliminated them, and that’s our focus at the moment – eliminate as many people as possible. Blanch continued, saying extensive forensic work was under way to map out every inch of the area: Now we’re in a stage where we need to forensically go over that ground inch by inch to see what disturbances might be in nearby areas for any sort of evidence which might give an inkling as to what happened. It could be tyre tracks, it could be the sleeping bag, it could be anything. Blanch said that there were many ways in and out of the camping area Cleo was taken from, but conceded that hopes were not high: It is difficult to keep the hope up, there is no doubt about it, the longer it goes, but I know those investigators are still focused absolutely on this case trying to bring Cleo home. This has absolutely hit the heart of everyone in Western Australia, the Australian community, it’s gone international. Verry Elleegant has won the race over favourite Incentivise. You can read all the updates at our live blog: As expected the Reserve Bank of Australia has left the official cash rate target unchanged at its record low annual rate of 0.1%. The focus of the markets and pundits alike, though, has been on the language of the accompanying statement by the RBA governor, Philip Lowe. As expected, the recent pickup in the consumer price index has given the central bank cause to bring forward its prediction that the underlying inflation will only be “sustainably” within its 2-3% target range by 2024. While emphasising that it remains “prepared to be patient” with rising prices, the RBA’s “central forecast” is now for underlying inflation “to be no higher than 2.5% at the end of 2023 and for only a gradual increase in wages growth”, Lowe said. Not a huge change but one the markets will focus on. “The Delta outbreak caused hours worked in Australia to fall sharply, but a bounce-back is now under way,” he said. “The central forecast is for the unemployment rate to trend lower over the next couple of years, reaching 4.25% at the end of 2022 and 4% at the end of 2023.” The encouraging comments about the economy will likely mean interest rates rise sooner than that 2024 scenario previously stated by the bank. No wonder people have been rushing to lock in fixed-rate mortgages even as those too start to come with higher rates attached. Markets, too, will focus on the RBA’s decision to ditch its yield control curve, or the measure used to keep the yield on the benchmark bond due in April 2024 to 10 basis points, or 0.1%. That confirmation matches what traders had seen in the market for the past few days with no RBA buying to keep that yield down. The Reserve Bank of Australia has announced it is keeping the interest rate at 0.1%, while downplaying the threat of inflation. Our Melbourne Cup live blog is up, if you’re looking to keep up: So earlier today, the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, was asked about work from home rules, confirming that the government will continue to advise employers to allow employees to work from home until 1 December. After that, however, it appears it will come down to employers’ discretion. Perrottet indicated the government would provide advice from there, but didn’t say what that would look like: It’s under review. You’d have to say that people have voted with their feet – they’re staying at home anyway. We’re looking at that and we’ll see how it goes over the next couple of weeks. NSW police have provided an update on the police operation under way in Gladesville, saying a man has been arrested. Police released a statement, saying they attended to a call from Punt Road, Gladesville, following reports of a domestic violence incident. When officers arrived, a 38-year-old man – armed with two knives – allegedly attacked a 26-year-old male probationary constable. The injured officer – attached to Ryde police area command – suffered lacerations to the back of his head and a dislocated shoulder. He has been taken to Royal North Shore hospital for treatment to non-life-threatening injuries. Officers attached to Ryde police area command attended and, with the assistance of the tactical operations unit, police negotiators and other specialist commands, arrested a 38-year-old man without incident a short time later. He has been taken to Ryde police station where he is assisting police with inquiries. The federal opposition leader, Anthony Albanese, has accused Scott Morrison of “gaslighting and backgrounding” against the French president, Emmanuel Macron. Albanese told reporters the PM was using Australia as a “human shield” in his attempts to hit back at Macron, who accused him of lying with regards to the submarine deal. The attempt at damage control by selectively leaking private text messages is quite an extraordinary step for an Australian prime minister to take. The leaking of this text message is a considerable escalation of the conflict. Diplomacy requires trust and it requires sombre engagement between leaders. Queensland’s deputy premier, Steven Miles, spoke earlier to reporters, and said the state was getting closer to the 80% vaccination rate, having hit 64.12% double dose and 77.83% first dose rates. Asked if more resources needed to be allocated to regional aeras, to supercharge the vaccine rollout, Miles said he didn’t think that was the problem: To be frank, I don’t think the problem here is insufficient resources. We have clinics all over the place and our problem now is people. People need to go and get vaccinated and that’s why we’re working so hard to get that message out – it’s very, very easy to get vaccinated now.” So, Victorian opposition leader Matthew Guy had earlier told reporters that he has advised MP Tim Smith he should not contest the 2022 election, but added that Smith had not yet made a decision. I made it very clear to Tim that he wouldn’t find his way on to the front bench of any parliamentary Liberal party that I lead. And I made it clear that I didn’t want him to nominate at the next election and that I didn’t believe he should nominate for the seat of Kew. Tim has and will reflect on my advice to him, he will then make a statement in his own time. I hope sooner rather than later. Guy also said that he hoped Smith would remain in government until the next election, avoiding a by-election: I think enough damage has been done. It’s really impressive that along with a day off for the AFL grand final, Victorians also get one for the November Reserve Bank of Australia board meeting. Plus they throw in the Melbourne Cup horse race as a bonus. So, all those binoculars will be focused at 2.30pm on the central bank’s rates call. I previewed it here if you want a primer. The RBA used to be a regular spoiler or enhancer on the first Tuesday of November, lifting or raising rates on race day. From 2006 to 2011, it altered the cash rate at each of its November board meetings, disturbing the afternoon’s festivities for traders and financial journalists alike. The 2010 November decision to lift the cash rate by 25 basis points (aka 0.25%) to 4.75% was the last time the RBA moved the rates dial upwards. A year ago, the November cut of 15 basis points to 0.1% is the most recent of any RBA move, and the rate has sat at its record low ever since. Today’s interest is not in a rate change. Markets would swoon if they went up, and that hasn’t been flagged. What will be of note, though, is the change in the language of the statement, particularly as to when the RBA thinks it will have to lift rates next. Up to now, it’s been “not until 2024” or words to that effect. But the pick up in core inflation as reported last week, and the absence of RBA buying of a short-term bond since, has prompted analysts to predict the bank will detail today some of the end of its emergency efforts to keep the economy afloat during the Covid lockdowns. With the US equivalent, the Federal Reserve, also meeting for two days from today and the Bank of England later this week, the RBA’s comments will be parsed more carefully than usual for hints of how these counterpart banks will be thinking. So watch out for some action from the trading jockeys half an hour before the horses start their race at 3pm AEDT. Good afternoon, Mostafa Rachwani with you to take you through the afternoons headlines. A quick thanks to Matilda Boseley for her expert guidance this morning. With that, I shall hand you over to the effervescent Mostafa Rachwani to take you through the afternoon of news. See you bright and early tomorrow morning! According to Nine Newspapers, Victorian opposition leader Mathew Guy has advised the former shadow attorney general, Tim Smith, that he will not return to the front bench and should resign at the next election. Smith resigned from his shadow cabinet position after crashing his car into a home after driving at more than double the legal drug-alcohol limit. A police officer in Sydney has allegedly been attacked with a knife, with the back of his head slashed by the blade. The incident is ongoing at a unit on Punt Road in Gladesville. NSW police says: About 11.20am today an officer who was responding to a domestic violence incident nearby [allegedly] received lacerations to the back of his head from a knife. He has been taken to hospital for treatment. Police negotiators are currently at the scene. As the operation is ongoing, no further information is available at this stage. They have urged motorists to avoid Punt Rd as traffic diversions are currently in place. Save the Children Australia has criticised the prime minister’s pledge of an additional $500m in climate financial aid to Australia’s Pacific and south-east Asian neighbours. This brings Australia’s total commitment to $2bn over the next five years, but Save the Children’s principal climate change adviser Paul Mitchell says we still aren’t pulling our “fair share”: The additional climate finance allocation announced by the Prime Minister is underwhelming, like Australia’s whole approach to COP26. Adding an extra $500 million to an already mediocre pledge is really lowering the bar and seeing Australia fail to contribute our fair share to this global crisis. While any additional climate finance for our region is welcome, Australia needs to do much more to genuinely support Pacific nations on the frontline of the climate crisis. At a minimum, we should be doubling our existing commitment to $3 billion. Mitchell said he was concerned by the “lack of transparency” about exactly where these funds are headed. It’s almost impossible to track how much is spent, where it is allocated and what it is doing. What we do know is that these funds are being drawn from the existing aid program. There is no new money here. There is no Covid-19 in Queensland by the way! The Queensland government will forge ahead with its Covid-19 quarantine camp near Toowoomba, despite reports the federal government wants to scale down a facility being built in Brisbane, reports Marty Silk from AAP. The state is building a 1,000-bed facility at Wellcamp, while the federal government is building another 1,000-bed quarantine camp in Brisbane, like similar camps in Melbourne and Perth. However the federal government is considering downsizing those facilities with as states progressively open their international borders, according to News Corp. Queensland Agriculture Minister Mark Furner said the state-funded facility at Wellcamp will be needed for foreign and unvaccinated travellers for the foreseeable future and there’s no plans to scale it down. I understand that our plan is still on track for 1000-bed facility by around March-April next year... Once again, you only need to look at the fast track of how this facility has been built, we’re well on track to achieve that. Meanwhile, the state’s vaccination continues as it prepares to open home quarantine to all fully-vaccinated domestic arrivals who test negative when 70 per cent of eligible Queenslanders are vaccinated on November 19. Quarantine will be scrapped for all domestic arrivals when 80 per cent of eligible Queenslanders are fully vaccinated, or December 17 at the latest. Queensland Health will set up a special pop-up vaccination clinic after up to six people were given an ultra-low dose of the Pfizer vaccine in error at clinic at Flagstone in southern Logan on Saturday, AAP reports. The mistake means any of 175 people who were vaccinated at the clinic that day may not have been given enough vaccine to give them immunity. Metro South Health’s Dr Michael Cleary apologised for the error and said it was detected following the conclusion of the pop-up clinic as part of the due diligence process. I apologise for any distress this has caused to those 175 people and their families. We will, of course, be supporting every single person impacted. The New South Wales government will be forced to correct and resend 44,000 letters to returning travellers demanding payment for hotel quarantine, due to a basic error explaining its legislative power to recover debts. The state government has issued more than 134,800 invoices charging inbound travellers thousands of dollars for hotel quarantine since the pandemic began. Where the invoices are not paid, Revenue NSW issues debt recovery orders demanding payment, and warning recipients it has the power to take money from wages or a bank, seize property, or issue a charge on land. But the debt recovery order letters contain a small, but potentially, consequential error. You can read the full report below: Netflix has removed two episodes of the spy drama Pine Gap from its streaming service in the Philippines, after country rejected scenes involving a map used by China to assert its claims to the South China Sea, Reuters reports. The Philippines on Monday asked Netflix to remove certain episodes of the six-part Australian series, saying the map depicted on the show was a violation of its sovereignty. The second and third episodes of the show were no longer available in the Philippines by late Monday, with Netflix announcing on its platform that those episodes had been “removed by government demand”. It did not elaborate. Netflix did not immediately respond to Reuters’ request for comment. China lays claim to most of the South China Sea waters within the so-called nine-dash line, a U-shaped feature used on Chinese maps. Parts of the resource-rich waters are also contested by the Philippines, Brunei, Malaysia, Taiwan and Vietnam. After a thorough review, the Philippines’ movie classification board ruled that certain episodes of Pine Gap were “unfit for public exhibition”, the Department of Foreign Affairs said in a statement. Earlier this year Netflix removed Pine Gap from its services in Vietnam following a similar complaint from the country’s broadcast authorities. The Philippine films board, acting on the DFA’s complaint, handed down its ruling on 28 September. It was not clear why the decision was only made public now. The board, according to the DFA, noted that the appearance of the map was “no accident as it was consciously designed and calculated to specifically convey a message that China’s nine-dash line legitimately exists”. A senior White House official has declined to clarify exactly who Joe Biden was referring to when the US president said he had been misinformed about France being notified about the cancellation of the French submarine contract. Last last week, in a meeting with the French president Emmanuel Macron in Rome and with television cameras present, Biden said the Aukus partnership had been handled in a “clumsy manner”. Biden told Macron: I was under the impression that France had been informed long before that the deal was not going through. I, honest to God, did not know you had not been. In his public remarks, Biden did not elaborate on whether he was talking about the Australian government or his own staff. The White House national security adviser Jake Sullivan was asked about the matter during a “press gaggle” on the way to Glasgow overnight. Here is the exchange: Journalist: President Macron pretty bluntly said that he thought that prime minister Morrison had lied to him about the deal. We know that president Biden also said that he was misinformed about, you know, had the French been notified of the deal. Did Morrison lie to president Biden? Sullivan: I would — here is my view on this. President Biden spoke to this issue on Friday night about what had happened. He said what he said. It made headlines in a number of your publications. And I think we should look forward and not backward. So, I don’t want to get into characterising one way or another what happened before. I think we’ve — president Biden has addressed it. I thought he addressed it very effectively. And I’ve got nothing to add. New Zealand has recorded 126 new cases of Covid-19 in the community across three regions, bringing the total in the Delta outbreak to 3,634. Of Tuesday’s cases, 107 are in Auckland, 18 are in the neighbouring region Waikato, and one is in Northland, the ministry of health confirmed. About half of the day’s cases have not yet been epidemiologically linked, bringing the total number yet to be linked to 432 in the past fortnight. There are 49 people in hospital, with three in intensive care. Twelve of the active cases are connected to Edmonton Meadows care home in west Auckland and the source of the infection is under investigation. The ministry said it is also aware of a small number of cases in an Auckland corrections facility. Roughly 85% of the population over 12 years old has had at least one dose of the vaccine, while about 73% of the eligible population is fully vaccinated. It seems Victorians unhappy with the government’s pandemic powers bill have gathered near the Melbourne Cup’s Flemington race track to protest. Here are the ACT Covid-19 numbers I mentioned before. Reporter: The Icac copped a lot of criticism around it. Now we’ve had the hearing. Do you back Icac? There have been colleagues saying maybe we need to look at it? Perrottet: Of course I support the independence of the Independent Commission Against Corruption. They have an important job to do. They’ve concluded their public hearings. There has not been a public report finalised. The independent commission needs to have, free from political interference, the opportunity to conclude its work and to provide a public report and when they provide a public report, we’ll consider that report. The current NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, has been asked if the public Icac hearings made him reflect on former premier Gladys Berejiklian’s judgement. I didn’t follow it yesterday. I was in Dubbo* with the people of regional New South Wales as we opened up. That’s what is front and centre and I’ve said from the outset we won’t provide ongoing commentary in relation to these proceedings. Every single person in my team is focused on one thing and that’s the people of our great state. There will be a report handed down in due course. If there are any actions the government needs to take, we will... What is important from the government’s perspective is that Icac has the independence to conclude its inquiry. Once they conclude its inquiry and provide a public report, if there’s anything the government needs to do, it will. *In fact he was busy hand-feeding giraffes in Dubbo. It was very charming. Questions at the NSW press conference have now turned to yesterday’s public Icac hearings, where the former premier Gladys Berejiklian was questioned about her relationship with the former Wagga Wagga MP Daryl Maguire. But Perrottet isn’t saying much. Reporter: I know you said you won’t give a running commentary on matters before Icac, but disturbing issues came up yesterday with Daryl Maguire suggesting to Gladys Berejiklian that she got a private phone and download apps. Do you think it’s time to change the rules regarding private phones and encryption apps? Is that something you’ll look at? Perrottet: Look, once the report is handed down in relation to the Icac inquiry currently underway, I’ll consider any outcomes in relation to it. In relation to the code of conduct, I think the code of conduct we have in New South Wales is incredibly strong and that is important because the public expect the highest levels of integrity in public office. The premier was then directly asked if he possesses a private phone. I have a private phone and I think many ministers and many members of parliament would do that to keep your professional work separate from your private discussions. The Australian Capital Territory has recorded eight new local cases of Covid-19 in the last reporting period. There are currently seven Covid-19 positive patients in hospital in the territory, four of whom are in intensive care and ventilated. Interestingly it seems there won’t be much formal enforcement of the returned travellers’ testing requirement. Reporter: Who is checking that? Day seven negative tests, who is checking that? Chant: Basically, there is a responsibility for the individuals to take responsibility for those results. I think we’re moving into an era where people are having to take that responsibility. There are penalties for making false declarations and for not acting. Obviously, if there’s any positive test and there will be probably some auditing process in place. But I think we are moving with the return of international travellers in the volumes we’ve seen prior to the pandemic, very much an individual responsibility. Hmmm, it seems there is a little confusion, even within the government, about what exactly fully vaccinated international arrivals are allowed to do in their first week back in Australia. Reporter: On that. If you’re a fully vaccinated traveller, are you allowed to go to a pub or restaurant as soon as you get off the plane? Perrottet: I think there’s been some confusion in relation to that. Obviously, there’s got to be a negative test on day three and day three on arrival, and also to avoid high-risk settings. Reporter: But in the New South Wales Health regulations, it does say high-risk settings are hospitality venues and sporting. Did you know about this before the pamphlets went out? Perrottet: We certainly made it clear from the decision making perspective that it would be in place for high-risk settings, such as... Reporter: Is that a restaurant? Perrottet: No, I don’t believe so. I understand that. But what I can say ... is we are looking at that. The change was in relation to high-risk settings. From time to time when we are making these decisions, changes do need to be made. Clearly, there will be omissions from time to time. Now it’s time for a little victory lap about the reopening of international borders. Perrottet: It was great to see so many returning Australians being reunited with their families and loved ones and not have to be in hotel quarantine for two weeks. I think that I really want to applaud the work the federal government* has done as well because I think the clear direction from the commonwealth government and in support of the New South Wales government’s position is that we need to rejoin the world. It’s pleasing to see the discussion now with bubbles and countries like New Zealand, which we’re seeing obviously come back, but also Singapore. I think this is a great path forward, not just for New South Wales, but for the country. I think if anyone saw the scenes on the news last night of family members reunited for the first time in a long time, what a great thing that is. *Remember like three weeks ago when Perrottet low-key tried to unilaterally open up the international border for all arrivals, not just citizens and permanent residents. Reporter: You said a moment ago that we are aiming to get as close to 95% [vaccination] as possible. You obviously get modelling on this. Do you think we will get 95% double dose, and if so, when? Perrottet: I don’t want to make any predictions in relation to that. What I will say is we have exceeded where we believe we would be, and that is a great thing. We were discussing this six months ago and to be in a position where we could potentially reach 95% fully vaccinated, I would not have believed that would have happened, and I think we are on track to do it, it is one last push and I believe that we can get to that 95% mark, plus a strong booster program which we were already undertaking. I think we can continue to ensure we don’t go backwards, we open up, provide freedom and opportunity for every single person across our state. Perrottet says increased restrictions are not off the table if case numbers skyrocket in particular areas in the state. We have always said as part of the national plan from time to time ... the government might have to look at targeted restrictions. That has always been part of the plan, but ultimately we believe we have landed today, and over the course of this period ... been able to open in a sensible way that keeps people safe. Every time we do this I understand there will be concerns. There were concerns ... we brought forward the opening up of schools a week early. We understand that will occur. There is still a long journey ahead of us, a long journey, many challenges that are going to come our way. We weigh up the economic and health advice, we make the decision that we believe keeps people safe and opens up the economy and that’s where I believe we have landed today. It that Victorian MP Tim Smith’s political future may be announced today at 12.30pm, with the state opposition leader Mathew Guy fronting up to a press conference. When asked, Perrottet acknowledges that the delay to the easing of restrictions for unvaccinated people was partially a trade-off for bringing additional fully vaccinated freedoms forward. That was a balancing act and we believe that in circumstances where we could bring some of those changes forward to 8 November, we need to consider all aspects around it. Perrottet has been asked if QR check-ins will still be required after reaching 95% vaccination. We have not made any decisions in relation to that. Today’s decision is specifically in relation to the roadmap and we will speak to the health community as we move through the challenges that arise into the future. A QR code check-in will not be here forever, but at the moment they play a crucial role in ensuring that our health teams are equipped with the information they need to keep on top of the virus. The Service NSW app, the effort that people have made to download data download their vaccination status, has played a crucial role in ensuring we can open up businesses as quickly as possible and get people back into work. Perrottet: We have always wanted to open up in a measured way and incentivise vaccination rates and we have seen an extraordinary effort from people across our state. From the outset we have said we put a roadmap in place, we wanted to stick to that roadmap as much as we could but ultimately, in circumstances where people have made an extraordinary effort across our state, we have been able to move some of those changes forward. And as the health minister has stated, this is a great day for New South Wales, recognition of the effort that everyone is made but at the same time we want to make that as we open up we do so safely, mobility will increase as we moved to this period of time, and we believe we can get as close to that 95% rate as possible. That will ensure that we are able to keep the hospitalisations down. NSW health minister Brad Hazzard seems to be announcing the state’s victory over Covid-19 with an optimistic speech at today’s press conference. (Although all leaders have warned people to still be hyper-vigilant for Covid-19 symptoms and get a PRC test immediately.) I think it’s a great day. A year and a half ago we all wondered whether we would get vaccinated or whether we would ever get our freedoms back, and as little as three or four months ago when things were looking dark, we were all wondering [if we’ll] be able to get through this in the next few months, or how long will it take us? I want to thank the community because the community had not been with us on this journey, we would not be enjoying the freedoms that we are seeing coming earlier today. This really is a giant step for all of us, for all of us are New South Wales, and how good is it that we have actually faced down this enemy of this hidden virus and managed to get our freedoms back. Chant has given additional details of the four NSW residents who lost their lives to Covid in the last reporting period. We currently have 333 Covid cases admitted to hospital and 72 people in intensive care and 35 of whom require ventilation. In terms of death, sadly we report the death of four individuals, two men in their 50s, one man in his 60s and one man in his 70s. One man was from Western Sydney, one man was from south-western Sydney, one man was from Wollongong and one man was from Newcastle. Three had received one dose of Covid vaccine and one had received two doses of the Covid vaccine. The gentleman in his 70s died at the Tarrawarra aged care facility north of Wollongong where he acquired his affection and he received two doses of Covid vaccine and it is the fifth death link to this outbreak. I would like to extend my condolences to those who have lost loved ones. The NSW chief health officer Dr Kerry Chant has confirmed that indoor mask-wearing restrictions will not be relaxed early and are still required until 15 December. We need you to continue to wear a mask and the indoor mask-wearing settings will be maintained until December 15, and I extend my appreciation to the community for understanding that this is a really important risk mitigation strategy for indoor settings. Perrottet has encouraged everyone over 18 who had their second dose more than six months ago to go get their booster shot of Pfizer. NSW has pushed back the date at which unvaccinated people will gain similar freedoms to the vaccinated cohort to 15 December, or when the state hits the 95% vaccination rate milestone. Perrottet: We want to ensure that as we open up we open up safely and we will be pushing back that date from 1 December for those who are not fully vaccinated. That will go back to December 15, or 95%, whichever happens first. ... Our vaccination rates have been key and, ultimately, we want to get to a point where New South Wales is open, one and free and we believe the changes we have made today enable that to occur. Here is Dominic Perrottet announcing the reopening changes now, including no limits on home visits for vaccinated people. He says these changes will come in from 8 November. I want to thank everybody across New South Wales for the effort they have made in getting vaccinated. We said from the outset that this was the key to be able, for our state open up safely and an extraordinary effort from every person across New South Wales has today allowed us to bring a number of changes forward from the roadmap from December 1, initially set out. For those fully vaccinated there are some changes we are pleased to announce today. Density limits will shift to 2 sq metres right across the board. Capacity limits will be lifted for all settings other than gym classes which will keep at 20 per class. Visitors to the home will be uncapped. Outdoor gatherings will increase as well for those who are fully vaccinated and for those outdoor gatherings of more than 1000, you will need a Covid safe plan in place. Indoor halls will reopen for all purposes. Hospitality will move to 2 sq metres indoors and amusement centres and play centres will open in major events. And major recreation and obviously stadiums, for example, will go to 100% capacity. By the looks of it, many of the scheduled roadmap changes scheduled for 1 December will be moved forward to Monday, 8 November. These include no limits on visitors to the home and indoor swimming pools completely reopening. Hey, it’s I, Matilda Boseley, back on the blog. Thank you so much Caitlin for keeping this baby safe and up to date in my absence. We are just standing by now to hear from the NSW premier who is set to give details about the continued reopening of the state. With that, I will hand the blog back to the capable hands of Matilda Boseley. The prime minister of India has described the Scott Morrison experience as “never a dull moment”: The Guardian has not independently verified this but it looks like Covid restrictions for unvaccinated people will be extended in New South Wales. Oil and gas giant Santos will proceed with a $220 million carbon capture and storage project in South Australia’s north, in a move hailed as a major milestone in Australia’s push towards net zero emissions by 2050, AAP reports. Santos and joint venture partner Beach Energy say the Moomba plan has been successfully registered with the Clean Energy Regulator allowing it to qualify for carbon credits over a 25-year period. Santos chief executive Kevin Gallagher said the project would be globally significant: This carbon reduction project in the South Australian outback will be one of the biggest and lowest cost in the world and will safely and permanently store 1.7 million tonnes of carbon dioxide per year in the same reservoirs that held oil and gas in place for tens of millions of years. This decision is a critical step in decarbonising natural gas on our path to new low-emissions and clean-burning fuels such as hydrogen. Federal energy minister Angus Taylor said the project was the first to be registered under the government’s emissions reduction fund: This is the first time a national government will award tradable, high-integrity carbon credits to large-scale projects that capture and permanently store carbon underground. The carbon to be stored represents about 7% of SA’s emissions and will cut emissions from gas production at Moomba by 70%. Victoria’s opposition leader Matthew Guy will also be fronting the media at 12.30pm today. “A start,” Fiji says of Australia’s climate targets. It comes as Australia has donated one million vaccines to the pacific nation. I’ll be back in a little while but for now I’m handing you over to the amazing Caitlin Cassidy to bring you all the latest updates. Labor frontbencher Andrew Leigh has accused the prime minister of “gaslighting” in relation to his ongoing spat with French President Emmanuel Macron. He spoke to 2SM radio earlier this morning: You think about your advice to any teenager would be don’t break up with somebody by text, but Scott Morrison is the kind of guy who not only breaks up by text but then lies about it afterwards and pretends he didn’t. This is classic gaslighting from the prime minister. He says he won’t accept sledging of Australia - but there’s no sledging of Australia. There is a direct criticism from a major world leader that Scott Morrison lied. Emmanuel Macron doesn’t think Australians are liars. He thinks Scott Morrison is a liar. Please know, as a Victorian who is working throughout today’s public holiday I share these tweets of people picnicking in the sunshine with extreme spite and bitterness. Ummmmmm $10 Messina vouchers and a Nando’s dinner, all for the small price of a free and lifesaving vaccine? Pretty darn good deal for people who live near Richmond in Melbourne, by the sounds of it. Oh, and we will be hearing from Anthony Albanese at 12.30pm AEDT: The Melbourne Cup will be run with 23 horses this afternoon after Future Score was scratched, having showed signs of lameness on the eve of the $8m race. Future Score failed mandatory Racing Victoria inspections yesterday and was given until this morning to confirm fitness. But the horse, one of the genuine outsiders after finishing worse than midfield in three spring appearances, again presented with lameness in his right foreleg and was scratched before the 7.30am deadline. There was better news for Delphi, who was also lame on Cup eve but passed race morning veterinary checks. Delphi has fallen from favour as a Cup chance after running his worst race of the spring in the Caulfield Cup. The import was well-backed to beat Incentivise at Caulfield but was the first horse beaten when 13th of 18 runners. You can read the full report below: Heads up, everyone, it looks as though we will be hearing from the NSW premier with more details about the state’s reopening roadmap at 10.30am. For the first time since 29 September Victoria has recorded fewer than 1,000 daily Covid-19 cases, with 989 new infections. Sadly, nine people infected with Covid-19 have lost their lives. The NSW numbers have finally come through and they are low, with just 173 new cases recorded overnight. Sadly, four people infected with Covid-19 have died in the last reporting period. Borrowers are rushing to lock in low interest rates amid gathering expectations Australia’s central bank will declare an end to its record low cash rate earlier than its current prediction of 2024. Economists say the Reserve Bank of Australia has little choice but to revise its rate rise timing given mounting evidence the economy is recovering quickly from the lengthy Covid-triggered lockdowns in NSW, Victoria and the ACT. It’s one year since the RBA lowered its official rate to just 0.1% and today’s board meeting is under pressure to state when it expects to raise it. No increase is imminent – and it’s now 11 years since the last rate rise – but markets are anticipating the bank will bring forward the timing of that move. You can read the full report below: Shadow foreign affairs minister Penny Wong has tweeted this morning criticising Scott Morrison’s decision to accuse French president Emmanuel Macron of “sledging” Australia: Mr Morrison is treating leaders of other countries like he treats state premiers – as political opponents. His furious attempt at damage control will only make world leaders trust him even less. This mess is a reflection of Mr Morrison’s character – not a sledge against us all. Cancer patients and those with acquired brain injuries were among the worst affected by Coalition reforms to the disability support pension that saw an overall increase in denied claims and a blowout in processing times, a new report shows. The report by management consultants Health Outcomes International, commissioned by the federal government in response to an audit office report, examined the revised pension assessment process brought in under Tony Abbott’s prime ministership in 2015. The changes included using “government-contracted doctors” to assess applicants and requiring them to provide existing medical evidence rather than a report from their own doctor. These followed sweeping changes to the eligibility criteria introduced by the Gillard government in 2011. Health Outcomes International found all disabilities had “higher rejection rates post implementation of the 1 July 2015 changes”. You can read the full report below: Victorian Liberal MP Tim Smith is set to learn his political fate after being caught driving at more than twice the legal blood alcohol limit and crashing into a house, reports Benita Kolovos from AAP. Opposition leader Matthew Guy says he will meet face-to-face with the state member for the blue-ribbon seat of Kew on Tuesday “to discuss his future with him”. Smith crashed into a Hawthorn house on Saturday night after a dinner with friends, narrowly avoiding a child’s bedroom. The 38-year-old returned a breath test reading of 0.131, prompting the immediate suspension of his licence for 12 months. He also faces a fine. Smith tendered his resignation from shadow cabinet to Guy on Sunday, describing his decision to drive home as a “serious error of judgement”. Pressure is now mounting on him to quit politics altogether. Several Liberal MPs have told AAP Smith’s position is untenable. Guy told reporters on Monday: I am bitterly disappointed that any member of parliament, let alone one of my colleagues, would get behind the wheel after drinking. He said while Smith’s actions were inexcusable, alcohol abuse had become an increasing problem amid Victoria’s repeated lockdowns: I do think that’s obviously been an issue, particularly for single people living by themselves and their own mental health ... but that is in no way an excuse for what has occurred. He said Smith had apologised to the home owners and offered to pay to repair the damage caused by the crash. Guy also confirmed the car Smith was driving – a white Jaguar – was not funded through a parliamentary allowance. Smith is one of Guy’s closest political allies and was instrumental in his return to the leadership of the party after a successful spill against Michael O’Brien in September. Federal treasurer Josh Frydenberg, who is also close with Smith, said he should “take some time to consider his future”. Smith is now in the Mornington Peninsula but is expected to front the media “within days”. Scott Morrison said “technology will have the answers to a decarbonised economy” at the UN climate summit in Glasgow. On the first day of the two-week Cop26 summit, Morrison said these new technological solutions must “out compete existing technologies” especially “in developing economies”. Malcolm Turnbull has told ABC radio that the tense relationship with France is “all a product of Scott [Morrison]’s duplicity”. The former PM was asked about leaked material that suggests Australia, the UK and the US had all agreed not to inform France of the new nuclear deal until the day before the public announcement: Well, this was how Scott Morrison is enhancing his reputation for being untrustworthy. He’s, he’s leaking selectively, no doubt, text messages between him and Emmanuel Macron. And now perhaps leaking selective selectively secret material to embarrass the United States. I mean, you know, this is the problem, you know, when first you practise to deceive, you just get caught in one web after another. How much simpler would have been if we had if it had been straightforward? I mean, the nuclear issue was always an option. I wrote about it my book um, and I discussed it with Emmanuel Macron. It was always a possibility that we would move to nuclear propulsion – it needs a long lead time because we have no nuclear industry here. We have no nuclear skills in Australia. And so you need to do that very carefully. But if he had had an honest and open discussion we wouldn’t have had any of these problems. I mean, this is all the product that Scott’s duplicity. I mean, you know, he can twist and turn and leak a text message here and leak a document there to his stenographic friends in the media, but ultimately, the failure here was one of not being honest. Malcolm Turnbull says Scott Morrison should have spoken to France about adapting the old submarine deal to include nuclear-powered options: You know, when you’re dealing with people honestly – and Scott Morrison did not do that – you don’t drop hints. You actually tell the truth. What we should have done is look for nuclear propulsion for submarines has always been an option for us. You know, there are all sorts of issues associated with it, but the least of which we don’t have nuclear industry to support those subs. But what we should have had was an honest and open conversation. That’s what an honest person would have done ... The French submarine that we were working on was actually a nuclear submarine, designed as a nuclear submarine by France and it was at Australia’s request that it had conventional diesel-electric propulsion. So the reality is that all we needed to do, or Scott needed to do, was to be honest and open. And that’s exactly what Biden has implicitly criticised him for because there wasn’t that open consultation. Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull has slammed Scott Morrison’s handling of the French submarine deal, stating that he should apologise to French president Emmanuel Macron: I think Scott Morrison should apologise. Firstly, because he did very elaborately and duplicitously deceive France. You know, we had a relationship of the deepest trust and confidence of France. France shared with us some of their most [prized] secret technology on submarines. It was a partnership between two nations and it was the cornerstone of France;s Indo-Pacific strategy, and to be double dealing that the way Morrison did was shameful. I mean, Joe Biden has acknowledged. You know, Morrison’s conduct has done enormous damage to Australia’s relationship with France, to America;s relations with France, I mean, Biden – you can imagine how much Biden has enjoyed apologising for what has essentially been the conduct of Mr Morrison. Scott Morrison has used his national statement at the Cop26 to emphasise that Australia will probably overachieve on its 2030 emissions reduction target in an effort to blunt international criticism about his government’s lack of climate ambition. While the lead-up to the Glasgow summit was dominated by Morrison’s negotiations with the National party to land a net zero commitment by 2050, the UN-led event is focused on ambition for the 2030s. Australia – part of a bloc of big emitters and exporters at last weekend’s G20 summit in Rome attempting to water down commitments in the final communique to phase out coal – has been criticised for not increasing its ambition in the critical decade. Morrison used his set-piece address to the Glasgow conference to tell his peers that Australia had submitted a new nationally determined contribution, noting that Australia’s emissions would “fall by 35% by 2030, far exceeding our Paris commitment”. You can read the full story below: Good morning, everyone, it’s Matilda Boseley here, ready to jump into the day’s news. Scott Morrison has kicked off his first day at the Cop26 in Glasgow by telling the assembly of world leaders it will be scientists, not politicians, who come up with the solution to climate change, and announcing an additional $500m in climate financial aid to Australia’s Pacific and south-east Asian neighbours, bringing its total commitment to $2bn over the next five years. But the main headlines have stemmed from his response to the French president’s accusation that he lied about Australia’s intention to withdraw from a $90bn diesel submarine deal. He said: I’ve got broad shoulders, I can deal with that. But those slurs, I’m not going to cop sledging of Australia, I’m not going to cop that on behalf of Australians. I can deal with whatever people throw at me. But Australia has a proud record when it comes to our defence capability. This is interesting because I’m pretty sure Emmanuel Macron was sledging Morrison, not Australia, but anyway! A little closer to home, economists say the Reserve Bank of Australia will probably have to revise its rate rise timing given mounting evidence that the economy is recovering quickly from lockdowns in NSW, Victoria and the ACT. A year ago the RBA lowered its official rate to just 0.1%, with the intention not to raise it until 2024. But today’s board meeting is under pressure to state if and when it expects to back down from this plan. And with all that, why don’t we jump into the day!It took six years for David Beckham’s Inter Miami team to make it onto a football field. It’s going to take a while longer for success to follow. Under the guidance of head coach Phil Neville, the second-year expansion team is ending the season well adrift of the MLS playoffs. After leaving the England women’s team to join his old Manchester United teammate in Miami, Neville was unable to lift a goal-shy roster into the Eastern Conference’s top seven. Six straight losses – by a combined score of 16-1 – undid a promising mid-season revival that saw only one defeat in 11. Neville was recently fined for claiming Miami were “being cheated” by MLS referees, but it was a conference-low 35 goals in 33 games and a lack of collectivism that proved Miami’s undoing. In mid-October, Neville admitted his team would be “bottom of the league by a long way” but for 12 goals from Gonzalo Higuaín. Despite late-season signs of life – including a 5-1 win over Cincinnati – Miami were left needing a miracle. Saturday’s 3-1 defeat at home to New York City, at which Beckham was present, extinguished faint playoff hopes and left Miami 11th out of 14 teams in the Eastern Conference, with one game remaining. Neville’s position isn’t under threat, despite this underachievement. “I’d be lying if I said I didn’t expect us to finish higher and I take responsibility for that. But I can’t wait for 17 January to attack next season as quick as possible,” he said on Friday. Neville speaks of the need to for the team to become younger. During a recent press conference, he told the Guardian: “I think this MLS is a young person’s league. Maybe 10-15 years ago it was seen as a retirement league. Now some of the best young players are coming through the academies. We’re a club that wants to produce our own players and we’ve given debuts to some of our academy players.” With the coach’s emphasis on reducing the average age (Miami have the fifth-oldest squad in MLS) and the acknowledgment MLS isn’t pasture for aging Europeans, the 2021 signing of defenders Ryan Shawcross, 34, and Kieran Gibbs, 32, baffles. In truth, there are few signs the club is operating under a clear vision, on the commercial or playing side. In a damning report in The Athletic in August, a club source said: “We launched a brand, not a team.” On the field, Neville bemoans the absence of a roster “more interested in the team than themselves.” The expansion-team-finding-its-feet defence doesn’t wash these days. Nashville joined MLS alongside Miami, sit second in the east and will move to a 30,000-seater stadium next season. In 2018, Atlanta United won MLS Cup in their second season. Sporting director Chris Henderson, a January acquisition from Seattle Sounders, could provide a more coherent team-building strategy. The continuity offered by a second-year coaching team will benefit Miami if Neville finds his feet. Neville’s desire to field younger players is achievable but boosting the squad quality is more challenging. The club is hamstrung by $2,271,250 salary cap sanctions, spread over 2022 and 2023. Excluding the three designated player (DP) spots, each team can only spend $4.9m on player wages a season, leaving Miami down around 20%. MLS ruled 2020 salaries afforded to French World Cup winner Blaise Matuidi and Andres Reyes were worthy of designated player allocations; slots Miami filled elsewhere. An investigation also unearthed “underreporting of salary budget amounts” for three more players. The punishment for this “incorrect roster categorization” (aka cheating) was severe. Oddly, the DP rule was adopted in 2007 so LA Galaxy could pay the $6.5m salary of a certain David Beckham. It means Neville’s aspirations of blooding “two, three, or four” players from Miami’s reserve side, Fort Lauderdale CF, must be realised. Due to existing commitments, enlisting new DPs is trickier. The current trio of Higuaín, 33, Matuidi, 34, and the unfavoured Rodolfo Pizarro all have deals for next season. “It’s a difficult situation for everybody. The sanctions mean next year we’re going to have to be really, really good at building a roster,” Neville said. “Me, Chris Henderson and the ownership will sit down and think of the best way to build a roster to be competitive. “This club has to be competitive. There are no excuses, whether we put the youngest team, or the oldest team out there. Come the first game next season, the supporters, ownership, manager, players, and MLS will be expecting us to compete and win games of football. This club has to win trophies, that’s what I as a manager have to deliver.” Harnessing local talent was part of the club’s pitch. In 2018, Beckham promised to build a “state of the art” academy and now has U-12 through U-17 teams playing at the first-team’s training facility. Beckham is a regular at games and, by all accounts, gracious with his time with watching parents. It’s intertwined with the club’s efforts to join the fabric of the community, embracing the area’s Latin heritage. It started with the name – Inter Miami Club de Fútbol – and is reflected in the stands with a loud core of supporters dubbed “La Familia”. On humid Florida nights, it feels like a South American arena. Max Ramos of The Siege supporters group says: “We’re a fútbol club in an American sports league. The Supporters’ Section is extremely Latin and the majority of the fanbase is Hispanic. The club has done a really good job of allowing us to go with a South American atmosphere within an American framework. “Of course, there are things that you can’t do next to an airport in Fort Lauderdale, that you can at La Bombonera in Buenos Aires! I can’t launch a flare, for example. But the music, the lighting, it’s very Miami. “Could they do more, like having a stadium announcer, or more media in Spanish? Sure. But it’s still a work in progress.” Local enthusiasm is waning slightly. Attendances are down up to a quarter on the mid-season peak of 17,925. But this is south Florida. Historically, winning cures all. The excitement can be relit. “Everyone’s pissed right now, but it can all change in a year,” Ramos adds. Efforts to intertwine team and community – like September’s “Celebra Tu Patria” Hispanic Heritage Night – remain difficult while Inter play in another city, an hour’s drive away. The temporary stadium is in Fort Lauderdale, a much different cultural vibe. Word on the planned 25,000-seater stadium development in Freedom Park Miami is scant. “The stadium in Fort Lauderdale is lovely,” Ramos adds. “They’ve done a brilliant job of making it feel like a proper football stadium. If it was built in Miami instead of Fort Lauderdale, no-one would care. The problem is the name says ‘Miami’.” Neville, for one, acknowledges little is ideal for the club’s patient fans right now. “The supporters have suffered and suffered badly,” he said on Friday. “We’ve got great plans for this football club, and I feel this season we’ve put some of the bricks in the foundations to be successful in the years to come. It was never going to be a quick, overnight turnaround; it never is in football.” Neville has faced questions about the club’s ambitions multiple times a week lately, but this is still “David Beckham’s Inter Miami”. Neville says Beckham is “frustrated” and “wants better”, but fans may appreciate occasionally hearing from the man who appointed the manager. Neville’s first season in club management has been deeply disappointing. He only shot par with England women; now he must prove his Miami appointment wasn’t just jobs for the boys.The US has rejoined the High Ambition Coalition at the UN climate talks, the group of developed and developing countries that ensured the 1.5C goal was a key plank of the Paris agreement. The decision by the world’s biggest economy and second biggest emitter, after China, to return to the High Ambition Coalition group of countries marks a significant boost to attempts to focus the Cop26 summit on limiting temperature rises to 1.5C, the tougher of the two goals of the Paris agreement. The coalition, which numbered scores of countries at the 2015 Paris talks, will on Tuesday call on governments to step up their efforts on greenhouse gas emissions and phasing out coal, consistent with a 1.5C limit, and urge rich nations to double the amount of climate finance they make available for poor countries to adapt to the impacts of the climate crisis. They also want to bring an end to subsidies for fossil fuels. A senior US official said: “The High Ambition Coalition was instrumental in Paris in making sure that high ambition was written into the Paris agreement and will be instrumental in Glasgow in making sure it’s delivered.” Tina Stege, the climate envoy for the Marshall Islands, said: “The High Ambition Coalition has set the bar for what needs to happen at this Cop: getting on track to limiting temperature rise to 1.5C with enhanced [nationally determined contributions] and with real, actual actions, like phasing out coal; a sea-change on adaptation, with at least a doubling of current levels of adaptation financing; and making sure that we all have the resources we need to face this crisis, including the loss and damage we’re already experiencing today. “These heads of state have given their marching orders for ambition.” One negotiator said fears that the 1.5C target was in danger of slipping out of reach had prompted the group’s resurgence. “We are extremely concerned about 1.5C,” they said. “That’s why we are calling for a way to keep 1.5C as a viable option.” The High Ambition Coalition was formed in the run-up to Paris by the chief negotiator for the Marshall Islands, Tony de Brum. Though the tiny Pacific island state, made up of 29 atolls, has a population of only 60,000, the charismatic De Brum had a major influence at climate Cops. The goal of holding temperature rises to 1.5C rather than 2C is much harder to achieve, as it requires emissions cuts of at least 45% by 2030, compared with 2010 levels. But science shows it is much safer – beyond 1.5C, many of the impacts of climate breakdown, such as melting ice sheets, become irreversible, and many small islands would face inundation from rising sea levels and storm surges. De Brum spent months taking soundings from developed and developing countries, and in the closing days, when it appeared that the 1.5C could be in danger, the coalition was announced. John Kerry, the US climate envoy, said earlier this year that the Paris goal of “pursuing efforts” to 1.5C was “based on hard work by the High Ambition Coalition and the small island developing states. They felt it that it was imperative – and thank heavens they did. Science has now caught up to that fact, the IPCC [Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change] and IEA [International Energy Agency] and others have been pretty clear, that this is what we need to try to achieve.” De Brum died in 2017. Stege is his niece.There was a worry that when theatres reopened after months of pandemic-enforced closure, programming might be risk averse, with ambitions constrained by strapped finances. Al Smith’s Rare Earth Mettle is not a constrained play. It is a multi-stranded, multi-character, continent-hopping drama that centres on the Bolivian salt flats but encompasses numerous plotlines and locations. It was commissioned pre-pandemic – they were midway through rehearsals when theatres closed in March last year – but the Royal Court has remained committed to bringing it to the stage. Smith’s protagonist, Henry Finn, is an Elon Musk-esque billionaire who believes he can save the world by building electric cars. He’ll get richer in the process of course, which he’s fine with. Local indigenous communities also want to benefit from the deal. Smith had wanted to address climate change, but he felt that a lot of the theatre that did so either took the form of a lecture – Katie Mitchell’s Ten Billion, for example – or had a dystopian approach. Neither of those routes appealed. He had been reading about the Lithium Triangle, a region of the Andes that is thought to hold around 54% of the world’s lithium reserves, and he started reading up on the politics and history of the region and about mineral rights. Struck by the image of the train cemetery in Uyuni, a series of rusting British locomotives sitting amid the salt flats, he thought it was a great place to start a story: “an arresting, bright empty space”. Smith is married to an NHS doctor and some of their conversations about the mental and physical health of the nation made it into the play. Gradually, he says, these different ideas and images coalesced, connections formed: lithium, as well as being a component of batteries, is also a mood stabiliser. The play, says Smith, forces you to take a position where benevolent technocracy is the solution to the climate crisis; he doesn’t agree with that himself, but it’s intended as a provocation. “I don’t know if I have enough faith in people to change our behaviour in a way that is rationally best for the planet.” The play is also interested in ideas of language – it is full of instances of meaning being lost in translation – and in history, both cultural and personal. Smith’s protagonist has tried to detach himself from his past. “He sees it as somehow getting in the way of his grand messianic view.” As he was writing, Smith asked himself: “Does it need to be this big? Should I cut a strand? And I resisted it.” The Royal Court never told him to restrict the play for reasons of scale or cost. “That is a wonderful gift to be given as a writer.” It’s being directed by Hamish Pirie who has a rich visual approach – he put a ball-pit on stage for Tim Price’s Teh Internet is Serious Business and a flock of live goats in Goats by Syrian playwright Liwaa Yazji. While Smith is grateful to be back in the rehearsal room, he’s acutely aware that you can’t just pick up where you left off. The world has undergone a collective trauma and the pandemic is far from over. While theatres are now playing to full capacity audiences, he’s aware of the increasing case rate and remains cautious, perhaps more so than most. As well as being a doctor, his wife is also a cancer patient and they were shielding throughout lockdown. Smith studied English at the University of Edinburgh. His first major play, Harrogate – a two-hander about a complicated father-daughter relationship and sexual role play – premiered at the High Tide festival in Aldeburgh and transferred to the Royal Court. He has also written for Holby City and EastEnders, as well as five series of Radio 4’s Life Lines about an ambulance dispatch worker played by Sarah Ridgeway, who also starred in Harrogate. Smith spent some time at the South Western Ambulance Service Trust in Exeter, listening in on calls. He speaks with passion about the creative possibilities of radio drama. “It’s something which doesn’t receive a lot of press. I love the medium but it’s getting hammered. The cuts in radio drama have been massive.” Rare Earth Mettle is about power and apathy, he says. The play’s protagonist asks people to save the world by allowing him to absorb all the risk. Which is nuts, says Smith, but “when you have that kind of ludicrous intellectual hypocrisy at the highest level, I don’t know how anyone can be trusted to take a rational line about anything”. Sometimes, he adds: “I question whether the things I write are too absurd, but then I remember the secretary of state for culture ate bollocks on television for money. Rome is definitely burning.” • This article was updated on 7 November 2021 to reflect the playwright’s subsequent change to the name of Rare Earth Mettle’s protagonist. Rare Earth Mettle is at the Royal Court, London, 10 November-18 December.An exclusive London casino racially discriminated against one of its dealers by allowing a request by a patron not to have black dealers at their table, an employment tribunal has found. Semhar Tesfagiorgis, 41, successfully sued Crown London Aspinalls, in Mayfair, over an incident in December 2019, when she and a black colleague were prevented from working at the table of a patron who had requested “females with fair skin”. The casino had tried to argue that the reason for not allowing Tesfagiorgis and her colleague to deal to the patron was not because of race but because of the perception that it was necessary to accommodate patrons’ request, no matter how unreasonable, in order to the further the interests of the business. This was rejected by the three-person panel sitting at London central employment tribunal, led by Judge Elliot. In a written judgment, it said: “Our finding is that the claimant and her black female colleagues were held back from going on duty because they were not ‘fair-skinned, female dealers’ or ‘western-looking female staff’ … “The accommodation of the request was direct race discrimination of the claimant because but for her race she would have been asked to deal to the patron. The granting of that request was less favourable treatment by the managers because of race.” The tribunal also found that a complaint relating to an incident in June 2015 would have succeeded as an act of direct race discrimination but was time-barred because the claim had been brought too late. In that incident, Aspinalls refused to accommodate a request by Tesfagiorgis for a shift swap because a patron did not want a black female dealer. The panel said: “The shift swap was refused because of the claimant’s race: she did not fit the patron’s requirement for ‘white female dealers only’, which the respondent accommodated. The reason the claimant was not one of the patron’s preferred dealers is because she was not white. The refusal of the shift swap was less favourable treatment of the claimant because of her race.” The panel noted that the casino had only one slide on a presentation given during training that dealt with patrons’ behaviour, describing the training as “inadequate”. Comparing her victory to David versus Goliath, Tesfagiorgis, who worked as an inspector/dealer at Aspinalls between 2007 and 2020, said: “I tried for many years to open a dialogue about the racism myself and many others were often faced with but I was either shut down, ignored or gaslighted each time. “The direct discrimination myself and other black colleagues received was not an isolated incident. Although the tribunal could not rule on past events due to time limits, they have acknowledged this was the case and for once Crown Aspinalls will finally be forced to do the same, for this I am grateful to the employment tribunal.” Her solicitor, Shazia Khan, a founding partner of Cole Khan, said she hoped the judgment led to “root-and-branch reform of the casino and gaming industry to address the racist and sexist conduct that drove my client out of a career she clearly loved”.West Australian police are using drones and aircraft to create a detailed map of the Blowholes campsite as they look for “disturbances in the sand” during the ongoing investigation into the disappearance of four-year-old Cleo Smith. Police recruits are also sifting through a mountain of rubbish collected from roadside bins stretching more than 600km along Western Australia’s north-west coast in the hope of finding any clue that could lead to Cleo. The four-year-old vanished from the Blowholes campsite on the coast of Macleod, about 950km north of Perth, on 16 October. Her mum, Ellie Smith, was the last known person to see her when the family were camping almost three weeks ago. She said her daughter woke about 1.30am asking for water before going back to bed. In the morning Cleo and her sleeping bag were gone from the family’s tent. Acting police commissioner Col Blanch on Tuesday said the force was using drones as they looked to “map every inch” of the area. “We are looking for disturbances in sand,” he told ABC radio. “We’ve used satellite technology, we used aircraft to take high-definition photos. We really need to make a good quality mapping of that area to make sure that we cover every inch.” Blanch said the initial search focused on looking for Cleo if she had potentially wandered off. “Now we are in a stage where we need to forensically go over that ground inch by inch to see what disturbances might be in the nearby areas for any sort of evidence that might give an inkling as to what happened,” he said on Tuesday. Authorities are conducting line searches too. WA police had previously said there was nothing to suggest the account given by Cleo’s parents was anything but “accurate and truthful”. Guardian Australia is not suggesting they were involved in Cleo’s disappearance. More than 50 cubic metres of rubbish has been collected from bins stretching as far south as Geraldton, more than 500km from where Cleo vanished, and as far north as Minilya, 165km away. WA police believe Cleo may have been abducted, with the state government offering a $1m reward for any information that helps them find the people or person responsible for her disappearance. The rubbish was packed into trucks and transported to Perth where four forensics officers and 20 officers spent days sorting through hundreds of bags in an effort to find any items that may assist in the investigation. The search of the rubbish was “still going on today and will take a while to get through,” Blanch said on Tuesday. He said police were still looking for a vehicle they believed turned off Blowholes Road about 3.30am on the day Cleo went missing and drove south towards Carnarvon along the coast road. The acting commissioner said it was thought to be a “smaller passenger-type vehicle”. That sighting remained a “significant focus of the investigation,” he said. Blanch said given the remoteness of the area there were some potential routes from the campsite to Carnarvon without any CCTV coverage. Asked if Cleo could have been watched or followed at the campsite, he said investigators were keeping an open mind so “all avenues are still a possibility”. But the detective leading the investigation, Det Supt Rod Wilde, believes she was likely taken by an “opportunistic” offender. Wilde said on Tuesday the family had stayed near their tent all evening and had not socialised with other campers. “I think it’s more than likely an opportunistic-type event,” he told Perth radio 6PR. “We know they got there on the Friday night, it was getting dark, and there would have been limited opportunity for people to observe Cleo at that time.” There are 100 people on the taskforce searching for Cleo – 50 locally and 50 in Perth. The working theory is that she was still in WA because it was a “high-risk proposition” someone would try and take her out of the state, Blanch said. He called on people in the community to look out for anyone they knew behaving strangely “or a little bit off” after 16 October. The acting commissioner said it was difficult to remain hopeful as the search dragged on but investigators were “focused absolutely on this case trying to bring Cleo home”. Crime Stoppers have had 200 possible sightings of Cleo since she went missing and members of the public have come forward with hours of CCTV and dashcam footage in the hope that it helps. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning “It’s been two weeks since four-year-old Cleo Smith was last seen, and while the search for answers continues we’d like to take a moment to thank the public for their ongoing assistance, attention and support for the investigation,” WA police said in a statement on Sunday. “This investigation could not progress without new information, and we’re receiving that every day from people who want to help, who want to see Cleo return home to her family.” - with Australian Associated PressCorporal punishment, wearing fur, pineapple on pizza – moral dilemmas, are by their very nature, hard to solve. That’s why the same ethical questions are constantly resurfaced in TV, films and literature. But what if AI could take away the brain work and answer ethical quandaries for us? Ask Delphi is a bot that’s been fed more than 1.7m examples of people’s ethical judgments on everyday questions and scenarios. If you pose an ethical quandary, it will tell you whether something is right, wrong, or indefensible. Anyone can use Delphi. Users just put a question to the bot on its website, and see what it comes up with. The AI is fed a vast number of scenarios – including ones from the popular Am I The Asshole sub-Reddit, where Reddit users post dilemmas from their personal lives and get an audience to judge who the asshole in the situation was. Then, people are recruited from Mechanical Turk – a market place where researchers find paid participants for studies – to say whether they agree with the AI’s answers. Each answer is put to three arbiters, with the majority or average conclusion used to decide right from wrong. The process is selective – participants have to score well on a test to qualify to be a moral arbiter, and the researchers don’t recruit people who show signs of racism or sexism. The arbitrators agree with the bot’s ethical judgments 92% of the time (although that could say as much about their ethics as it does the bot’s). In October, a New York Times piece about a writer who potentially plagiarized from a kidney donor in her writing group inspired debate. The bot obviously didn’t read the piece, nor the explosion of Reddit threads and tweets. But it has read a lot more than most of us – it has been posed over 3m new questions since it went online. Can Delphi be our authority on who the bad art friend is? One point to Dawn Dorland, the story’s kidney donor. Can it really be that simple? We posed a question to the bot from the other perspective … The bot tries to play both sides. I asked Yejin Choi, one of the researchers from University of Washington, who worked on the project alongside colleagues at the Allen Institute for AI, about how Delphi thinks about these questions. She said: “It’s sensitive to how you phrase the question. Even though we might think you have to be consistent, in reality, humans do use innuendos and implications and qualifications. I think Delphi is trying to read what you are after, just in the way that you phrase it.” With this in mind, we tried to pose some of the great questions of politics, culture and literature. The bot does answer some questions with striking nuance. For example, it distinguishes whether it is rude to mow the lawn late at night (it is rude), versus whether it is OK to mow the lawn late at night when your neighbor is out of town (it is OK). But previous versions of the bot answered Vox’s question “Is genocide OK” with: “If it makes everybody happy.” A new version of Delphi, which launched last week, now answers: “It’s wrong.” Choi points out that, of course, the bot has flaws, but that we live in a world where people are constantly asking answers of imperfect people, and tools – like Reddit threads and Google. “And the internet is filled with all sorts of problematic content. You know, some people say they should spread fake news, for example, in order to support their political party,” she says. So you could argue that all this really tells us is whether the bot’s views are consistent with a random selection of people’s, rather than whether something is actually right or wrong. Choi says that’s OK: “The test is entirely crowdsourced, [those vetting it] are not perfect human beings, but they are better than the average Reddit folk.” But she makes clear that the intention of the bot is not to be a moral authority on anything. “People outside AI are playing with that demo, [when] I thought only researchers would play with it … This may look like an AI authority giving humans advice which is not at all what we intend to support.” Instead, the point of the bot is to help AI to work better with humans, and to weed out some of the many biases we already know it has. “We have to teach AI ethical values because ai interacts with humans. And to do that, it needs to be aware what values human have,” Choi says. • The photo with this story was replaced on 10 November 2021 to show a cast of The Thinker at the Rodin Museum in Paris, as captioned, rather than a cast at Legion of Honor museum, San Francisco.State of Terror Hillary Rodham Clinton and Louise Penny Macmillan, £20, pp512 I didn’t expect, when picking up Hillary Rodham Clinton’s debut, State of Terror, for it to be the sort of thriller that I’d simultaneously want to read slowly, soaking in the delicious details of how high-level politicians really act around one another (there’s an awful lot more swearing), and horribly fast, panicked at the dreadful events piling up ahead. But I should have: Clinton’s co-writer is the hugely classy Canadian crime writer Louise Penny and this appears to be a match made in heaven. Ellen Adams is secretary of state for a new administration, which has just been sworn in after the “near-criminal incompetence” of its predecessor. “The former administration screwed up everything it touched. It poisoned the well, poisoned our relationships. We’re the leader of the free world in name only.” She’s in her late 50s, the former boss of a media empire, and she thinks she has a little time to learn on the job until bombs start going off in the major European cities and there’s no information about who’s responsible. This is meticulously plotted, intelligent and terrifying, a portrait of a world facing terrible threats, where “accomplished middle-aged women were often diminished by small men”, female friendship is key and where we are given delightful titbits from America’s former secretary of state such as this one, on the British prime minister: “A hollow man, an upper-class twit, with any guts he might have had replaced by entitlement and random Latin phrases.” Don’t miss it. The Missing Hours Julia Dahl Faber, £12.99, pp288 Claudia Castro is a rich, beautiful and privileged social media queen at NYU, but when Julia Dahl’s The Missing Hours opens, she’s waking up in pain, her underwear gone, her skirt smelling of urine and her face beaten. Claudia doesn’t remember what happened to her and she doesn’t want to talk to anybody: not her sister, who is about to have a baby, not her music producer father, not a counsellor. “Did you hear Claudia Castro says somebody raped her?” she imagines them gossiping. “One of those disgusting reality TV blogs… would probably pay ten grand for that headline.” So she says nothing, waits, heals. As New York is stalked by an attacker who is slashing their victims with a knife, “over and over Claudia read the word, heard the word: victim. The victim’s mother says her life will never be the same. The victim’s husband says her children are afraid. The victim the victim the victim. The word had spikes.” Then a phone video emerges of Claudia’s attack and she slowly sinks out of sight, determined that she isn’t going to be another victim. This is a dark, gripping study of vengeance and of what it means to live in a woman’s body. The Apollo Murders Chris Hadfield Quercus, £20, pp470 Astronaut Chris Hadfield is known for his bestselling nonfiction as well as his time as commander of the International Space Station. The Apollo Murders is his first venture into fiction and it is set around the launch and flight of Apollo 18 in 1973, in reality cancelled by President Nixon, but here setting out for the moon, by way of a Russian space station that the Americans believe is conducting military espionage. “For the first time in history the United States is going to take hostile military action in space.” Our hero is Nasa flight controller Kazimieras “Kaz” Zemeckis, a former pilotwho lost his eye flying an F-4 Phantom, while it’s soon clear that many of those on this mission have agendas of their own. The plot hangs together well, although why does Kaz not know the moon is tidally locked to the Earth? Even I know that. But the real and genuine joy of The Apollo Murders is the insight Hadfield gives into life as an astronaut, the moments as launch approaches: “Still three miles away, yet clearly visible high above the flood plain, the Saturn V rocket was like some ancient Egyptian monument to the gods… gleaming white in the morning sunshine.” The Gs as the rocket takes off. The wonders of space. Riccardino Andrea Camilleri Mantle, £16.99, pp304 All hail the final novel from the brilliant Andrea Camilleri, the late Italian author who gave us the inimitable Sicilian detective Inspector Montalbano. Camilleri actually wrote Riccardino in 2004 and 2005, updating it in 2016, but gave orders for it not to be published until after his death. He died in Rome in 2019, aged 93, and here it is, a whimsical and wonderful conclusion to Montalbano’s story. Translated by Stephen Sartarelli, Riccardino opens as the detective receives a phone call from a wrong number: it’s a man called Riccardino and Montalbano soon sends him on his way. Shortly afterwards, he learns that Riccardino has been murdered and starts investigating. But “some years back [Montalbano] had the brilliant idea to tell a local writer the story of a case he’d conducted, and the guy had immediately spun it into a novel”; this author now tells the detective he’s going about solving the crime all wrong, saying: “You keep invoking the problem of imminent old age, but I know perfectly well that it’s just an excuse for covering your increasing indecision.” Though Riccardino gets increasingly meta, in the end it is a moving finale to this peerless series. To support the Guardian and Observer, order your copy of State of Terror, The Missing Hours, The Apollo Murders or Riccardino at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may applyA Guardian investigation has revealed that a controversial church whose leader has openly expressed the ambition of creating a “theocracy” in America has accumulated significant influence in the city of Moscow, Idaho. Christ Church has a stated goal to “make Moscow a Christian town” and public records, interviews, and open source materials online show how its leadership has extended its power and activities in the town. Church figures have browbeaten elected officials over Covid restrictions, built powerful institutions in parallel to secular government, harassed perceived opponents, and accumulated land and businesses in pursuit of a long-term goal of transforming America into a nation ruled according to its own, ultra-conservative moral precepts. The rise of Christ Church may be playing out in a small Idaho city but it comes at a time when the US is roiled by the far right, including Christian nationalism, and when social conservatives are seeking to roll back basic tenets of US life such as legal abortion, as well as dominating powerful national institutions, such as the supreme court. While the church’s previous controversies have centered on its founder and pastor, Douglas Wilson, a new generation of male church leaders – including Wilson’s son – have found ways to expand the church’s reach in Moscow and beyond, even gaining footholds in mainstream popular culture in the broader US. In recent months, Christ Church has advocated for resistance to Covid mandates in Moscow, and Wilson has attempted to give theological ballast to opposition to restrictions and vaccination programs, as well as warning of political violence. Last month, a video version of a post by Wilson at his well-read blog was removed from YouTube. The blogpost, entitled “A Biblical Defense of Fake Vaccine IDs”, was based on a conspiracy theory asserting that the vaccine response was a “power play” on the part of the Biden administration, which intended to leave the restrictions in place permanently. Wilson further claimed that “we are not yet in a hot civil war, with shooting and all, but we are in a cold war/civil war” and urged readers to “resist openly, in concert with any others in your same position”, claiming that this would not be “rebellion against lawful authority” but “an example of a free people refusing to go along with their own enslavement”. The post was met with outrage, including from other prominent evangelicals. That was not the only time that Wilson’s activities and positions have led to criticism from other evangelicals, and associations with Wilson have led to crises in other churches. In recent months, members and clergy resigned from Minneapolis’s Bethlehem Baptist church, and staff resigned from its associated Bethlehem College and Seminary (BCS), in part over the appearance of newly appointed BCS president Joe Rigney on Man Rampant, a video series hosted by Wilson and streamed on platforms including Amazon Prime. The show promotes Wilson’s long-held position that men need to assert themselves in society. Christ Church was founded in Moscow in the 1990s, and experts who have studied the church estimate the size of the congregation and its offshoot churches at about 2,000, or 10% of the city’s total population. But they also say that the church is increasingly drawing people to the area who are attracted to the idea of northern Idaho as a conservative “redoubt” against American modernity, and by the church’s “reconstructionist” position, which holds that the world will need to be governed according to their interpretation of biblical morality before Christ returns to earth. Christ Church’s previous controversies have garnered national attention. Recent reporting focused attention once more on the church’s – and Wilson’s – handling of a series of sexual abuse cases, and the theological subordination of women. In 2005, Wilson asked a judge for leniency in the case of Stephen Sitler, a former student at a Christ Church-aligned college, New Saint Andrews College (NSAC). Sitler was at that time convicted of sex offenses involving children. After his release on probation in 2007, Sitler was married in Christ Church in 2010, by Wilson, to a woman who, by Sitler’s and her account, had been introduced to him by Edwin Iverson, then a Christ Church elder and now pastor of a Communion of Reformed Evangelical Churches (CREC) church in Colville, Washington. Wilson has faced scrutiny over other positions. In the early 2000s, Wilson received criticism over a book, Southern Slavery as it Was, which he had co-written in the previous decade with J Steven Wilkins. Wilkins is a Louisiana pastor who was a co-founder of the neo-Confederate organization, the League of the South. His church is a member of Wilson’s congregational umbrella group, the CREC. The book depicted slavery in the antebellum southern United States as “a relationship based upon mutual affection and confidence”, and argued that the enslaved enjoyed “a life of plenty, of simple pleasures, of food, clothes, and good medical care”. Wilson has repeatedly disavowed any interest in national electoral politics, but Christ Church’s eventual aim is what Wilson explicitly describes in a 2016 book as “theocracy”, or “a network of nations bound together by a formal acknowledgement of the lordship of Jesus Christ”, as opposed to secular society ruled by “civil governments, [which] are in necessary degrees satanic, demonic, and influenced by the god of this world, who is the devil”. These beliefs have led Christ Church into conflicts with local government, but additionally, Wilson and other Christ Church members have founded a range of local and national institutions which are affiliated with or sponsored by the church. Christ Church itself is an unincorporated nonprofit, which means that it is not obliged to provide details of its finances to government authorities. Many entities associated with the church are either also unincorporated, like the Logos School, or, like publisher Canon Press, are operated by a network of limited liability companies (LLCs) which are similarly limited in their accountability. But insiders who spoke on condition of anonymity said that all members tithe 10% of their household income, and wealthier members are expected to make an even larger contribution. Within a network of educational institutions, publishing houses, churches, and national associations that Wilson has founded or led, a small number of men, from a small number of families, have come to exert significant power within the organisation and Moscow. Not least among these is Wilson’s own family, with him as its head. At NSAC, for example, the college president is Wilson’s son-in-law, Ben Merkle. Another son-in-law, Luke Jankovic, sits on the board of trustees, as does Wilson himself and Christ Church’s associate pastor, Toby Sumpter. Douglas Wilson is also on faculty at NSAC, and is listed as a senior fellow in theology. Also on faculty are his son Nathan (ND) Wilson, a fellow of literature; and his brother, Gordon Wilson, a self-described “young earth creationist” who believes that God created the earth in seven days, is senior fellow of natural history. According to tax filings, Merkle and Gordon Wilson each draw salaries from the college, which lists tuition and costs for undergraduate students at $19,900 per year. Merkle, Jankovic, and all three Wilson men are also elders at Christ Church, along with a founding director and former trustee at NSAC, Moscow resident Andrew Crapuchettes. Until June 2021, when the company was acquired by a competitor, Crapuchettes had been chief executive of Moscow’s largest private employer, EMSI, for more than 19 years. During that period, EMSI was a major employer of NSAC graduates. According to LinkedIn data, there are 55 current employees at EMSI who are NSAC graduates, from a college which has graduated only 635 people throughout its history. In addition, a number of Christ Church elders hold senior positions at EMSI. They include Luke Jankovic – the NSAC trustee who is Wilson’s son-in-law – who is now executive vice-president of higher education. Also, EMSI’s chief operations officer and chief financial officer is Timothy van den Broek, a teaching elder at Trinity Reformed church, Christ Church’s suburban offshoot. Van den Broek began his career at EMSI immediately after graduating from NSAC, and he sits on the boards of church-aligned businesses and organizations, including the charity, the Hope Center, and Classic Learning Initiatives, which aims to devise alternative standardized testing for students at Christian private schools who wish to attend private Christian universities like NSAC. Since his departure from EMSI, Andrew Crapuchettes has started a new venture, a jobs website called Red Balloon, which advertises itself as connecting “employers who value freedom with employees who value it too”, in “a world beyond cancel culture, where employees are free to work … without fear that they will find themselves on the wrong side of their employer’s politics”. Many of the website’s initial clients appeared to be either church run or founded organizations, or companies belonging to other church members. Now, Crapuchettes has branched out into property development, and this year won approval from Moscow city council for the “annexation” of 27 acres of land on Moscow’s south-western edge for a new, 109 unit subdivision called Edington. A local businessman, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that the church already had a disproportionate presence in the downtown area, and that developments like Edington were evidence that “they are trying to attract more people here”. He added that the church’s anti-mask and anti-vaccination positions, as well as its attempts to “take over local institutions” like a food co-op, had polarized the community. He also referred to an ad for New Saint Andrews College that had been seen as transphobic by many in Moscow had “galvanized the town against them”. He called it a demonstration of the church’s preparedness “to throw red meat and recruit on the basis of hate”. In response to detailed emailed questions about various aspects of Christ Church’s operations, Douglas Wilson did not offer any specific response, but wrote that the Guardian’s “approach illustrates an absurd fixation and anti-church bigotry that we have come to expect from certain elements of the leftist media”. Asked about EMSI’s hiring practices under his leadership, Andrew Crapuchettes wrote that: “Under my watch, EMSI grew into a global company with offices on two continents, and in an ever-tightening labor market, we hired talent wherever we could find it, including from the 3 local colleges – Washington State, University of Idaho and New Saint Andrews.” • This article was amended on 12 November 2021 to correctly refer to the Communion of Reformed Evangelical Churches, rather than the Council of Reformed Evangelical Churches.Good morning. World leaders have agreed a deal that aims to halt and reverse global deforestation over the next decade as part of a multibillion-dollar package to tackle human-caused greenhouse gas emissions. Xi Jinping, Jair Bolsonaro and Joe Biden are among the leaders who will commit to the declaration at Cop26 in Glasgow today to protect vast areas. Meanwhile, Biden will try to underscore his green credentials by unveiling an action plan to control methane, regarded by the administration as the single most potent way to combat the climate crisis in the short term. Leading an alliance of 90 countries, including for the first time Brazil, he will set out new regulatory measures today to limit global methane emissions by 30% from 2020 levels by the end of the decade. Major producers and consumers of deforestation-linked commodities including Indonesia, China and Brazil have put their name to the deforestation deal, which aims to curtail the second-largest source of greenhouse gas emissions. The detailed US proposals on methane gases may prove to be one of the lasting successes of Cop26 in Glasgow where Biden will announce his action plan. On Monday, Biden urged other world leaders to embark upon a shift to clean energy and vowed that the US will ‘lead by example’. California legalized weed five years ago. Why is the illicit market still thriving? Five years after cannabis legalization, California is awash with signs of an apparently booming industry. Californians can toke on Justin Bieber-branded joints and ash their blunts in Seth Rogen’s $95 ceramics. They can sip on THC-infused seltzers, relax inside a cannabis cafe and get edibles delivered to their doors. But behind the flashy facade, the legal weed industry remains far from the law-abiding, prosperous sector many had hoped for. In fact, it’s a mess. Voters passed a law in November 2016 making recreational marijuana legal. But today, the vast majority of the market remains underground – about 80-90% of it, according to experts. Because that 2016 law, known as Proposition 64, gave municipalities the power to ban weed as they see fit, the majority of cities and counties still don’t allow the sale of cannabis, inhibiting the growth of the legal market. What else is causing the illegal market to thrive? Business owners say high taxes, the limited availability of licenses, and expensive regulatory costs have put the legal market out of reach. How do those who are licensed to sell cannabis legally stay afloat? For now, the only way legal, state-licensed businesses say they are able to stay profitable is to keep one foot in the illegal, unlicensed market. Republican senator Josh Hawley worries feminism has driven men to ‘pornography and video games’ The effort to combat toxic masculinity in the US has led men to consume more pornography and play more video games, the Missouri senator Josh Hawley claimed in a speech to a group of Republicans. Speaking at the National Conservatism Conference in Orlando, Florida, Hawley addressed the issue of “manhood”, which he said was under attack, and called for men to return to traditional masculine roles. The Donald Trump supporter who notoriously raised a fist in support of a mob outside the US Capitol on 6 January appeared to echo talking points made by the likes of the Proud Boys, a far-right group that opposes feminism and believes men are under attack from liberal elites. “Can we be surprised that after years of being told that they are the problem, that their manhood is the problem, more and more men are withdrawing into the enclave of idleness and pornography and video games?” Hawley said. Hawley did not cite sources for his belief that men were watching pornography more frequently. Nonetheless, on Monday his speech was republished by the Federalist, a rightwing outlet. Hawley is the son of a banker and attended private school before studying at Stanford and Yale. Given his background, he has repeatedly raised eyebrows for railing against elites and claiming to speak for all men. In other news … Mexican journalists have expressed alarm after two veteran reporters were attacked in their own homes in less than 24 hours, bringing this year’s death toll for media workers to nine – already surpassing the eight deaths recorded in 2020. Robert Durst was indicted on Monday for murder in the death of his first wife, Kathie McCormack Durst. The multimillionaire real estate heir is currently serving a life sentence in California for the murder of Susan Berman, who prosecutors say helped him cover up Kathie Durst’s killing. Joe Exotic’s nemesis, Carole Baskin, may throw the second series of the hit Netflix documentary Tiger King into disarray after taking legal action in Tampa, Florida. The founder of Big Cat Rescue is accusing Netflix of breach of contract for using footage of her and her husband in a trailer for the second series. Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen has delivered her strongest call yet for Mark Zuckerberg to step down as chief executive of his social media empire, saying the business will be better off with a leader who focuses on user safety. Stat of the day: Almost one in three of Republicans say violence may be necessary to ‘save’ US Almost a third of Republicans believe violence may be necessary to “save” the US, according to a poll. Researchers at the Public Religion Research Institute, a nonprofit, found that 30% of Republicans agreed with the statement: “Because things have gotten so far off track, true American patriots may have to resort to violence in order to save our country.” Among Americans who believe the 2020 election was “stolen” from Donald Trump, which it was not, 39% believe violence may be required. Don’t miss this: Second act sensations! Meet the people who reached peak fitness – after turning 50 What combination of factors leads anyone to go all out at the gym, become a marathon runner or walk miles a day after the age of 50? Motivation is complex, and people differ, but the fact that mortality is nibbling at your heels, midlife restlessness has set in and with it the desire for reinvention, alongside a shift from active parenting or full-time work, may all contribute. Sometimes, a low-level unease gradually crystallises into a sense of urgency. “I had this sense that if I didn’t do something soon, it would be too late,” says Rich Jones. Climate check: why chefs are ditching the avocado On the one hand, they are deliciously creamy, versatile and gloriously Instagrammable. On the other, they have an enormous carbon footprint, require 320 litres of water each to grow and “are in such global demand they are becoming unaffordable for people indigenous to the areas they are grown in”, according to Thomasina Miers, the co-founder of the Mexican restaurant chain Wahaca. Now, like other chefs, Miers has created an alternative: a vibrant, green guacamole-inspired dip, made from fava beans, green chilli, lime and coriander. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth (formerly Green Light) to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: I got a camera to spy on my cat – and it made me question everything about myself Hayley Nahmen bought two in-home security cameras. She told people she got them because her cat was sick but the truth was she just wanted to spy on him. She writes: “The problem with getting a camera for your pets is that you also inadvertently get a camera for yourself. Technology and social media are full of such promises – not just that we might gain a 360-degree understanding of our pets, but of ourselves. We document accordingly, obsessively. And implicit in this compulsion is the suspicion that our lives are best understood at a distance, the way someone else might experience us, rather than the way we experience ourselves.” Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comHow can you hold climate talks without including the most affected people? You can’t. How can you make decisions on the best way to adapt to climate impacts without talking to those forced to adapt? You can’t. And how can you deliver climate justice by continuing to ignore those that are suffering the most? You can’t. As the Cop26 climate summit gets under way, and the so-called leaders of the world take centre stage to deliver yet more empty promises, we – five youth climate activists from five of the most affected areas across Africa, Asia, Central America and the South Pacific – have arrived despite attempts to shut us out. We have sailed into Glasgow onboard the Rainbow Warrior to let these presidents, prime ministers, policymakers and CEOs know that our voices will no longer remain unheard. They cannot and should not have these talks without us and we’re demanding a seat at the table to make sure they finally act. The climate crisis is a global crisis that requires global action. But it does not affect everyone in the same way. It’s a crisis of inequalities. We are all in the same storm, but we are not all in the same boat. Today there are five times more extreme weather events – devastating storms, floods, droughts, water scarcity and heatwaves – than 50 years ago, and they disproportionately affect those of us living in the most vulnerable areas, especially in the global south. Last year, climate disasters displaced more people from our communities than war and violent conflict, again mostly from the global south. Yet we are not the ones that have caused this crisis. Since 1965, one-third of global emissions, driven by the relentless exploitation of fossil fuels, have been caused by just 20 companies. Rich nations are responsible for 92% of global emissions, with the US and countries in Europe causing almost two-thirds of those. We’re just the ones forced to live with, or sadly in many cases die because of, its impacts. Yet our voices continue to be sidelined. In our home countries of Namibia, Bangladesh, Uganda, Mexico and Tuvalu in the South Pacific, we face many different challenges. But they are all exacerbated by the same injustices such as gender violence, forced migration and racial injustices, as well as the Covid-19 pandemic and the climate crisis. These are all symptoms of the same rotten system. We have friends who have dropped out of school because droughts have forced their families into poverty and famine. Others are forced to literally sell their children in order to meet their basic needs. Many people have lost land, homes and crops to floods and rising sea levels. More are being forced to flee their homes and communities. And even just accessing safe drinking water is a daily struggle for many. Thousands of people are dying right now because of the climate crisis: the world leaders at this summit have blood on their hands. While corporate greed and a failure to act from governments in the global north are driving climate change, the disparities between rich and impoverished, between those who are causing this crisis and those who are not, don’t end there. The inequalities also run deep within our countries. Corruption and neocolonialism are rife. Communities are displaced by industry as politicians sell off our land to oil companies, promising prosperity and jobs for local people who have been forced deeper into poverty by the climate crisis. Our communities are being misled. Those jobs never come, but the pollution, environmental destruction – along with emotional and cultural destruction – and more severe climate impacts always do. For over a decade, rich nations have failed to deliver the international climate finance that they have promised. This is not aid, nor just the help they’re obliged to provide. This is a debt that they owe us for the environmental death and destruction that they have caused – and it must be paid in full. What little of this debt that actually is repaid rarely reaches those who need it. But no one questions our governments. No one checks up on how this money is being spent. Policies put in place to protect our local environments are meaningless while corrupt politicians remain in charge. But speaking out in our countries can result in grave consequences. We are literally putting our lives on the line – so it is imperative that our voices are heard. The leaders gathering in Glasgow have failed to act on the science. They have failed for decades to tackle the climate crisis. And they have failed to listen to people from the most affected areas who are now suffering from the consequences of their failure to act. Enough is enough. We are here to let them know that we will continue to fight for climate justice until they stop failing us. They must not deny us the platform to freely defend our present and futures. They must not ignore our demands. And they must not continue to put profit over people and the planet. The system must be uprooted before it is too late. This article was written by five Fridays for Future MAPA (Most Affected People and Areas) youth climate activists: Bernard Ewekia, 25, from Tuvalu; Jakapita Kandanga, 24, from Namibia; Edwin Namakanga, 27, from Uganda; Maria Reyes, 19, from Mexico; and Farzana Faruk Jhumu, 22, from BangladeshAhead of the release of Home Sweet Home Alone, the Guardian will be putting reader questions to actor Rob Delaney. Did he ever have a traumatic experience being left home alone as a child, perhaps? What was it like working with Sharon Horgan on Catastrophe? What was the response like to the article he wrote about getting a vasectomy? Send your questions You can send your questions for us to put to Rob Delaney by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Five years after cannabis legalization, California is awash with signs of an apparently booming industry. Californians can toke on Justin Bieber-branded joints and ash their blunts in Seth Rogen’s $95 ceramics. They can sip on THC-infused seltzers, relax inside a cannabis cafe, and get edibles delivered to their doors. But behind the flashy facade, the legal weed industry remains far from the law-abiding, prosperous sector many had hoped for. In fact, it’s a mess. Voters passed a law in November 2016 making recreational marijuana legal. But today, the vast majority of the market remains underground – about 80-90% of it, according to experts. Because that 2016 law, known as Proposition 64, gave municipalities the power to ban weed as they see fit, the majority of cities and counties still don’t allow the sale of cannabis, inhibiting the growth of the legal market. In the places that do allow pot shops and grows, business owners say high taxes, the limited availability of licenses, and expensive regulatory costs have put the legal market out of reach. And many of the Black and brown entrepreneurs who were supposed to benefit from legalization have actually ended up losing money. Meanwhile, consumers remain confused about what’s legal and what’s not. For now, the only way legal, state-licensed businesses say they are able to stay profitable is to keep one foot in the illegal, unlicensed market – often called the “legacy” or “traditional” market. “You have to go into the traditional market to stay afloat,” explains the cannabis consultant Ophelia Chong. “Considering California is the home of cannabis, we messed it up in so many ways.” California’s cannabis conundrum speaks to the enormous challenges of bringing a gray market that for decades has thrived in the shadows into the light. But the problems run deeper than any flaws in Proposition 64, or actions taken over the past five years. Rather, the state’s weed economy is in disarray largely because of everything that happened in the two decades before Prop 64 passed. How we got in a marijuana muddle Cannabis has long been a crucial part of Golden state culture, a perfect fit for the laid-back, health-conscious attitude that has been percolating out west since well before the first hippies arrived in the Haight. The story of California’s legal weed chaos dates back to 1996, when voters passed a law allowing medical marijuana. At the time, Bay Area Aids activists saw the way pot relieved pain and stimulated hunger among their emaciated and desperately ill friends. That led to a grassroots campaign to get Proposition 215, a measure legalizing the medical use of cannabis, on the California ballot. However, Prop 215 only allowed doctors to recommend that patients and their caregivers grow their own weed. Essentially, it legalized a commodity without legalizing the business side of it. For the next 20 years, a laissez-faire, gray market for medical marijuana flourished and became entrenched. With doctors’ recommendations for medical marijuana easy and cheap to come by, cannabis entrepreneurs practiced a lucrative form of civil disobedience, opening dispensaries, manufacturing edibles and growing acres of plants that brought in enough money to offset intermittent law enforcement crackdowns. The industry developed protocols to get a business back up and running right after a raid, such as keeping cash offsite and obscuring ownership through a series of management companies. If you could withstand the legal uncertainty, it was a good time to make money in marijuana. By 2010, the city of Los Angeles had about 2,000 pot shops illegally selling cannabis. Statewide, the total illicit market surged, causing Mexican cartels to either stop growing weed or to relocate their grows to California. Some municipalities attempted to get this wild west of weed under control by licensing, taxing and regulating local businesses, but many cities and counties were scared off, especially after a court ruled in 2011 that any local government trying to regulate weed was complicit in violating federal law. Other places tried to prosecute and shut down as many dispensaries and grows as possible, only to find that even the most resource-intensive efforts were rarely effective. So by the time California lawmakers actually set about creating licenses and regulations for medical cannabis in 2015, and voters passed an initiative legalizing recreational weed in 2016, much of the industry had become accustomed to operating illicitly and preferred to keep it that way. A vibrant and unregulated marijuana ecosystem was operating in every corner of the most populous state in the country, now the fifth-largest economy in the world – attempting to get it under control was like trying to put toothpaste back in a tube. “It’s complicated, because we had a 20-year history of a quasi-legal, look-the-other-way gray market,” says Adam Spiker, executive director of the Southern California Coalition, a cannabis industry group. “The reality was if someone didn’t get a license, it doesn’t mean they’re gonna stop doing what they do to provide for their families, and that’s what we’ve seen, up and down the state.” The challenges of going legal California’s illicit market is enormous and efficient. This year alone, the state has seized more than 1.2m illegal cannabis plants and more than 180,000lb of processed pot. The illicit market encompasses both well-intentioned entrepreneurs who tried to legalize but couldn’t afford it and cartels with guns, growing pot using harsh chemicals that leach into local groundwater. It comprises both legal-looking storefronts selling unregulated vape pens to Californians and traffickers bringing marijuana to states where sales remain illegal. For a marijuana enterprise today, becoming legal has often meant sacrificing a good deal of profit. Businesses frequently pay an effective tax rate of 70%, in part because they are breaking federal law and therefore aren’t able to take tax deductions, but also because politicians see the industry as a source of tax revenue and set higher rates. “The level of taxation in California has destroyed the legal market,” says Ryan Jennemann, founder and CEO of the cannabis company THC Design. “They’ve priced cannabis out of the market for everybody, and in particular for the people who don’t have money.” One of the most significant promises of California’s legal weed market was that it would serve as a form of reparations, providing “generational wealth” to the Black and brown communities that suffered disproportionately under prohibition. But today there are far more Black and brown people in California who have lost money trying to start and run a pot business than those who are raking it in under the “social equity” programs that were ostensibly designed to help. “Folks are coming in thinking they’re going to sell some weed and make millions, and that is not how it works,” says Amber Senter, an entrepreneur and equity activist in Oakland. Chong, the consultant, agrees. “Running a dispensary is not a million-dollar thing. It’s so not,” she says. “People have such a wrong perception.” Very few people are making money in legal cannabis, says Spiker. “If there’s 10% turning a profit in California, I’d be shocked, and they may not be doing everything on the up and up. They may still be dabbling in the illicit market.” Small businesses are competing with both the illicit market, which offers lower prices and often appears legal to consumers, and corporate firms, which might be backed by private equity, public markets in Canada, or deep-pocketed investors like Jay-Z. “I tried to go legal,” one illicit dispensary owner says, preferring to speak anonymously because he continues to break the law. “Everybody wants to stand up straight in the universe. Nobody wants to be criminalized.” He struggled, he says, with the strict zoning requirements and the steep costs, among other factors. “Nobody could find a building. Nobody could find any money. It was just a bunch of bullcrap.” What comes next? So do California’s struggles spell doom for the broader effort to legalize weed? States including Virginia and Illinois have already legalized adult-use cannabis, while several others are considering it. And while a few places are in better shape than California, several, including Oklahoma, Michigan and Washington, are in similar straits, or will be soon. At a federal level, cannabis legalization remains a low-priority issue. Even though 68% of Americans think weed should be legal, the political will to make it happen simply isn’t there. Cannabis will never feel as urgent as inflation, immigration, or the pandemic. And even if it did, California shows that fixing America’s chaotic approach to the cannabis economy wouldn’t be easy. Legalizing in order to drum up tax revenue seems to only raise the cost of running a cannabis business and therefore the cost of a gram of weed, pushing sellers and consumers back into the illicit market. Local politicians will always fight for the ability to opt out of a legalization measure, but allowing individual cities or counties to make their own decisions about whether to participate in legalization seems only to ensure the survival of those who operate outside it. But the longer we allow cannabis to remain state-legal and federally illegal, the harder it will be to fix. Though botching weed legalization sounds like a trivial issue, it intersects with many of the issues that are fundamental to our lives, from criminal justice to public health, gang violence to economic inequality, the opioid crisis to the wellness craze. Cannabis is the second-most-valuable crop in the country, after corn and ahead of soybeans. It’s the most common reason for arrest in America. And despite marijuana’s dubious reputation, research has shown the plant “may have therapeutic potential in almost all diseases affecting humans”. Legalization remains trapped in a bizarre netherworld of low-priority, high-complexity issues that are unlikely to be resolved anytime soon. Yes, it’s cool that you can legally buy watermelon lemonade weed gummies with consistent dosage at hundreds of stores across California, and yes, it’s great that far fewer people are being arrested for cannabis crimes. But if legalization was supposed to convert California’s marijuana chaos into an orderly, legal, and profitable industry, the first five years have been a failure.Last July, the home secretary, Priti Patel, fired off a triumphant tweet: “We have published a clause to end so-called ‘rough sex defence’ which enables perpetrators to avoid justice by claiming their victims consented to rough sex.” The tweet was the result of rising fury over cases such as that of Natalie Connolly, the 26-year-old mother from Worcestershire, who in 2016 bled to death after sustaining more than 40 injuries, which her partner, John Broadhurst, claimed occurred as part of consensual sex. (His account was believed and he served less than two years for manslaughter.) In 2018, the campaign group We Can’t Consent to This began collating cases and found that uses of the so-called “rough sex” defence increased tenfold between 1996 and 2016 – and in 45% of cases had led to lesser charges of manslaughter rather than murder, or sometimes no charge at all. This weekend, the Sunday Times reported that nine British soldiers made jokes about “choking” a Kenyan mother, Agnes Wanjiru, whose body was found dumped in a septic tank in Nanyuki, Kenya. Following a local police inquiry, a 2019 inquest presided over by a Kenyan judge concluded that one or two British soldiers were responsible for the death, but the MoD took no further action. The subject of Patel’s tweet – section 71 of the Domestic Abuse Act (DAA), which states that a defendant cannot use the defence that the victim “consented to the infliction of the serious harm for the purposes of obtaining sexual gratification” – was going to change all that. Except it has not. Barely a year later, on 7 September, Sam Pybus, from Middleton St George, a village near Darlington in County Durham, was sentenced to just four years and eight months after pleading guilty to the manslaughter of Sophie Moss, a vulnerable mother of two. (He could expect to serve half that; compare this with the sentence this month of Penelope Jackson, 66, who will serve a minimum of 18 years for the murder of her husband, David Jackson, a man she claims was violent and coercively controlling; their daughter had seen him holding a knife to her mother’s throat.) At Pybus’s sentencing hearing, the court heard that, late on a Saturday night last February, after drinking 24 bottles of Amstel lager, he left the home he shared with his wife, Louise Howitt (who was sleeping upstairs), and drove to Moss’s home in Darlington. Although Pybus claimed to recall little of what happened, Moss died after “sustained pressure” to her neck, something Pybus claimed Moss “enjoyed and encouraged” during sex. According to his account, Pybus awoke in the early hours to find his hands were hurting and Moss unresponsive beside him. Rather than administering first aid or dialling 999, he got dressed, left the flat and sat in his car for 15 minutes, deciding what to do. Then he drove to the police station to give his story. His lenient sentence has sparked another outcry – and been referred to the court of appeal by the attorney general. The case is currently expected to be heard on 12 November. So what went wrong? Harriet Wistrich, the director of the Centre for Women’s Justice, who has spent decades fighting discrimination in the justice system around male violence against women, admits that even she was surprised by the Pybus case, occurring so soon after the new clause was enacted. “I think it’s an embarrassment to the government that, having passed this law, heralded as a new intervention, you get the same outcome,” she says. “In a sense, though, the DAA amendment did little more than codify what had already been determined. The legal principle that a person cannot legally consent to being injured or killed was already established. The amendment doesn’t outlaw ‘rough sex’ as a defence.” In cases like Pybus’s, Broadhurst’s or any other so-called “sex game gone wrong”, the critical issue is not the victim’s consent – it is the defendant’s intent. And the judge in Pybus’s case accepted that he did not intend to kill. A murder charge requires proof beyond reasonable doubt that someone intended to cause serious harm or death – and a statement from the Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) North East claimed that, with Pybus, the evidence for this was insufficient. “For me, the most concerning thing is, first, the way the case was investigated,” says Wistrich. “Was it with a view to determine whether Pybus was dangerous and a risk to women, or was it a search for evidence to stand up his story? Second, the readiness with which the CPS seemed to accept that evidence, instead of putting it to a jury, is impossible for me to understand. Third, the length of the sentence just seems so inappropriate.” Some of those closest to the case agree. Howitt, Pybus’s estranged wife, and Daniel Parkington, Moss’s former partner and the father of her children, have been shocked by how quickly and easily Pybus’s narrative slipped through. “The police told me at the very start that the charge would probably be downgraded to manslaughter,” says Parkington. “It always felt like they were accepting the easy option. If it’s tricky to take this person to court for murder and let a jury decide, you get the sense that they’d rather accept a guilty plea to manslaughter and go for the slam dunk, the tick in the box. Move on. Next case.” Parkington, 39, who works for his family’s telecom business, lives 10 miles from Darlington with the boys, aged five and six, he fathered with Moss. He met Moss nine years ago when she worked in a stable yard and as a personal trainer in the local gym. “She was a hardworking girl with so much charm and charisma,” he says. “When Sophie entered a room, you knew she was there. I first introduced her to my family at my mum’s 60th birthday dinner. They were amazed by how perfect she was. And she was perfect.” The couple moved to a tiny cottage in the village of Bolton-on-Swale, North Yorkshire, before relocating to Darlington just before their first son was born. After six years, they separated – Parkington says Moss’s deteriorating mental health and alcohol dependence were factors, although he stresses that he carries much of the blame. It was, he says, in the boys’ best interests that the couple lived apart. Parkington had custody, but Moss remained central to all their lives. She would meet them at the school gates most mornings to see the boys into school. They would FaceTime every evening. They stayed with her on a weekly basis. Parkington would bring food to Moss at her flat and order her takeaways to make sure she was eating – two months before she was killed, she was seriously ill in hospital with liver and kidney infections. There was no doubt that Moss was extremely vulnerable to abuse. Parkington says he had witnessed one male visitor arrive at her flat at 9am with two bottles of wine. He had seen another – a local solicitor – bring wine in his lunch hour. “I used to tell Sophie’s friends that, if we didn’t stop this, one day she’ll turn round and say: ‘I’m not in the mood,’ and some man is going to kill her.” There were also, he says, high value items going missing from her flat, and money disappearing from her account on a monthly basis. (Parkington is convinced that CCTV footage at her local cash machine would confirm that someone else was using her card.) On the night Moss was killed – before Pybus had arrived at her flat – she had texted Parkington and asked him to order a taxi to take her to hospital, as her ankles were swollen and she was struggling to walk. Unfortunately, Parkington was already asleep and did not see it until the morning. He refuses to accept that, just hours after texting him, Moss died by accident as a result of consensual choking. Parkington says: “When the police told me, I immediately said: ‘No way.’ She didn’t enjoy that type of thing. I knew Sophie better than anybody. She had the lowest pain threshold of anyone I’ve ever known. Sophie’s long-term boyfriend told the police the same thing. But the police accepted the account of Pybus and another unidentified person who used to visit her, who was not put in front of a jury to decide whether he was credible. All the judge heard were good character references for Pybus, and his terrible remorse.” Howitt, a teacher studying for a PhD in linguistics, agrees that the investigation did not delve deeply. When the police arrived at her house on the Sunday morning, their first question was: “‘Did Sam ever strangle you in bed?’ It seemed like they took his narrative then looked for evidence to support it,” she says. “They were concentrating so much on: ‘What did he do?’ and: ‘How did he do it?’ The truth is that, yes, there were things he did to me when I was young and a bit naive and at the time I thought: ‘This is what people do.’ But it’s really important that there were never any conversations about it first. Sam never, ever asked before he did it. “The police didn’t dig any deeper about our marriage,” continues Howitt. She claims that Pybus had got the couple into £10,000 of debt due to reckless spending and payday loans. At one point, she had discovered he was texting numerous local women and sleeping with Moss, but whenever she tried to leave, Pybus would break down and threaten to kill himself. “He was so good at manipulating you and making you feel sorry for him,” she says. “If they’d really looked into Sam’s history with women, they would have found abuse, sexual violence and just a complete lack of respect.” (Another former partner wrote on Facebook when the case became news: “I’m just gonna put this out there before all the messages flood in. Yes, this is THAT Sam … I just hope that now nearly 10 years later those people who didn’t believe my words as a young 19-year-old girl or judged me without knowing both sides now know what this boy is capable of.”) Once the police had confirmed that Pybus had practised strangulation during sex in the past, and once the CPS had accepted his manslaughter plea, there was still scope for a lengthier sentence. Much depended on the judge’s decision around Pybus’s culpability, which can range from very high to low. According to sentencing guidelines, high culpability includes cases where death resulted from “an unlawful act which carried a high risk of death or GBH which was or ought to be obvious to the offender”. This carries a sentence range of between eight and 16 years. Instead, Pybus seems to have been deemed to have had medium culpability, which carries a sentence range of three to nine years. On top of this would be a reduction for a guilty plea, and possible mitigating factors such as remorse and good character. (It seems an injustice that use of a weapon is an aggravating factor when it comes to sentencing, whereas strangulation, the second most common method of femicide, is not.) Fiona Mackenzie, the founder of We Can’t Consent to This, has found the case hugely disappointing. “What’s so upsetting, right after the new amendment, is that it’s immediately been demonstrated that police are not getting it, the CPS are not getting it and the judge did not get it,” she says. “So what is the government going to do? Do we need more training? New guidelines for prosecution or sentencing?” In the meantime, she hopes the impending appeal will increase Pybus’s sentence. Wistrich, along with We Can’t Consent to This, is exploring the possibility of bringing a third-party intervention to the appeal, to introduce additional points for consideration from witnesses including Howitt, who remains adamant that justice was not served. “Sam has written from prison,” she says. “His letters are infuriating – all about making me feel sorry for him. He says he’s so depressed, he has nothing in common with the other prisoners. Not once has he ever said he was sorry for killing Sophie or taking her away from her children.” Moss’s sons still call for their mum when they fall or hurt themselves. When Moss was killed, the UK was in lockdown, so, at home in his little bubble, Parkington put off telling his boys for several weeks. It was only when schools were reopening that he told them their mummy had been in hospital again and this time doctors couldn’t save her. Sophie loved cats – she had four when she died, three of them rescues. The boys have taken one each. “They love them and I’m sure it keeps their memories of their mummy more recent,” says Parkington. “We can’t kid ourselves, though. There’s Google. They only need to type in their mum’s name and all this will be there – and by the time that happens, the man who killed her could be out and free. “It consumes me. I think about it every minute of every day. It makes me so, so angry and that anger isn’t all at him. A lot of it is to do with these people in powerful positions who make decisions that just aren’t right. No sentence would be long enough in my mind, but how can this one ever be seen as fair? If the appeal isn’t successful, then I just lose all faith. Surely there have got to be some good people out there.” • This article was amended on 3 November 2021. Sam Pybus did not stand trial, as a previous version suggested, because he pleaded guilty to the manslaughter of Sophie Moss.Headspace Sleepcasts The recent boom in “sleep podcasts” encompasses a range of aims: some provide short-term relief each night, while others help build a bedtime routine. The Headspace app, which aims to make mindfulness techniques habitual through bite-size lessons, extends that mission into the bedroom with its Sleepcasts. The 45- to 55-minute “audio journey” begins with a meditation or breathing exercise to wind down, before sending you to sleep with an audio tour through a soothing scene. In the episode I tried, it was a gallery where all the paintings were blue. The seven-part Headspace Guide to Sleep video series might strike a compromise for those struggling with the first rule of good sleep hygiene: no screens. Sleep With Me Drew Ackerman came up with the concept for Sleep With Me after finding, at parties, that the people he was chatting to often seemed eager to excuse themselves to go to the bathroom. Having struggled with insomnia since childhood, and finding most “sleep solutions” to be off-puttingly po-faced, Ackerman decided to use his talent for boring people to help them drift off. Now millions seek out his company, with Sleep With Me celebrating its eighth anniversary this month. Speaking as the affable, absentminded “Dearest Scooter” (and after a short preamble, including ads), Ackerman tells a circular and confused story that you will never hear the end of. He is so good at what he does, he can even make Game of Thrones lower the pulse, recapping episodes in his spin-off pod Game of Drones. Slow Radio, BBC Radio 3 Finding out what works for you requires experimentation: one person’s bedtime wind-down might be counterproductive for another, as evidenced by the large (one might say, perturbing) number of people who choose to drift off to violent stories of true crime. Even some designated sleep aids can be more unsettling than soothing (like Sleep Whispers, where a man mutters about baked trout or Stonehenge). If you find any words intrusive, BBC Radio 3’s Slow Radio series creates soundscapes to lull you to sleep. Billed as an “antidote to today’s frenzied world”, the 30-minute episodes combine music with field recordings from the natural world, from crashing waves to the crunch of gravel underfoot. And with the monthly “Sounds of the Earth” compilation, you can travel the globe from your bed. Boring Books for Bedtime This weekly ad-free podcast brings together the relaxing effect of reading before bed with material where you won’t mind losing your place. Host Sharon Handy (creator of the Great British Bake Off podcast Gin and Cake) calmly and quietly reads from a “not-at-all-riveting” book available in the public domain. Most are nonfiction works from the turn of the century, and range from the esoteric – such as Ernest Ingersoll’s “early history of boats” The Book of the Ocean, published in 1898 – to classic titles you might have always intended to read, like Aurelius’s Meditations. If you learn something before you fall asleep mid-sentence, well, that’s just a bonus. (And yes, listening to a book definitely counts as having read it.) Goodnight, World! One does not simply “put on a podcast” to send kids off to sleep, my friend with a three-year-old tells me sternly: for little ones, any stimulus around bedtime needs to be carefully vetted and deployed. Goodnight, World! gets an immediate thumbs up from him. A partnership between Headspace and Sesame Street (and featuring some of its familiar faces), the podcast helps children wind down and transition into restful sleep, while easing the challenges for parents. My friend was impressed that it struck the balance between a bedtime story and a sleep aid, despite being only 20 minutes long, and singled out the palpable care put into production. The real measure of success? His son was asleep by the time it finished.With this small-town gothic murder mystery director and co-writer Lauren Fash overdoes it with the missing-kid tropes: a grieving mom fighting for the truth; police corruption; buried secrets; a powerful family controlling the town; rusting pickup trucks; mean dudes with mullets. But there is just about enough psychological complexity in the mix in the shape of the central character Charlie, a gay woman winded by the disappearance of her eight-year-old daughter Lily. Charlie marches about town stapling missing posters to lamp-posts in the midst of an emotional breakdown or maybe even a psychotic episode – hallucinating, seeing her daughter in dark corners. Set in Georgia in the 1990s, the film opens a year after Lily vanishes. Tough but vulnerable Charlie is played beautifully by character actor Robyn Lively (half-sister of Blake) with a riveting less-is-more stillness. The local sheriff (Stan Houston) is ignoring her. Her partner Angela (Bethany Anne Lind) has walked out; homophobia already put a strain on their relationship. When another local girl disappears, for reasons that remain foggy to me, Charlie is the prime suspect. The latest missing girl is the daughter of a whiskey heir Chip Carmichael (Michael Trucco) – he’s a toxic mix of mommy’s boy and tree-trunk-necked neanderthal. The twists and turns of the case, familiar from a dozen past thrillers, are mostly easy to predict. Instead, the script depends on a big character reveal that just about works if you don’t think about it too hard or too long. There’s another outstanding performance too, from Shameless’s Shanola Hampton, as ambitious young TV journalist Amy, who wheedles Charlie into partnering up with her. A black female reporter, Amy is also an outsider and the two women give the movie a satisfying emotional core, even if the storyline is a bit of a letdown. I also felt the denouement fetishised abuse, just a little. • Disappearance at Lake Elrod is released on 1 November on digital platforms.It is Thursday morning at Home Park and, as the Plymouth manager Ryan Lowe says, there is no time to waste. Training starts across the way in nine minutes. His squad are preparing to face Ipswich before a bumper crowd of 16,087, their biggest for a league game since 2008. Perched above a tree-lined slope the performance analyst, Jimmy Dickinson, is filming the session. The pitches, spread over two tiers, are immaculate – perfect for their slick style – and the ball zips across the surface during a passing drill. Then comes some unit work, while rainbow-coloured corner flags flutter in the breeze. Lowe, a former Shrewsbury and Bury striker, moonlights as a defender as he takes the forwards for a shooting exercise while his assistant, Steven Schumacher, takes the midfielders. Adam Randell, a 21-year-old academy graduate, is practising pinging balls forward from a pivot position, until now home to the suspended Jordan Houghton. Two days later Randell is man of the match on his full league debut as Plymouth win to stay top of League One and extend their unbeaten streak to 15 league matches. The Pilgrims are not getting carried away but their progress is impossible to ignore. Eight years ago they avoided relegation to non-league on the final day and they finished 18th in the third tier last season. They have revamped their defence – only Swindon and Oldham conceded more goals in the top four tiers last season – and grown wedded to an attacking 3-5-2. “We try and play the formation no matter who we are playing against,” says the defender James Wilson, one of 10 summer signings. Recruitment is key. Plymouth work with Mrkt Insights, a data analytics company, to identify potential signings. “I liaise with them pretty much on a day-to-day basis,” says the director of football, Neil Dewsnip, pointing out they still have “foot soldiers” taking in games. “The data is a support mechanism – it is not the holy grail. The signoff is still very much at the end of a discussion between myself, Ryan and Andrew Parkinson, the CEO.” Dewsnip, who previously worked with England and Everton, has known Schumacher since the age of eight. “I was his first coach at Everton,” he says. “I was still a PE teacher in those days and he came to my school as well, so he got it both barrels. He’d always said: ‘When I start to coach, would you help me, would you mentor me?’ We’re living that, really.” It explains why Schumacher and Lowe refer to Dewsnip, who also counts Steven Gerrard and the Oxford manager, Karl Robinson, among his former pupils, as “Mr D”. “I think Steven is still a little bit apprehensive about calling me by my first name because I would have challenged him as a young player over the years,” he says, laughing. “It is a term of endearment, I think.” Dewsnip’s contacts have enabled him to organise Zoom calls between Plymouth’s coaching staff and Gareth Southgate, Steve Holland and Anthony Barry, Chelsea’s first-team coach. Lowe, meanwhile, counts Gerrard as a longtime friend. Dewsnip, who is based in Cheshire, sometimes crashes at Lowe’s apartment in Plymouth and speaks with the manager “hourly, I think”. The day before a game, Dewsnip is on the grass at training. “Most technical directors or sporting directors are doing it from a recruitment point of view. I’m not so sure there is anybody else in my role that actually gets on the field and supports the manager and assistant manager in terms of the gameplan, the discussions we have about how to win games and so on.” Last weekend marked a decade since the club came out of administration and a handful of staff remain, including the kit manager, Neil Lunnon. Over the years Lunnon has seen various superstitions, including a striker who bought a pair of boots every time he went a couple of games without scoring, and a midfielder who requested Lunnon lug a pot of black pepper with him home and away. “Every game I would sprinkle it into his boots,” Lunnon says. The bloody noses Plymouth have given Sheffield Wednesday, whom they face in the FA Cup first round on Sunday, and Ipswich are even more impressive given they are working with a bottom-half budget. Sustainability is not just a buzzword at Argyle, who – with the caveats of receiving a £2.5m business interruption insurance payout in case of “communicable disease” and government support via the furlough scheme – posted a £376,000 profit despite playing almost all of last season behind closed doors. “You have clubs who chase the dream and probably overstep that and on the other hand you go to a situation where if you don’t spend the right amount of money, are you really competitive?” Parkinson says. “The answer is somewhere in the middle. We’re doing well on the pitch and off it.” Plymouth were one of the first clubs to hand use of their stadium to the NHS at the beginning of the pandemic and although the Captain’s Lounge in the revamped Mayflower Stand is still a vaccine centre, these days the main reason supporters are coming in their droves is to drink in what is happening on the field. A decade on from those struggles at the foot of League Two, those dark days are a distant memory. “The club is well structured, we’re in a better financial position,” Lowe smiles. “It is run better than it ever has been – and the football’s going OK as well.”I am a woman in America who can bear children, and this means that there are powerful people coming for me, with detailed and strategic plans to control my body. Sounds dramatic, doesn’t it? It is dramatic, more so because it’s a straight-up fact. In 2021, state legislatures enacted more abortion restrictions than in any previous year, according to an analysis by the Guttmacher Institute, a research and policy body dedicated to advancing reproductive rights. Last month’s decision by the supreme court to refuse to block a Texas law all but banning abortion signals that the court could well be on the way to overturn Roe v Wade, and soon. National legalized abortion is just one part of this. Reproductive justice advocates as far back as 1994 understood that when women don’t have access to abortion it generally means that we don’t have access to a whole host of other rights: affordable contraceptives, comprehensive sex education, pre-natal care, even screening and treatment for a variety of diseases including cancer and HIV. This is an overall form of oppression, and I know what’s happening. I also fear I know what’s coming. I live in New York City, I am financially stable and I am white. These factors, as well as legal protections in New York, mean that I get to live a life free from coercion, with access to contraception, to reproductive healthcare, to a medical abortion if I need one. I don’t take this for granted, because this reality is worlds away from where I grew up – in Ireland, a country that only legalised abortion in 2018. Here in the US, back in 1973, the supreme court affirmed the legality of a woman’s right to have an abortion under the 14th amendment to the constitution. Living in this far from perfect nation, I still have the right to make choices about my own health and future, meaning a life with more dignity and autonomy than I had growing up, and that is an extraordinary thing. But even if I don’t yet feel it, the threat of losing this hard-won freedom is all around me. In the words of Alexis McGill Johnson, president and chief executive of the Planned Parenthood Federation of America, “The moment is dark … No matter where you live, no matter where you are, this fight is at your doorstep right now.” McGill Johnson was speaking on 2 October, as women across the country organized through the Women’s March protested against the US supreme court’s refusal to block the Texas legislation. Talk about being up against it: Donald Trump appointed three conservative justices, meaning that the court now has an anti-abortion majority and reproductive justice hangs in the balance. That is why on 4 October, Emma Whittman, a 22-year-old public health student from Arizona sat in the road, blocking traffic outside the supreme court in Washington DC. She was arrested for civil disobedience. “I’m not from Texas, but I feel like I’m fighting for people in Texas,” she told me, as well as people “in all of these other states that will probably get abortion bans, and will be impacted when Roe v Wade is overturned. I feel like I’m fighting for all women around the country.” It was Whittman’s first arrest and the experience of being searched and held by the police was scary. Concerns about how an arrest and a potential criminal record may affect her future career worried her too. But Whittman was not alone. Her mother, an OB/GYN from Tucson, was there too, reassuring her daughter as she was zip-tied, telling her that she loved her and was proud of her. Women take care of each other. We always have. In Ireland, in the darkest and most oppressive times, when our reproductive rights and our health were out of our hands, we did what we could to make each other safe. In 1980 Irish women could not get condoms, divorce was illegal and abortion was shameful, illegal and dangerous. In 2018, after a compassionate but fierce campaign, almost two of every three Irish people voted to legalize abortion. Today in the US, the moment is indeed dark, and there are darker times ahead. Women, as ever, are fighting against that. Professor Terry McGovern, chair of the department of population and family health at the Columbia University medical center, was also arrested outside the supreme court that day. She points out that Texas already has a severe maternal mortality crisis with a disproportionate effect on Black women. “They’re not taking care of women and children,” she told me. “They have the worst health outcomes. And then they’re focusing on restricting women and girls and people’s bodily autonomy?” That is why she showed up on the steps of the supreme court, and that is why she will continue to fight. “It has absolutely always been true in history that when a law is as thoroughly amoral as this one, and it will be when they overturn Roe, that we have to do whatever we need to do to protect people’s health.” Maeve Higgins is a comedian and the author of Maeve in America: Essays by a Girl from Somewhere ElseThink Democrats have it tough now, trying to keep a precarious US Senate majority in tune on a trillion-dollar-plus budget reconciliation package without a single vote to spare? Just wait. These days of 50 Democratic senators may soon look like glory days. Democrats are staring down an ugly reality in the US Senate: the historical malapportionment of the upper chamber, which awards two members to every state, even though Wyoming’s population is not only 68 times smaller than California’s but smaller than 115 counties nationwide, already places the party at a disadvantage. This edge has only become more prominent due to polarization and population patterns, and will collide next with a challenging map in 2022 and an even harder one in 2024. It’s a problem so intractable that it makes even partisan gerrymandering seem like child’s play. Demographic change won’t help, either. Democrats are simply packed into fewer states. According to a 2020 Data for Progress study, that hands Republicans a three-percentage-point advantage. The nation has grown more multiracial and less white, according to 2020 census data, a trend which should, on balance, favor Democrats. But while the “emerging Democratic majority” is happening on paper, it has been structurally blocked from achieving political power. The white, non-college-educated voters that make up the largest part of the Republican coalition are shrinking in numbers nationwide, but they’re better distributed; those rural and less-educated voters still hold a dominant position in enough small states to claim a decisive grip over the Senate. Maybe 130,000 New York hipsters can be persuaded to move from Jackson Heights, Queens, to Jackson Hole, Wyoming. It might be the best investment any liberal billionaire could make, since this is a political problem for Democrats but also a crisis for democracy without any easy solutions. The political analyst and pollster David Shor suggests that even if Democrats deliver “a startling performance” in 2022, defeat Republicans by four percentage points and surmount the losses that a governing party historically faces in the midterms, “they have about a 50-50 chance of holding the majority”. Win a more slender majority, says Shor – say 51% – and “they’ll likely lose a seat – and the Senate”. This isn’t a new development, of course: the structure of the Senate has been inegalitarian since our founding, and the nation’s political geography has provided the Republican party with a baked-in edge for decades. But contemporary partisan trends have exacerbated it. The Republican party held the US Senate between 1994 and 2006, and again from 2014 through 2020. However, according to research by Stephen Wolf of Daily Kos, Republican senators actually represented a majority of Americans during just one electoral cycle over those decades, in 1996-97. (Right now, the 50 Democratic senators represent 41 million more Americans than the 50 Republicans.) Wolf added up every vote cast for Democratic and Republican Senate candidates over this period, and calculated the total over every six-year period in order to determine which party had more support over the period of any given Senate term. Only during a small window over those three decades – covering Senate elections from 1994 through 1998 – did Republicans ever capture that three-cycle aggregate vote representing every ballot cast for all 100 senators. The trendline for Democrats does not look to be improving. The 2020 census showed that more than half of the 330 million Americans live in just nine states. That means upwards of 50% of us have 18 US senators, while the smaller half has the other 82. (By 2040, according to a University of Virginia forecast, half of the nation could live in only eight states, with just 16 senators.) Let’s break that down even further. Two-thirds of all Americans – some 219,073,534 of us, to be exact – live in the largest 15 states, according to census data. They’re represented by 30 senators – 22 Democrats and eight Republicans. The other third? They have 70 senators. These smaller states aren’t only whiter than the nation at large, they tilt decisively to the Republican party, represented by 42 Republicans and 28 Democrats. That’s more than enough to filibuster any legislation that cannot be passed through the reconciliation process – including voting rights – effectively granting veto power over even popular proposals to a tiny minority of voters from the smallest and whitest states. (As the Maine senator Angus King noted on the Senate floor last week, 41 senators representing just 24% of Americans can block legislation with the filibuster.) The Democrats’ future looks even bleaker when you graft that geographic reality on to a deeply polarized nation with more red-leaning states than blue, and voters increasingly less likely to split their ballots between a presidential candidate of one party and a US Senate hopeful from another. The Senate has become as sorted as the rest of the nation. Should the Senate represent states, or the American people? Should one-third of the nation retain the power to block legislation favored by large majorities? What does it mean to hold the consent of the governed when Democratic candidates for the US Senate – but also the US House and the White House – must win by large majorities to have a chance at holding more seats or electors, but Republicans can capture both chambers with fewer votes? In a moment in which we are focused on racial equity, how can we hand bonus representation to smaller, whiter states, ensuring that the Senate leans toward the interest of white voters on any issue where whites and communities of color diverge? And what does it hold for the legitimacy of the supreme court when five of nine conservatives have been selected by presidents that lost the popular vote, then confirmed by senators that represent a minority of Americans? There is no equality in a system so wildly malapportioned. A Congress designed 240 years ago to guard against a tyranny of the majority now ensures that a white majority in a changing nation maintains veto power simply by virtue of the smaller states where they live. Perhaps that has been the point of the Senate from the beginning. More than 25 years ago, in 1995, the former senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan observed that “sometime in the next century, the United States is going to have to address the question of apportionment in the Senate.” We’ve arrived at that moment. Now what? One solution would require Republicans conceding their advantage in the interest of representational fairness and broadening their appeal to voters in a multiracial nation. The other requires Democrats to broaden their appeal and win elections in states turning decisively the other direction, then using that power to add states or make otherwise bold reform. At this moment, as Republicans cement an enduring minority rule through gerrymandering, geography and the courts, and Democrats appear unable or unwilling to muster any meaningful response, both options feel equally unlikely. David Daley is the author of Ratf**ked: Why Your Vote Doesn’t Count and Unrigged: How Americans Are Battling Back to Save DemocracyShares in the Hut Group hit an all-time low on Tuesday after it emerged that BlackRock was halving its stake in the online retailer after a rocky month for the company. BlackRock, its largest institutional shareholder, is selling 58m shares priced at 195p each, or a 10.3% discount to the stock’s Monday close, according to bookrunner Goldman Sachs. The deal is valued at £113.1m. The world’s biggest fund manager had a 10.1% stake, or nearly 124m shares, in mid-October according to Refinitiv data. Shares in the Manchester-based THG, which runs websites including Lookfantastic and Cult Beauty, fell 9% to a record low of 197p on Tuesday, far below the flotation price of 500p in September 2020. The shares soared to nearly 800p at the start of the year but have slumped in recent months because of concerns about the firm’s governance and the future of the business, after it flagged last week that profit margins would be squeezed by currency changes. Analysts have also pointed to a slowdown in growth at its core beauty division. “For a while THG was a stock market darling with investors clambering to own the stock in the belief it would play a key role in helping product manufacturers sell direct to consumers. Now it is losing fans at an incredibly rapid rate,” said Russ Mould, the investment director at the stockbroker AJ Bell. “Asset managers rarely sell after a stock has already fallen so much unless they’ve lost all confidence in the business and/or found something that completely changes the investment case. The backlash against THG seems to centre on the fact that people bought into the hype without paying attention to valuation. “Now that difficult questions are being asked about costs and more, particularly if the business is broken up into three as per the suggestion from THG, investors aren’t getting the answers they want – or they are not liking what they see.” The company, which is run by its co-founder and biggest shareholder, Matt Moulding, has tried to calm investor nerves by hiring the headhunter Russell Reynolds to search for a new non-executive chair. Moulding is currently executive chairman and chief executive, which is against best practice according to the corporate governance code. THG said the appointment of a new chair would help it prepare for a premium listing on the main London Stock Exchange. It currently has a standard listing. Last week THG also appointed an executive from its Japanese backer SoftBank, Andreas Hansson, as a non-executive director to its board, to dispel any doubts about its relationship with SoftBank, which invested $730m (£530m) in THG this year.Researching outfits for the Netflix western The Harder They Fall, the costume designer Antoinette Messam got a history lesson in the process. The film’s story is fictional, but it draws on the real-life black cowboys of the west, including Nat Love, Bill Pickett, Rufus Buck and characters such as Stagecoach Mary, who delivered mail across the US, protecting it from bandits with a shotgun. It is now thought that one in four cowboys were black, but this reality has been whitewashed from history. “I literally had to buy this book, The Black West,” says Messam. It contained images of these people for her to pore over. “They all had their own individual style,” she says. “So, when it came to my cast, it was really, really important that I differentiate everyone so they’re not a cookie-cutter, stereotypical cowboy, you know?” Directed by Jeymes Samuel and produced by Jay-Z, the film features Regina King, Zazie Beetz, Idris Elba, Lakeith Stanfield, Delroy Lindo and Jonathan Majors. Their costumes showcase Messam’s research skills. Love, played by Majors, wears jeans. Messam says the original appeal was the indigo colour, “but I when I started doing my research, I was shocked to know that denim as I show it existed far before my timeline, from the 1850s. I was like: ‘My shit is accurate, you guys.’” Stagecoach Mary, played by Beetz, is reimagined as a former gang member who owns saloons. She wears a corseted dress that multitasks. “When we first see her, it’s important to show her in the attire of a saloon,” says Messam. “Then, when we see her again, she’s dressed to go out on the plains … her dress is split, so that she can straddle a horse, not sit side-saddle, which was common at the time.” Details like this are crucial for Messam. Most viewers will notice King’s frilled blouse, Stanfield’s neckerchief or Elba’s red velvet jacket, but look closer and you will see the different cultural influences that people such as Love and Buck would have absorbed. “It was important for me to use references from all over the world,” says Messam. “Spanish references, Mexican references, indigenous references. Mary wears a lot of silver and turquoise, and they were influenced by the vaqueros, Mexican cowboys.” Cuffee, played by Danielle Deadwyler, is a gender-non-conforming character who provides the muscle on the door of Stagecoach Mary’s saloon. “In doing my research and coming across a woman who dressed non-binary, as we would call it now, it looked to me like it was mostly for practical reasons,” says Messam. Cuffee is clearly more comfortable in a man’s suit than a skirt. “To be taken seriously, that’s what worked for her,” says Messam. “If she was going to knock somebody out, it was better that she was wearing pants and a jacket.” While modern viewers might assume that the clothing in The Harder They Fall would conform to gender norms, Messam says the era was more varied in reality – especially in the wild west. This is evident in her costumes. “It’s hard to see some of them in the saloon, but there was a woman in hats and pants alongside the ladies of the night,” she says. The Harder They Fall comes out at a time when western style is enjoying a moment, with black Americans in the public eye showcasing the look. At the film’s premiere, Taraji P Henson wore a stetson, while others donned cowboy boots. This follows Beyoncé in chaps, Lil Nas X in a cowboy hat and the Yee-Haw Agenda, a website and Instagram account that works as an archive of imagery. Is this about rediscovering style heritage lost to history? “Well, there’s that – and there’s also the fact that people are becoming aware of the cowboy culture that exists now,” Messam says. She references Elba’s film, Concrete Cowboy, which is based on a real-life black cowboy community in Philadelphia, and a community she visited in California. “Doing this film, they brought in cowboys from across the country to ride the horses,” she says. “I got to know some of them. They’re so cool.” The Harder They Fall is on Netflix from 3 NovemberSudan has been hit by a severe cash shortage as most banks and cash machines remain closed one week after a military coup prompted a nationwide strike by bankers. About 90% of bankers were taking part in a civil disobedience campaign, said Ibrahim Abdel-Raheem, who works at the Workers National Bank in Sudan’s capital, Khartoum. “We knew that going on strike as bankers would cripple the economy,” he said. “Banks are the backbone of the economy.” The Sudanese Bankers Association has said it will stage protests in front of banks across the country on Tuesday and Thursday in a “revolutionary escalation” of its campaign. Abdel-Raheem said the action has affected him personally. “I had to give up many things,” he said. “I don’t even have one pound in my pocket. I am only buying the very basic things, because I have no cash.” Yassir Binawai, a 46-year-old who works in the mining industry in northern Sudan, said that he had to borrow money from his employer’s canteen to buy food. “It’s been so difficult to manage with the cash shortage,” he said. “But we will not give up despite all the struggles.” Cash still dominates the Sudanese economy due to a lack of ATM infrastructure. Western Union suspended its operations last week, making access to money harder. Salah Mamoun, from Omdurman, said he relied on friends who worked in the money exchange industry to get hold of cash. “There’s no money in the market,” he said. Commodity prices have fluctuated wildly in recent weeks, making financial planning hard for ordinary people. A shop owner in Khartoum who declined to give his name said he had been forced to borrow money from a neighbour and that his family was struggling. “There’s a recession, nobody buys things from our shop” he said. “My wife has money in her bank account [but] withdrawing it is an issue because the ATMs are empty.” On 25 October, Sudan’s top general, Abdel Fattah al-Burhan, dissolved the cabinet as well as the ruling joint military-civilian Sovereign Council, which had been heading Sudan’s transition towards full civilian rule after the 2019 overthrow of the autocratic president Omar al-Bashir. In a move widely condemned internationally, Burhan declared a state of emergency and detained Sudan’s civilian leadership, including the prime minister, Abdalla Hamdok, and members of his government. The US special envoy for the Horn of Africa, Jeffrey Feltman, arrived in Khartoum on Tuesday to try to defuse the crisis. Feltman accused Burhan of acting in bad faith by staging the coup hours after holding face-to-face discussions with him in Khartoum, in which he gave no hint of his plan to seize power. The US has paused $700m in debt relief and aid and urged potential allies of the Sudanese military – Russia and the United Arab Emirates – not to back the coup. “We are in with a number of nations, including the UAE, to restore the civilian [government] in Sudan,” Feltman said. Feltman urged the military to restore the ousted civilian government, release all prisoners including Hamdok, who is currently under house arrest, as well as to allow medical assistance to reach injured demonstrators without interference. “To the freedom-loving Sudanese and to those who would seek to rob them of their democratic ambitions, I say: ‘The world is watching and the Sudanese people have made it clear they will not accept a military attempt to sideline their hard fought democratic transition.’” Feltman also questioned Burhan’s bona fides. “For all his statements supporting the constitutional declaration of 2019 and their desire for elections, his actions have done the opposite, undermined the civilian military partnership and hijacked the type of transition that the military and civilians had agreed,” he said. Agence France-Presse contributed to this reportAs I travelled on the train to Glasgow for Cop26 a few days ago, I felt the enormous power of my people and my ancestors around me. I am a Samoan, from one of the regions most threatened by climate breakdown, despite contributing little to emissions. I am at the climate summit to represent the voices of our communities, and of those who could not travel here due to Covid-19 and continuing vaccine apartheid. I bring with me the voices of a Pacific that refuses to give up. Time is fast running out for my islands, and we will accept no more excuses or failures from world leaders. We know they’re not doing enough – the most recent scientific report by the IPCC has shown us that. Cop26 must deliver concrete solutions urgently, and we are here to force them to act. On Monday, I told world leaders at the start of the summit “to remember that your meeting rooms and drafting documents are not just black and white objects; to remember that, in your words, you wield the weapons that can save us or sell us out for profit and power”. All that talking could have a real impact across the world. Will the negotiators in Glasgow have the political will to do the right thing, to use the right words and follow them up with long overdue action? If not, then we have to keep fighting. As a Pacific islander, one key part of my history is the canoe. And you can think of the climate talks as a compass for a journey, indicating directions in the form of ambitious goals and detailed plans that would guide our canoe to safety. The compass is helpful, but we’re not dependent on it. My ancestors didn’t use compasses to navigate the ocean, and if the summit in Glasgow fails then we, the people, can move the canoe to safety by pushing those in power towards a real course of action. For hundreds of years my people have been resilient. We fought back against our colonisers and we have made them change. As the rest of the world begins to suffer from the climate emergency as we Pacific islanders already are, we can teach you how to fight back like us. From the moment the US, Germany and Britain began trying to colonise Samoa, they tried to strip us of our culture. In some sense the colonisers recognised that our knowledge, our beliefs and our way of doing things were where we draw mana – our power – from. That’s why one of the main things we want to say with the Youth4Pacific declaration that we’re bringing to Cop26 is that indigenous knowledge must be respected as a form of climate science. We fought against the colonisers who tried to burn down our culture and achieved our independence. But now we’re living through a different revolution: we’re resisting climate colonialism, where rich dirty corporations profit from our destruction. For a decade now, the storms in the Pacific have been getting more violent, the droughts have been longer and the floods deeper. Fishers cannot feed their families. Family-owned shops that are flattened in a cyclone are rebuilt, only to be destroyed by rising water. All these fights are connected. The climate crisis and social inequities are all symptoms of a world shaped by colonialism and then by capitalism, both of them ways of organising society that value the comfort of one group over the lives of another. We know that if one part of a canoe is damaged, the whole thing sinks. What is happening now to the Pacific islands is a warning to the rest of the world. We can show you what is coming, but we can also show you how to survive it. Our resilience means we adapt. When there are hardly any fish, our boats take the risk and go further out. When the winds destroy homes and businesses, the village stops what it’s doing and gets together to fix everything. But we cannot go on like this, allowing the climate crisis to make our islands uninhabitable. The declaration we’re bringing to Cop26 says that we refuse to leave our islands. Forcing an entire people to migrate so the world’s super-rich can continue burning oil and coal is not a solution. And if world leaders allow this to happen to the Pacific, the rest of the world will be next. We all know we should be punishing the politicians who fail us. Of course, next time we must tick different names on our ballot papers. But there’s so much more we can do. Join your local grassroots environmental group, a students’ climate association or volunteer programme. This is the kind of organising that can hold those in power accountable after this Cop has ended. One of the Pacific climate warriors in our group at Glasgow is a dancer – that’s how she spreads the message. Another is an educator doing this work through his students. Another entered a beauty pageant to use it as a platform for talking about climate justice. How you can protect the world depends on who you are. We are not just victims to this crisis. We are not drowning, we are fighting. Now the world needs to hear us and follow our lead. Brianna Fruean is a Samoan climate activist, student and member of the Pacific Climate Warriors delegation at Cop26Local authorities providing support to thousands of Afghan evacuees are yet to receive any funding from the Home Office to do so, the Guardian has learned. Councils looking after those evacuated from Afghanistan this summer say they are struggling to cope as hundreds of thousands of pounds promised to them by the government has not yet materialised. The Home Office has pledged to provide councils with £28 a person a day to provide essential support to Afghan families in hotels. But a government source told the Guardian: “Local authorities will be offered £28 per person per day to provide support to the guests. This will be backdated and we will be working with local authorities on how it can be claimed in due course.” Georgia Gould, the chair of London Councils, said: “London boroughs have stepped up to provide emergency support for hundreds of Afghan families evacuated during the summer. Despite promises from the Home Office, councils are yet to receive any funding to cover the cost of clothing, medical supplies or the hiring of support staff to help evacuees with basic needs. “We are urgently seeking reassurance from government that boroughs will receive this funding and that it will be extended to British nationals who have so far been excluded from this offer, which is unacceptable.” The news comes after reports that the Home Office’s debit cards, known as Aspen cards, failed to activate, leaving new arrivals from Afghanistan with no cash. The Refugee Council said it was making payments of £7-8,000 a week in emergency cash to refugees. Many people airlifted to safety from Afghanistan this summer are still unclear about their immigration status and not everyone has been told for which resettlement scheme they qualify and whether they are eligible for family reunion. London Councils told the Guardian it had received 221 homelessness applications from Afghans who do not qualify for resettlement support when they leave the hotel accommodation they were placed in when they arrived. Enver Solomon, the chief executive of the Refugee Council, said: “It’s alarming that families with large numbers of vulnerable children, many of whom are very traumatised, are having to live in hotels without the support they need and without any money of their own. “It’s critical that every family is given the warm welcome the government has promised so that it becomes a reality rather than just an aspiration. Government needs to step up its efforts by creating across Whitehall taskforce to make this happen.” A government spokesperson said: “The emergency evacuation of Afghanistan was the biggest and fastest in our country’s recent history. It helped over 15,000 people, including those who served alongside our armed forces, to safety in the United Kingdom. The government is working at pace to secure permanent housing for families and we would urge all local authorities to do their upmost to help support these vulnerable people.”Misinformation about the climate crisis runs rampant on Facebook, a new study has found, and comes mostly from a handful of “super polluter” publishers. Ten publishers are responsible for 69% of digital climate change denial content on Facebook, a new study from the Center for Countering Digital Hate (CCDH) has found. The outlets, which the report labels the “toxic ten”, include several conservative websites in the US, as well as Russian state media. Breitbart, a far-right news site once run by former Trump strategist Steve Bannon Western Journal, a Conservative news site Newsmax, which has previously been sued for promoting election fraud conspiracies Townhall Media, founded by the Exxon-funded Heritage Foundation Media Research Center, a “thinktank” that received funding from Exxon Washington Times, founded by self-proclaimed messiah Sun Myung Moon The Federalist Papers, a site that has promoted Covid misinformation Daily Wire, a conservative news site that is of the most engaged-with publishers on Facebook Russian state media, pushing disinformation via RT.com and Sputnik News Patriot Post, a conservative site whose writers use pseudonyms The Center for Countering Digital Hate used NewsWhip, a social media analytics tool, to analyze 6,983 climate crisis denial articles that were featured in Facebook posts in the last year. The articles included condemnations of the “cult of ‘climate change’” whose “worship” risks people’s future or told readers not to “worry too much about CO2 baking the planet”. Together, the posts raked up 709,057 interactions. Facebook strongly rejected the study in a statement, with a spokesman saying the analysis from CCDH “uses a flawed methodology designed to mislead people about the scale of climate misinformation on Facebook”. He added that the 700,000 interactions mentioned in the report on climate denial represent 0.3% of the over 200m interactions on public English-language climate change content from pages and public groups over the same time period. “We continue to combat climate misinformation by reducing the distribution of anything rated false or misleading by one of our factchecking partners and rejecting any ads that have been debunked,” he said. Tuesday’s study echoes past research on what has come to be known as the “Dirty Dozen” – a group of accounts responsible for the vast majority of Covid-19 misinformation circulating on social media. It underscores just how much of an impact a small number of widely read websites can have in the algorithm-driven Facebook ecosystem, said the US senator Sheldon Whitehouse. “Facebook and other social media companies make money when they send users down rabbit holes of climate denial,” he said. “That’s a very dangerous business model for the future of the planet.” In 2020, Facebook launched a Climate Change Science Center, which contains factual data from credible sources on the climate crisis to counteract the spread of misinformation on its platforms. It also adds informational labels to some posts about the climate crisis, which direct users to the center. A spokesman for Facebook said it received more than 100,000 visitors each day. That resource was previously targeted primarily at US users, but on Monday, the company announced it was expanding its Climate Change Science Center to more than 100 countries, labeling posts for the first time in Belgium, Brazil, India, Indonesia, Mexico, the Netherlands, Spain and Taiwan. But the study’s authors are asking the social media platform to go much further. They called on Facebook to stop taking payment from the publications to promote their content and to label misinformation about the climate crisis on a larger number of posts. The study found that 92% of the most popular articles examined did not have a label about climate crisis misinformation. CCDH also called on Google to remove eight of the 10 publications using Google Ads to profit from their climate crisis denial content. The researchers determined those eight publications earned an estimated $3.6m through Google Ads in the last six months. Imran Ahmed, chief executive of the Center for Countering Digital Hate, argued that the “bad faith misinformation” pushed by the 10 websites is designed to undermine social media users’ confidence in science. By not acting more forcefully, Ahmed said, “big tech is once again on the wrong side of science, truth and human progress.” The deputy editor in chief of RT, which according to the CCDH study published articles on “climate alarmism” condemning “doom-mongers” who believed climate change was worsening and has been called “one of the most important organizations in the global political economy of disinformation”, told the Guardian that the publication “constantly raises concerns over environmental issues”. RT would not “disregard the variety of views essential to a healthy public discourse on its effects”, Anna Belkina said. Other websites named in the study did not immediately respond to requests for comment.Following the death of Aaron Beck, the “father” of cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), at age 100, we would like to hear your own experiences of the treatment. How has CBT changed your life? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.The construction of smart motorways should be paused until promised safety improvements have been delivered and there is more evidence to assess the risks, MPs have urged. The cross-party transport select committee criticised as premature the decision by Grant Shapps in March 2020 to press ahead with the use of the controversial motorways in the face of mounting concern about their safety. While the government has maintained that smart motorways are as safe as conventional ones, MPs said at least five years of trial data covering all variants of smart motorway, which manage road speeds through electronic signs and do not have a hard shoulder, were needed. The report said the available evidence was “limited and volatile”, and urged greater powers for the Office of Rail and Road to block new road schemes until it was satisfied of their safety. The scale of measures needed to mitigate the risks from removing the hard shoulder on motorways had been underestimated, MPs said, and Highways England (the old name for National Highways) and the Department for Transport had failed to deliver promised safety upgrades. More emergency refuge areas should be retrofitted to existing all-lane running smart motorways to be never more than one mile apart, and every 0.75 miles where possible. The highway code should also be updated with instructions to drivers to create corridors to allow emergency services to reach the scene of incidents, according to the MPs. The report did not go as far some campaigners in calling for smart motorways to be scrapped, after a number of motorists who had broken down in a live lane and been hit by other vehicles were killed. However, it said that Shapps’ so-called “stock take” and 18-point plan last year would not go far enough in addressing the risks. MPs also questioned Shapps’ decision to end by 2025 the use of “dynamic” all-lane running, where the hard shoulder is sometimes used as a live traffic lane. They suggested that with clear, consistent use such motorways would be preferable, as they could retain the hard shoulder in quieter times. The committee chair, Huw Merriman, said as only 29 miles of all-lane running smart motorways had operated for over five years, it “feels too soon, and uncertain, to use this as an evidence base to remove the hard shoulder from swathes of our motorway network”. He said the focus on upgrading safety by ministers was welcome, “but we’ve been here before. We’re not convinced that reinstating the hard shoulder on existing schemes is the answer, but the DfT must pause the rollout and take stock.” The select committee in June 2016 called on the government to drop or pause the rollout of smart motorways, which have been seen as a comparatively cheap and easy way to increase capacity on the UK’s major road networks. A report then concluded that the trade-off in safety was an “unacceptable price to pay” for all-lane running. Motoring organisations welcomed the latest report, which they said was pragmatic and endorsed their calls for measures to improve safety. Labour said it confirmed that ministers had wrongly pressed ahead in the face of overwhelming warning evidence. Jim McMahon, the shadow transport secretary, said: “We know smart motorways in their current form, coupled with inadequate safety systems, are not fit for purpose and are putting lives at risk. Reinstating the hard shoulder while full investigations are carried out need not be costly … the government must finally listen.” A DfT spokesperson said: “We’re pleased that the committee recognises that reinstating the hard shoulder on all all-lane running motorways could put more drivers and passengers at risk of death and serious injury and that we’re right to focus on upgrading their safety, as the secretary of state committed to doing when he became transport secretary.” While “improvements have not always been made as quickly as they could have been in the past”, Shapps had committed £500m on upgrades and the faster rollout of stopped vehicle detection technology, they added.The UK has received the ironic “Fossil of the Day” award for failing to make Cop26 the most accessible climate summit and “hindering civil society’s access to the negotiations”. The prize, organised by Climate Action Network International (CAN), is traditionally awarded every day during the Cop conferences to countries that “have done their best to block negotiations”. CAN said the UK presidency of Cop26, along with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), received the award also in part for a lack of organisation after long queues formed to access the conference venue on Monday. In a statement, the network said: “CAN asked for a Cop postponement as we feared people from the developing world wouldn’t be able to come and advocate for climate justice in the face of the global Covid-19 pandemic. “But the UK presidency insisted that Cop26 was going ahead and was prepared to welcome the global community to ‘the most inclusive Cop ever’. This spirit of inclusivity has showcased what the Brits do best – the art of queuing – for hours in some cases. “People who have invested time and resources to travel to Glasgow have waited patiently only to find there is ‘no room at the inn’ for civil society and told to ‘join events online’ – to then find they were offline.” Delegates were forced to queue for up to two hours on Monday morning while trying to pass security to access the venue, with many complaining about the lack of social distancing. CAN awarded a second Fossil of the Day award to Australia for what it described as “unconscionable behaviour”. “The Aussies are already excelling in heading for rock bottom this Cop,” a spokesperson said. “They’ve not only spectacularly failed to deliver ambitious contributions but have also approved three new coal projects in the last months.”The international community’s chief representative in Bosnia has warned that the country is in imminent danger of breaking apart, and there is a “very real” prospect of a return to conflict. In a report to the UN seen by the Guardian, Christian Schmidt, the high representative for Bosnia and Herzegovina, said that if Serb separatists carry out their threat to recreate their own army, splitting the national armed forces in two, more international peacekeepers would have to be sent back in to stop the slide towards a new war. International peacekeeping duties in Bosnia are currently the task of a residual EU force (Eufor) that is 700 strong. Nato retains a formal toehold with a headquarters in Sarajevo. The year-long mandate for both is up for renewal this week at the UN security council, but Russia has threatened to block a resolution unless all references to the high representative are removed, potentially undermining Schmidt’s authority as the overseer of the 1995 Dayton peace deal. In his first report since taking up the post in August, Schmidt, a former German government minister, warned that Bosnia was facing “the greatest existential threat of the postwar period”. The Bosnian Serb leader, Milorad Dodik, is threatening to pull out of state-level institutions, including the national army built up with international assistance over the past quarter century, and reconstitute a Serb force. On 14 October, Dodik said he would force the Bosnian army to withdraw from the Republika Srpska (the Serb half of Bosnia) by surrounding its barracks and that if the west tried to intervene militarily, he had “friends” who had promised to support the Serb cause, a presumed reference to Serbia and Russia. Bosnian Serb police carried out “counter-terrorist” exercises last month on Mount Jahorina, from where Serb forces bombarded Sarajevo throughout a 1992-95 siege. “This is tantamount to secession without proclaiming it,” Schmidt wrote in a report delivered to the UN secretary general, António Guterres, on Friday. He said Dodik’s actions “endanger not only the peace and stability of the country and the region, but – if unanswered by the international community – could lead to the undoing of the [Dayton peace] agreement itself.” The high representative said it was possible there would be clashes between Bosnian national law enforcement agencies and Bosnian Serb police. “Should the armed force of BiH [Bosnia and Herzegovina] splinter into two or more armies, the level of international military presence would require reassessment,” Schmidt warned. “A lack of response to the current situation would endanger the [Dayton agreement], while instability in BiH would have wider regional implications,” he said. “The prospects for further division and conflict are very real.” Schmidt’s warnings were delivered as the UN security council was preparing its annual resolution renewing the peacekeeping mandate for Eufor and the Nato headquarters, with a vote as early as Wednesday. Moscow is threatening to block the resolution unless all references to the high representative are removed. The Kremlin opposed Schmidt’s appointment by a Peace Implementation Council, an ad hoc multinational body set up to implement the Dayton peace agreement, and refuses to recognise his authority. “I suspect what Russia really wants is to chip away at the authority of the high representative’s office by stopping him briefing the council,” said a diplomat close to the discussions. Kurt Bassuener, co-founder and senior associate of the Democratization Policy Council, a Berlin-based thinktank, said: “It sounds like the Americans, the Brits and the French have effectively agreed to really strip back the references to the high representative that were boilerplate, standard issue language in all the previous resolutions.” He added: “And while legally that doesn’t undercut the high representative, politically it sure as hell does.” Even if Eufor’s mandate is renewed, there is little appetite in the EU to beef up the small force left in Bosnia. Some member states, particularly Hungary, are supportive of Dodik. “I think he’s willing to gamble on the possibility that, as improbable as it is, he can get away with it by essentially creating new facts on the ground rapidly and counting on the idea that confusion and delay would grip both Sarajevo and the international community and there would ultimately be no meaningful international consequences,” Jasmin Mujanović, a Bosnian political scientist, said. US deputy assistant secretary of state Gabriel Escobar told Congress last week that the US is working with the EU to “make sure there are consequences for any illegal or any destabilising actions” in Bosnia. But it is unclear whether the Biden administration would support a return to Nato peacekeeping. Alida Vračić, the head of a Bosnia-based thinktank, Populari, said the perpetual and worsening sense of crisis allows the country’s leaders to disguise their failure to govern. “Dodik has gone ballistic, but collectively politicians hope to win points on this crisis and citizens are the only losers as expected,” Vračić said. “This discussion comes in handy, as it derails all meaningful discussions like the fact that Sarajevo is choking in smog, that [the regional governments] embezzled money in the Covid-19 crisis, that the death toll in Sarajevo is worse than during the war, the fact that half of the country is living in poverty, that we have completed exactly zero reforms, that no laws have been discussed in the parliament for months.” • The headline on this article was amended on 2 November 2021. Schmidt is a representative of the international community, not the EU as stated in an earlier version.As anyone who has ever suffered from fear of flying knows, distraction is key. Anything to trick the brain into forgetting that you and it are hurtling through the ether in the cramped belly of a giant tin bird. Distraction. By any means possible. Booze might be the answer for some, the David Boon approach to air travel. Maybe you swear by that “make fists with your toes” thing or try to take your mind off the turbulence and terrifying sounds by strapping some headphones on and endlessly repeating the frightened flyers’ mantra about it being more likely you will perish after a chance encounter with a shark than through air travel. Or was it a vending machine? More rational souls seek solace with thoughts of the destination, of exciting adventures in store. On the flip side, perhaps the relative sanctuary and safety of the aeroplane is far preferable to what awaits beyond the tarmac after touchdown. Joe Root probably isn’t a twitchy flyer, “aerophobia” being relatively incompatible with the globetrotting demands of an international cricketer. Nevertheless he could be forgiven for finding himself somewhere between the two states of mind when he boards the flight to Australia on Thursday. If there is a twinge of despair in the departure lounge or a wave of panic amid the clouds it could be because the next few weeks might well define his legacy as a batter and as a captain. To the bat first. Root has enjoyed a remarkable run of form in 2021. In 12 Test matches, beginning with Sri Lanka in January and India home and away since, he has swept, stroked, glanced, cut, driven, defended and dominated against searing pace and devilish spin. On Asian dustbowl and English green-top, under Chennai sun and Pennine cloud. Root has been an almost constant figure at the crease, runs flowing from his blade with surgeon-like precision; 1,455 of them at an average a tick over 66. His six centuries this calendar year include three double centuries, a 186 and a 180 not out. With the rest of England’s top order quacking and creaking of late, Root’s runs have been increasingly imperative. If England are to get even the pinkiest of fingers around the urn during five Test matches in Australia on deathly-dull drop-in batter-friendly pitches, Root surely has to pick up where he left off and extend his purple patch up to Christmas and beyond. But here’s the rub. Root has never scored a century in Australia. In fact, as he cruises over the vast expanses on Friday, he will be unable to recall too many happy memories from his intended destination. Oz has been his bogey-land, he has an average of 38 in his nine Tests down under. While the lofty 30s might be a mere pipe dream for some of the top-order batters who have made the plane, that’s a significant drop-off for Root whose career average after 109 Tests is north of 50. He has made no secret of his desperation to put this record straight. Root has also pointed to the pain of being dropped for the 2014 Sydney Test after a quiet tour in which he occasionally looked cowed at the crease. To be fair, in that series the half-man-half-velociraptor Mitchell Johnson was ravaging his way through England’s batting lineup repeatedly, making even the most seasoned players yearn for the departure lounge. The memory of missing out in that game inspired Root to improve. “Cooky sat me down and said: ‘It’s a tough call but you are not going to play in this game.’” He opened up to fellow Sheffield Collegiate alumnus and England captain Michael Vaughan in 2015. “I can’t remember what I did for the next hour. I was gone. I was an empty vessel … but then I was absolutely spewing. I was so angry and gutted because I had not scored runs, not because I thought I deserved to play.” Four years later, Sydney again, but a different type of spewing. A debilitating bout of viral gastroenteritis struck Root down. Now captain and with England battling to stay in the game – the urn long since relinquished – Root spent time hooked up to a drip at St Vincent’s hospital up the road from the Sydney Cricket Ground. Although he briefly made it back to the ground and out into the middle, he was physically unable to continue. Forced to retire on 58 not out after nearly four hours of batting with a raging fever in temperatures topping 50 degrees. At the moment of defeat he was passed out on a bench in the dressing room. Jimmy Anderson had to stand in for his stricken captain to do the media postmortem. Despite this, when Root boards the plane to Queensland this week it might even be with a sigh of relief. At last, it is on. The prospect of Messrs Cummins, Hazelwood, Starc and Lyon – each in possession of their own fearful projectiles – lying in wait at the Gabba on 8 December – is far preferable to the uncertainty and speculation of the past few months. At one stage there were rumblings that those with young families – Jos Buttler, Chris Woakes, potentially even Root himself – would in effect be left with little choice but to rule themselves out of the tour due to the stringent quarantine regulations in place. The prospect of a cad’s tour to Oz was briefly in the offing, a Sam Billings XI or suchlike. In the end, with the right assurances made and the pandemic in Australia headed finally in the right direction, not to mention millions of pounds worth of broadcasting money at stake, the 2021-22 Ashes were cleared for takeoff. Perhaps crucially, Root will also have Ben Stokes by his side. As last-minute upgrades go, that is surely one of the best. As England Test captain, off the field is where you increasingly earn your paycheck while your legacy is still determined by events on it. Root has been a popular, thoughtful and honest captain at a time when the global game has been navigating decidedly soupy skies. His players like and respect him hugely, while he doesn’t quite attract the fawning and enjoy the free rein of Eoin Morgan. On paper he is England’s most successful in the Test format, in terms of number of wins, despite a tendency on occasion to tactical naivety, resulting in a few chastening losses. If Root helms an Ashes victory overseas, a big if, then his legacy as a captain will begin to nudge towards his greatness as a batter. The journey begins here. Welcome to Flight Ashes 2021-22. Fasten your seatbelts. • This is an extract from the Guardian’s weekly cricket email, The Spin. To subscribe and get the full edition, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Damon Galgut’s The Promise is frontrunner at the bookies to win the Booker prize this week. Six authors are in the running for the £50,000 award, with judges chaired by historian Maya Jasanoff set to meet on Wednesday to choose their winner before the award ceremony that evening. South African novelist Galgut’s book, about a white family that fails to keep its promise to give a home to the Black woman who has worked for them her whole life in South Africa, is heading the charge, if the bookmakers are to be believed: the novel is 2/1 at both Ladbrokes and William Hill to take the prize. Galgut, who has been shortlisted twice before for the Booker but has never won, has said he felt “relief, excitement and a fair amount of anxiety” at making the shortlist. “Damon Galgut has been all the rage with literary punters since making the shortlist, and if the money’s to be believed The Promise will land this year’s Booker,” said Ladbrokes’ Jessica O’Reilly. The three American writers shortlisted for the Booker follow Galgut in Ladbrokes’ odds: Richard Powers’s Bewilderment, in which widowed scientist Theo struggles to raise his profoundly troubled, passionately green young son, is at 4/1; Maggie Shipstead’s Great Circle, about a vanished female aviator, is at 5/1 and Patricia Lockwood’s internet-focused No One is Talking About This is at 6/1. Lockwood’s debut – the only first novel on the shortlist – is the bestselling title of the six, however, with 9,541 copies sold to date, according to the Bookseller, narrowly ahead of The Promise’s 8,844. Nadifa Mohamed, the sole British writer to make this year’s Booker shortlist, is at 8/1 at Ladbrokes for The Fortune Men, inspired by the real-life story of a Somali seaman wrongfully convicted of murder in Wales. Sri Lankan Anuk Arudpragasam’s A Passage North, in which a man travels across the island for the funeral of his grandmother’s former care-giver, is at 14/1. At internet betting exchange Smarkets, Matthew Shaddick said it would be “the biggest Booker shock of recent years” if Arudpragasam were to take the prize. “The betting markets hadn’t had a very good record of predicting the winner until a few years ago, but the favourites have tended to do better recently; Douglas Stuart was the well-backed market leader last year as was Margaret Atwood in 2019 (albeit that ended up as a dead heat),” said Shaddick. “Since this year’s shortlist was announced, Richard Powers has seen his chances improve the most, so I wouldn’t be at all surprised to see him win.”Why don’t opera singers deafen each other? They’re singing loud enough to be heard in the back row, yet they are right in each other’s ears. Brian Dermody, Blessington, Co Wicklow Post your answers (and new questions) below or send them to nq@theguardian.com. A selection will be published on Sunday.There aren’t many things you can count on in this world. But just as we know the sun always rises in the east, tides rise and fall on schedule, and plutonium isotopes decay at a certain rate, you know that there will be a feature film, maybe starring Jonathan Pryce or even Tom Jones, made out of this documentary about a senior Welsh male voice choir. When film-maker Dylan Williams gets a phone call from his widowed nonagenarian father Ed saying he’s sold the family home and is making plans for his own funeral, the director knows it’s time to go home to Rhyl and spend some time with dad. Via voiceover from Dylan and nippily snipped editing we’re introduced to Ed’s tranquil, weekly rituals, from the weekly sheet change and Tuesday’s bacon sandwich, to practice with the Côr Meibion Trelawnyd, the Welsh-language all-male choir he’s been singing with for decades. A splice of archive footage shows Ed and some of his friends in the prime of middle age, belting it out on TV back in the day when the choir competed in singing competitions. These days, there’s a lot less competing and more assembling to sing at the funerals of fallen choristers as their numbers dwindle. Musical director Ann Atkinson, a former opera singer herself, recognises that if the choir is to survive they need to recruit men with brown hair (as opposed to white or grey), and soon Ed and some of his friends, including Dylan’s primary school teacher Merf Richards, are hitting the supermarkets to hand out fliers and drum up new recruits. It’s hard not to feel as if there’s a bit of emotional arm-twisting going on here to get viewers moist with emotion over the film’s deployment of adorable old geezers (one of whom even takes on wing walking to raise money), stirring music and the melancholy theme of inevitable death. Thankfully, Williams tamps down the sentimentality with a wry eye for comedy – for example when the choir sings in a shopping mall, all dressed as Santas – as well as a painterly eye for faces and locales. Structurally, the story is a bit all over the place, but when the script editor comes on board for the inevitable feature, they’ll work out the three-act structure in the end. • Men Who Sing is released on 5 November in cinemas and on Curzon Home Cinema.I don’t know if it is too late for humanity to avert a climate catastrophe, but I am sure there is no chance if we continue to treat global heating and the destruction of nature as separate problems. That is the wrongheaded approach of the United Nations, which is about to stage one big global conference for the climate in Glasgow, having just finished a different big global conference for biodiversity in Kunming. This division is as much of a mistake as the error made by universities when they teach chemistry in a different class from biology and physics. It is impossible to understand these subjects in isolation because they are interconnected. The same is true of living organisms that greatly influence the global environment. The composition of the Earth’s atmosphere and the temperature of the surface is actively maintained and regulated by the biosphere, by life, by what the ancient Greeks used to call Gaia. Almost 60 years ago, I suggested our planet self-regulated like a living organism. I called this the Gaia theory, and was later joined by biologist Lynn Margulis, who also espoused this idea. Both of us were roundly criticised by scientists in academia. I was an outsider, an independent scientist, and the mainstream view then was the neo-Darwinist one that life adapts to the environment, not that the relationship also works in the other direction, as we argued. In the years since, we have seen just how much life – especially human life – can affect the environment. Two genocidal acts – suffocation by greenhouse gases and the clearance of the rainforests – have caused changes on a scale not seen in millions of years. Because subjects like astronomy, geology, and meteorology are taught separately in schools and universities, few people are aware of the natural forces affecting the Earth’s surface temperature. For billions of years the Earth’s surface temperature has been determined mainly by the radiant heat coming from the sun. This energy increased over time because it is the nature of stars like the sun to increase their heat output as they grow older. But temperatures on Earth remained relatively stable thanks to Gaia: forests, oceans and other elements in the the Earth’s regulating system, which kept the surface temperature fairly constant and near optimal for life. The global warming that concerns all of us, and which will be discussed this week in Glasgow, includes a great deal of extra heating that comes as a consequence of extracting and burning fossil fuels since about the middle of the 19th century. That releases methane, carbon dioxide and other gases into the atmosphere. They absorb radiant heat and stop it escaping from Earth. This is what causes global warming. The amount of global warming depends hugely on the properties of water. When cold ice forms, much of it is white snow. This reflects the sunlight back to space and is cooling. But when it is warm, the water vapour in the air is a powerful greenhouse gas that makes it warmer still. Much of the confusion over global heating comes about because of the huge quantities of heat needed to change the state of water. Few are aware that to melt a gram of ice takes 80 calories, enough heat to raise the temperature of 1ml of water to 80C. Try an ice cube in your boiling hot tea. Then imagine how much heat was needed to melt large areas of the polar ice cap during the recent summer and how much hotter the world would have been if the ice had not been there. No wonder there is confusion about whether there is global heating or not. Warnings that once seemed like the doom scenarios of science fiction are now coming to pass. We are entering into a heat age in which the temperature and sea levels will be rising decade by decade until the world becomes unrecognisable. We could also be in for more surprises. Nature is non-linear and unpredictable, never more than at a time of transition. Lowering these risks and adapting to those we can no longer avoid will require a mobilisation of resources on the scale of a war economy. We have no choice but to reduce the burning of fossil fuels or face even worse consequences. But we should also not become over-reliant on renewable power, which will leave us with an energy gap. We need to build more nuclear power stations to overcome that, though the greens will first have to get over their overblown fears of radiation. The dangers are nowhere near as bad as they are often painted. I’ve travelled millions of miles by air, and all that time I have been exposed to levels of radiation that are ten times as great as at ground level. The dangers are exaggerated. We also need to address the problem of overpopulation and to urgently halt the destruction of tropical forests. Most of all, we need to look at the world in a holistic way. I am not hopeful of a positive outcome at Cop26, knowing who is participating. I was not invited to Glasgow, though that is hardly a surprise. As well as being 102 years old, I am an independent scientist, and the university academics have never been comfortable with that. But my fellow humans must learn to live in partnership with the Earth, otherwise the rest of creation will, as part of Gaia, unconsciously move the Earth to a new state in which humans may no longer be welcome. The virus, Covid-19, may well have been one negative feedback. Gaia will try harder next time with something even nastier. James Lovelock is the originator of Gaia theory and the author, most recently, of Novascene. This op-ed was told to Jonathan Watts, the Guardian’s global environment editorThe Labour party has called on the government and the EU to lift the “veil of secrecy” over the talks about new Brexit arrangements for Northern Ireland, urging them to give local political leaders a seat at the negotiations table. As the talks inch towards the deadline the UK government has set for making a decision to trigger article 16 and suspend parts of the protocol, the shadow Northern Ireland secretary, Louise Haigh, said it was unsustainable for leaders, businesses and civic society to be “shut out” on huge decisions being taken about their future. She made her remarks as the taoiseach, Micheál Martin, revealed that the US president, Joe Biden, had pulled him aside after a formal Cop26 conference in Glasgow to tell him he was watching the Northern Ireland Brexit talks closely. “He called me aside after the meeting to, again, make it very clear to me that the United States takes the Good Friday agreement very seriously. To use his own words, ‘it matters greatly to me and to the United States’, and he said he has made this clear to the UK government.” Speaking at the start of October, the Brexit minister, David Frost, said the conflict over the protocol needed to be settled within three weeks, but last week he said significant gaps remained between the two sides, particularly on state aid and the role of the European court of justice. Whitehall sources suggest the earliest a decision on triggering article 16 could be made is the third week in November, after Cop26. Lord Frost and the European Commission vice-president Maroš Šefčovič are due to meet on Friday to assess progress in talks. Earlier this week it emerged that Frost’s drive to get the existing Northern Ireland protocol scrapped was as much rooted in opposition to the deal Theresa May struck in December 2017 as it was in delivering a new agreement to the unionist community that oppose the protocol. Writing in a foreword to a new paper for the Policy Exchange thinktank, Frost said the EU-UK joint report, which set the terms for the article 50 process of divorce from the EU, was a result of the UK failing to make “the necessary mental shift from being a member of the EU to negotiating exit from the EU”. Haigh urged negotiators not to stoke tension over the protocol, which has prompted a resurgence in identity politics in Northern Ireland, and to bring local leaders in from the sidelines. The Northern Ireland secretary, Brandon Lewis, admitted in the House of Commons last week that democratically elected leaders in Northern Ireland had still not been privy to the UK’s legal text of the negotiating position. “It is simply unsustainable for leaders, businesses and civic society to be shut out on huge decisions being made about their future,” said Haigh. “Businesses and communities want a deal and with rising tension, the last thing Northern Ireland needs is more poisonous instability.” “If the government are really acting in Northern Ireland’s interests, rather than their own, then they should draw back the veil of secrecy, move the talks to Belfast, and give Northern Ireland a seat at the table,” she added.The US drugmaker Pfizer has lifted its 2021 forecast for revenues from its Covid vaccine to $36bn (£26.3bn), and forecast another $29bn sales next year after it started shipping booster jabs and shots for children. The Covid jab, called Comirnaty and developed with Germany’s BioNTech, contributed $13bn of revenues in the three months to 30 September. That was more than half of Pfizer’s total revenues of $24bn in the quarter, which rose 134% from a year earlier. In the first six months of the year, Corminaty revenues were $11.3bn. Pfizer, which shares profits on the Covid vaccine evenly with BioNTech, raised its 2021 forecast for Corminaty sales from $33.5bn in July, as it expects to deliver 2.3bn doses this year. Together with BioNTech, it continues to expect to manufacture 3bn doses by the end of December, although not all of them will be delivered by then. For next year, it has so far agreed contracts for 1.7bn doses. The jab was the first to gain approval for emergency use in the US for adults last year, and more recently for children and booster shots. Together with the US biotech firm Moderna, Pfizer accounts for the lion’s share of the pharma industry’s global revenues from Covid vaccines. Many western countries including the US, UK and Germany have started giving third booster shots to elderly and vulnerable people. However, booster jabs are controversial because in low-income countries only 3.7% of people have received at least one dose of a Covid vaccine. About 7.1bn doses have been administered globally, and nearly half the world’s population has received at least one jab. The jump in Covid vaccine revenues prompted Pfizer to lift its overall sales and earnings predictions. It now expects to make total revenues of up to $82bn this year, and underlying earnings a share of $4.13 to $4.18, compared with its previous forecast of $3.95 to $4.05. Pfizer faced fresh criticism from groups such as Amnesty International. The campaign group Global Justice Now accused Pfizer of “making a killing” out of “the most lucrative medicine ever produced,” while “most of the world has been locked out of this vaccine”. Its director, Nick Dearden, said: “Just 1% of Pfizer’s supplies have been sold to the international distribution mechanism Covax, as the company has put sales of third and fourth doses in wealthy markets ahead of selling doses to where they’re most needed. This will undoubtedly prolong the pandemic.” Responding to criticism, Pfizer’s chief executive, Albert Bourla, said poorer countries and organisations such as Covax needed to place orders, at a heavily discounted price, adding: “We remain on track to achieve our goal of delivering at least 2bn doses to low- and middle-income countries by the end of 2022 – at least 1bn to be delivered this year and 1bn next year.” Bourla made a bold promise in June, saying that should the need arise for a new Covid vaccine, the company could develop one within 100 days. He was referring to the possible emergence of an “escape variant” – a strain of Sars-CoV-2 that evades the immunity provided by current vaccines and previous infections. Other companies, such as Moderna and AstraZeneca, are also preparing for the emergence of new strains by updating their current vaccines to match known variants such as delta, and testing them on these strains. These dress rehearsals are designed to even out kinks in the processes so the firms can move faster if an “escape variant” emerges for which current jabs do not work, Nature reported recently.The trickiest job in New Zealand? It used to be generally accepted that even the prime minister had it easier than the incumbent All Blacks head coach. Now, though, there is a third contender, requiring the former’s diplomatic touch and the latter’s survival instincts. To be NZ Rugby’s chief executive at this juncture in rugby history is to be caught between the devil and the deep blue Pacific. Put yourself in Mark Robinson’s jandals for a second. On the one hand he presides over the most marketable national team in the world, which is not the worst gig. On the other he represents a country at odds over whether a chunk of NZ Rugby’s commercial operations should be sold to a US-based private equity firm. Squaring that contradictory circle – “rugby means an awful lot to our country’s identity and psyche” – will define Robinson’s stewardship, with significant implications for every other rugby-playing country in the world. Because, make no mistake, these are critical weeks and months for rugby’s global commercial future. As with the climate emergency the clock is ticking and, having talked to various other senior officials over the weekend, the urgency and tension is mounting. “It has to happen now,” said one, referring to the renewed push to agree a streamlined global fixture calendar. “A lot of unions are hurting at the moment.” The upshot is that everyone, not least New Zealand, will need to embrace people and/or rival unions they have often treated with a mixture of scepticism or indifference. During the era of the previous NZ Rugby chief executive, Steve Tew, the All Blacks’ attitude was mostly a blunt: ‘Take it or leave it.’ Encouraged by cash-strapped European nations to fly north outside the official window, they have long since hired themselves out at a punchy rate. Playing in Cardiff against a weakened Welsh side last Saturday, for example, was worth £2m to NZ Rugby, which may explain why the head coach, Ian Foster, took a potshot or two at the media for questioning the fixture’s legitimacy. Playing non-lucrative away Tests in the Pacific Islands, strangely, has tended to be less of a priority. It also says a fair amount about rugby’s uneasy north-south marriage that, outside World Cups, England have faced the All Blacks once in the past seven years, a 16-15 loss at Twickenham in 2018. This lack of mutual interaction has not benefited either party, nor updated age-old prejudices on both sides, while southern hemisphere players relocating to lucrative European or Japanese leagues remains another underlying source of friction. For many of the above reasons, the 47-year-old Robinson is an increasingly key figure. Having spoken to him twice in recent days, the first thing to say is he is far more approachable than his predecessor and many of those masquerading as European rugby’s biggest cheeses. The second is that, perhaps uniquely for a senior NZ Rugby administrator, he genuinely loves the UK. In addition to winning nine caps for the All Blacks, he studied at Cambridge University and shared in two winning Varsity matches in an era when the Light Blues won five years in a row. Twickenham, as a result, holds fond memories and he also used to play rugby in Taranaki with Beauden and Jordie Barrett’s father, Kevin. A good enough player to have been selected on a couple of occasions ahead of Tana Umaga in the All Blacks’ midfield, he featured in the same half-decent starting backline as Christian Cullen, Doug Howlett, Jonah Lomu and Andrew Mehrtens against France in 2002. Unusually for a leading administrator, he knows how it feels to tour around sodden, wintry European fields in the professional era with every opponent desperate to take a slice out of you. Had it not been for his studies and bad luck with injuries, he might have had an even more decorated career but, given his nicely balanced CV, you can understand why NZ Rugby anointed him as Tew’s successor just before the world shuttered up against Covid. Completing a deal with the US technology investment firm Silver Lake after the players’ union vetoed the initial $NZ387.5m offer remains a clear priority – “I wouldn’t be prepared to put a timescale on it but it’s heading in the right direction” – but ask what will happen if things go completely pear-shaped and his easy-going tone hardens slightly. “We’re not the kind or organisation that gives up easily. It’s the Kiwi way. We would keep searching for the opportunity. The game has many mouths to feed and we’ll have to find a way to keep doing that.” Robinson is also smart enough to understand that even the mighty All Blacks can not stand still in changing times. In an open letter to New Zealanders in May he did not mince his words, suggesting the traditional Kiwi rugby model “is broken” and urging supporters to embrace change. He would be instantly sacked for suggesting the national team should lose more often but knows that visiting the United States to consult NBA and NFL teams about commercial strategy and event management, as the All Blacks did last month, will be of limited value unless global rugby becomes collectively healthier. Thrashing the US Eagles 104-14 is unlikely to woo many casual American fans and the same two teams winning the past four World Cups does not offer a perfect future growth blueprint either. “What we want to see an international environment with a greater depth and breadth of talent and competition,” says Robinson. “That has to be a vision we all aspire to. We’re really interested in what the game can look like as more of a truly global sport.” It explains why NZ Rugby is right behind a World Cup in the US in 2031, will be in the (virtual) room this month for talks with representatives of all the major club leagues and will happily host a women’s Lions tour should the opportunity ever arise, not just to generate more income to fund their domestic grassroots but “to create more value across the whole rugby ecosystem”. Because even Robinson and his marketable All Blacks can sense the onrushing financial chill if rugby does not pull together now. “It’s an absolutely critical time,” he says. “We want to make sure as many rugby organisations can firstly survive and then look to create some models that can really help it thrive. “I am optimistic we can create something with a stronger narrative around the international game but it takes a lot of consultation, listening and hard work. I don’t think anyone’s too big, at the moment, to think they’re got the answers to everything.” • This is an extract from our rugby union email, the Breakdown. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.Antonio Conte believes he can end a 13-year trophy drought at Tottenham. He has not said so publicly just yet, but this is a man who has described the pursuit of victory as “an obsession, a drug”. When Conte joined Internazionale in 2019, he told the Italian edition of GQ magazine: “I can accept having only a small chance of winning at the start, even just 1%, but there has to be at least that much.” The Nerazzurri were nine years removed from their last Serie A title. Conte needed only two to put them back on top. In his first season at San Siro, Inter improved by 13 points and reached the Europa League final. A year later, they were champions of Italy, sealing their title with four games to spare. Even that was slow going by the manager’s standards. At his two previous clubs, Conte won at the first attempt. Juventus finished seventh in consecutive seasons before he arrived in 2011 and led them to the Scudetto without defeat. Chelsea were the Premier League’s 10th-best team under José Mourinho and Guus Hiddink in 2015-16, then champions with Conte in 2016-17. This is the Italian’s brand: a man who just wins, wherever he goes. A “guarantee”, as he has often been defined by pundits in his home country, even though such terms make him bristle. As the one lifting the trophies, Conte is always quick to remind any interviewer that no victory is inevitable, and every result hard-earned. Winning at Inter was, in his perception, most difficult of all. The club’s identity seemed to exist in direct opposition to his own, and not only because he had spent so much of his career working for Juventus, a great rival. One of Conte’s first acts was to ban the playing of Pazza Inter before kick-off, a beloved anthem which calls on fans to embrace the “craziness” and unpredictability of their team. That trait was always overstated. Inter had won 18 league titles before Conte arrived – a figure only Juventus could better. They had underachieved heavily in the decade since winning the treble under Mourinho, however, routinely finishing outside the top four despite one of the highest wage bills in Serie A. Throughout his tenure, Conte repeated that his first objective was to make Inter “credible” again. Perhaps that would be an appropriate starting point at Tottenham. In the past two years the club has gone backwards, from a Champions League final to the Europa Conference League, via an Amazon Prime documentary series and a 3-0 humiliation in Zagreb. Those unfamiliar with Conte’s mindset might ask why he would consider taking on the team in their present state. A man who has won league titles in five out of his past seven seasons of club management could doubtless have landed a more comfortable position if he had chosen to wait. The prospect of a year out will not have daunted him. Conte took a sabbatical in 2018-19 after he parted company with Chelsea. Although “the need to work hard is in my DNA”, he confessed to enjoying the opportunity to be with family and swim in “my sea” where he grew up in Puglia. This summer his social media was awash with pictures of him revisiting those waters. If anything, it may be the scale of the challenge at Tottenham that has intrigued him. “I like putting myself in play,” Conte has said. “Inter were the extreme limit of this approach. I had a lot to lose. But I have a hard head, so I press forward, ready to knock down walls with this head of mine.” Equally, though, he is not a man to charge in without assessing the scale of the challenge. The fact that Conte was available is testament to his unwillingness to work in conditions he considers unfavourable. He left Inter because he did not believe he could build on his successes while the club sought to slash 20% from its wage bill. What assurances has he received from his former Juventus colleague Fabio Paratici, the managing director of football at Spurs? It is easy to imagine Conte being enticed by the opportunity to work with Harry Kane, whom he described in 2017 as “one of the best strikers in the world”. Yet the player has struggled for form this season after being denied a move. Tottenham may view Conte as a good bet to help the striker get back to his best. The manager found the right buttons to press with another brilliant No 9, Romelu Lukaku, who produced the best football of his career at Inter, piling up 47 goals and 13 assists in two Serie A seasons while adding almost 50% to his market value. That was not his first success story with a tall and physical centre-forward. Graziano Pellè went beyond the limits that most imagined for him while wearing an Italy shirt under Conte, and Diego Costa scored 20 times to fire Chelsea to the Premier League title in 2017, even if the relationship did break down immediately afterwards. Certainly, it is easy to imagine how Kane and Son Heung-min would dovetail well at the top of Conte’s preferred 3-5-2. The summer loan signing Cristian Romero could also benefit from returning to such a system, playing between two other centre-backs as he did at Atalanta. What guarantees, though, have Tottenham offered to Conte? He has always demanded that clubs who employ him match his ambition with investment. He left Juventus after infamously suggesting that nobody should expect to eat in a €100 restaurant for €10. He blamed a disappointing second season at Chelsea on the club’s failure to deliver him Lukaku and Virgil van Dijk. His critics will accuse him of always wanting more, pointing out the many players signed to support his vision at both clubs. In Italy it did not escape anyone’s attention that Inter found their best form last season after a January in which financial constraints prevented them from making any moves. The manager was obliged to work on getting the most from players who had been marginalised, including the former Tottenham man Christian Eriksen. What Conte wants and what he needs to succeed may be two different things, yet it seems inconceivable that a man with his CV and personality would take any job on somebody else’s terms. He believes he can win trophies at a club where Mourinho, Mauricio Pochettino and André Villas-Boas failed to do so. The least that Conte will expect from Spurs is to share in his vision for how that can be achieved.Northern Georgia has found itself besieged by millions of large yellow, blue and red spiders, in scenes residents say bring to mind the movie Arachnophobia. The Joro spider is an invasive species, native to east Asia, that was first spotted in Georgia in 2014. Since then, the 3in arachnid appears to have thrived in the warm climes of the state. Its presence has upset locals, however, particularly given its propensity to spin dense webs up to 3 metres deep. Jennifer Turpin, a self-described arachnophobe who lives in Atlanta, told the Associated Press she stopped blowing leaves in her yard after walking into a Joro web. Turpin, 50, said she tried to set a web on fire but became concerned the web would fall on her. She swiftly backpedaled, only to fall into a hole. Turpin asked a neighbor remove the spider. “I just don’t think I’m going to do yard work any more,” Turpin said. Debbie Gilbert, from Norcross, 20 miles north-east of Atlanta, was also forced to take matters into her own hands. She said she uses a stick to wind up the webs, before tossing it, spiders and all, to the ground. The 67-year-old then stomped on the spiders, she said. “I don’t advocate killing anything,” Gilbert said. “I live in peace with all the spiders around here and everything else. But [Joros] just don’t belong here, that’s all.” Joro spiders, or Trichonephila clavata, are common in Japan, China, Korea and Taiwan. It is unclear how they made their way to the US. Researchers say the particular abundance of the spiders this year could be down to changes in weather. It is unclear whether the spider will have a negative impact on native flora and fauna, as do other invasive species, including the notorious spotted lanternfly. Ann Rypstra, who studies spider behavior at Miami University, told the AP more research was needed. “I’d always err on the side of caution when you have something that establishes itself where it’s not supposed to be,” she said. In the meantime, people across north Georgia are trying to come to terms with their new neighbours. In Winterville, Will Hudson’s front porch became unusable amid an abundance of Joro webs 10ft deep. An entomologist at the University of Georgia, he said that he had killed more than 300 of the spiders. “The webs are a real mess,” Hudson said. “Nobody wants to come out of the door in the morning, walk down the steps and get a face full of spider web.” Hudson said that though the spiders can bite, they are not a threat to humans. A researcher collecting them with her bare hands reported the occasional pinch, he said, but said the spiders never broke her skin. “Last year there were dozens of spiders, and they began to be something of a nuisance when I was doing yard work,” Hudson said. “This year, I have several hundred, and they actually make the place look spooky with all the messy webs – like a scene out of Arachnophobia.”Australia has more than 100 fossil fuel developments in the pipeline that could result in nearly 1.7bn tonnes of greenhouse gases a year – equivalent to about 5% of global industrial emissions – if all were to go ahead, an analysis says. The Australian government lists 116 major coal and gas projects under development, each valued at more than A$50m and with the potential to reach a final investment decision in the next five years. Not all will be built, but a new report says it is an indication of the fossil fuel development that continues in Australia, including with taxpayer support, despite the Morrison government committing to net zero emissions by 2050. Launching a plan for the country to reach the target last week ahead of the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow, the prime minister, Scott Morrison, said the government would “not shut down our coal or gas production”. The plan said the country’s fossil fuel export industries would continue “through to 2050 and beyond, supporting jobs and regional communities”. Angus Taylor, the emissions reduction minister, has also promised to use Cop26 to promote Australia as a safe and reliable place to invest in gas and hydrogen. An analysis by the Australia Institute, a progressive thinktank, found the most recent data from the energy and resources department’s chief economist, published last December, listed 72 coal and 44 gas and oil projects with the potential to be developed. The institute also included the proposed Beetaloo Basin gas field in the Northern Territory, which the government has committed up to $224m to develop as part of what it calls a “gas-fired recovery” from the pandemic. Based on the estimated annual capacity of each proposal, it found together they could add about 146m tonnes to emissions within Australia (equivalent to a nearly 30% annual increase) during extraction and processing. The overwhelming bulk of the emissions – about 1.6bn tonnes – would be released offshore after the coal and gas was sold and burned for energy. About two-thirds of the coal projects were listed as at feasibility stage. Government officials noted there was a growing preference for mine expansions over greenfield projects and that some lenders and investors would no longer finance thermal coal, which is used in electricity generation. Richie Merzian, a former Australian government climate negotiator now with the Australia Institute, said the country continued to pursue an aggressive expansion of fossil fuels with potential emissions on the list equivalent to more than 200 coal-fired power plants. “Australia cannot claim to be acting on climate change while simultaneously expanding fossil fuel projects,” he said. The Morrison government’s position on fossil fuels is that cost and global markets will dictate the pace of the shift to cleaner technology. It has approved the expansion of four coalmines since September and in July granted a $175m loan for a new metallurgical coalmine in Queensland. On gas, it has said it hoped to develop four more basins after Beetaloo. State and territory governments under both the Coalition and Labor also back fossil fuel expansion. Hugh Saddler, an energy analyst and an honorary associate professor at the Australian National University, said the federal government was “just plugging on absolutely business-as-usual” on fossil fuels. “There’s been no thought about how you fit that into some supposed plan to reach net zero by 2050,” he said. “We know the important thing to stop the most catastrophic climate change is to stop fossil fuels, but Australia is putting its foot on the accelerator to develop coal and gas as quickly as it can and putting taxpayers’ dollars into doing that.” The government’s 2050 net zero emissions plan has been criticised for not including new policies and relying on new technology to make deep cuts in greenhouse gas emissions in the 2030s and 40s. It says it is committing $20bn over a decade to help lower the cost of some technologies. Most of the spending is a continuation of long-standing funding for clean energy agencies. The government has backed carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology – burying greenhouse gases from industrial sites kilometres underground – to extend their life, and committed $250m to a “CCS technologies and hubs” program. Australian governments have previously committed about $4bn in funding for CCS, but it has failed to prove commercially viable. The country has one operating CCS plant, at Chevron’s Gorgon gas development in Western Australia. It has suffered delays and operational problems, and captures only a portion of the emissions at the site. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning The gas company Santos confirmed on Monday it would proceed with a $220m CCS development at the Moomba gas reservoir in South Australia after the Morrison government approved it to earn revenue from carbon credits for storing emissions below ground. Santos said the project could store 1.7m tonnes of carbon dioxide a year from 2024. The gas industry group, the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association, said the Australia Institute’s analysis should not be considered “objective, scientific or reasonable” as the thinktank had made its opposition to the industry “very clear”. Its chief executive, Andrew McConville, said it would be more constructive for people to listen to those that had recognised gas had a role to play in a low-emissions future, including the International Energy Agency, the United Nations, and Australia’s former chief scientist Alan Finkel. Some have backed gas – which has about half the emissions of coal when burned, and more when methane leaks during extraction – as playing an ongoing role as the world moves away from coal, but few have backed opening new gas fields. The head of the International Energy Agency, Fatih Birol, earlier this year said there should be “no new investments in oil, gas and coal from now” if governments were serious about the climate crisis. Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull on Tuesday said Australia had to “face up to the fact that we’ve got to stop burning coal and gas”. “The proposition that seems to be fashionable in some quarters here that we can keep on burning coal, and indeed exporting coal, and that somehow is consistent with getting to net zero by 2050, is nonsense,” he told the ABC’s RN Breakfast. “The reality is if we keep burning fossil fuels we will fry the planet.”A small group of Ethiopian and Eritrean men stand shoeless and shivering in Calais. A few hours earlier, they almost drowned in the Channel, trying to cross to the UK. They got into difficulty when the motor on their boat failed. Their jeans are stiff and sodden with sand and seawater. “We called the French coastguard to rescue us but they told us to call the English coastguard,” says one man. “Eventually, the French rescued us and brought us back to Calais. “I studied political science at university in my country and I want to work and contribute in the UK. I do not know what I can do now. I can’t go back and I can’t go forward. There is a lot of racism in this situation. We need to find peace. If we have no peace we have no life.” Five years ago this week, workers dressed in orange jumpsuits and white hard hats came with sledgehammers and diggers to demolish the refugee camp that had been dubbed “the Jungle” by the migrants living there in this city on the northern French coast. The squalid 1.5 sq mile (3.9 sq km) area of scrubland had become a symbol of Europe’s migration crisis after more than 1 million desperate people – many escaping the conflict in Syria – fled to Europe by sea during 2015, according to UNHCR data. Migrants and police at the ‘Old Lidl’ site in Calais. The police clear the site regularly, evicting anyone living there and seizing remaining belongings. Today, the Jungle has gone, but the migrants remain – a report from Human Rights Watch, using data from local charities, estimates there are still about 2,000 migrants “in wooded areas, in and around disused warehouses, and under bridges in and around Calais”, including about 300 unaccompanied children. Several hundred more are camped in a forest near Dunkirk. The migrants waiting in these areas are at the centre of a political storm. In the UK, the home secretary’s draconian nationality and borders bill, which includes plans to punish asylum seekers who cross the Channel in small boats with a jail sentence and a ban on receiving state funds, looms on the horizon. There is growing hostility to the migrants on the French side, too, with police in Calais daily evicting the threadbare camps that replaced the Jungle. Authorities have even installed large rocks and boulders at some of the regular distribution points to prevent aid vans parking. Brexit has slowed shipments of clothing and other essential items. On a patch of bare ground known as “Old Lidl” – it was once the site of a Lidl store – dozens of young men, mostly Sudanese, gather to replenish their water supplies and charge their phones via large portable power banks. A man sits alone on the former site of the Jungle. They laugh and joke, but they look tired, lines prematurely etched in some of their young faces – and all are underweight, baggy jeans flapping around their legs. One of them leads us to a small area of woodland where a group of young men are sleeping in a clearing, surrounded by rubbish. One is dozing in an open cardboard box; another is lying on the ground with his legs covered in blankets. He says he is struggling to walk because he was beaten badly by the police. “Our routine is the same every day and every night,” says a third man. “We try and sleep a bit during the day if we can. Then we go to bed about 8pm. At midnight every night we wake up and try to cross the Channel. We try to find a boat we can cross in ourselves because we don’t have the money to pay the smugglers. Usually we don’t succeed. We hurry back here by 6am so we can hide our few belongings before the police come to evict us every morning. Then the same cycle starts again.” The migrants here – from Sudan, Eritrea, Kurdistan and more recently Vietnam (who are said to be accompanied by traffickers) are undeterred in their plans to seek safety in the UK. The number of asylum applications in Britain fell in 2020 to 29,456 (significantly lower than the 93,475 asylum applications made in France and the 121,955 in Germany). However, migrant small boat crossings from northern France to the UK are at record levels. These Sudanese young men are gloomy about their chances of reaching the UK. One, who came here via Libya, shows us a photograph on his phone of a 16-year-old boy known as Yasser, also Sudanese, who died on 28 September trying to board a truck at Calais. He had hoped he could secretly reach the UK by clinging on to the vehicle. “He was my friend,” says the young man showing the boy’s photo. “He was so small. Like the rest of us, all he wanted was to live in a safe place. We call Priti Patel ‘Madame No’ because she won’t allow us to do this.” Several hundred migrants are camped in a forest near Dunkirk. The squalid conditions will only become worse in winter. The French media has reported a second similar death of a young migrant trying to board a truck to the UK on 21 October. “The only thing in our lives now is to get across the Channel,” the young man continues. “My hair has grown long. I have said I will not cut it until I reach the UK.” This desperation is just as palpable in neighbouring Dunkirk. The Grande-Synthe camp here is home to several hundred migrants, many of whom are Kurdish. They, too, have endured difficult journeys – some spent years stuck in camps in Greece. When we visit, the sun is shining and the autumn air is still warm in the forest area where the camp is based. The mud paths are dry now, but when the rain and snow come the area will be treacherous to navigate. Refugee barbers trim the hair of friends and family members, unofficial shopkeepers sell soft drinks on folding tables and Kurdish music blares. This group is more likely to have the money to pay smugglers, so tend to spend shorter periods of time here before crossing to the UK – some have enough money to buy a few essentials from the nearby supermarket. Charities including Care 4 Calais (top) and Refugee Info Bus (bottom) provide migrants with food, water, clothing and phone charging services. However, the funder Choose Love is due to stop financing at least seven local charities. Navid, a Kurd who speaks perfect English, was forced to flee Iran after he took part in protests against the government, an action which is punishable by death, and was called to appear in court. “I studied mechanical engineering at one of the best universities in Iran,” he says. “I travelled through nine countries to get here; a lot of the time I was walking. The journey took months. I hope I can cross the Channel to the UK soon. We are refugees. We have no other way.” One woman from Eritrea sits in the mud with her five-month-old baby. Her two older children play nearby. Like many, she is fleeing more than one problem. She escaped Eritrea as a child with her family and grew up in Sudan, a country she eventually had to escape from, too, arriving in Germany where she sought sanctuary. She married a man there who became increasingly violent and threatening, forcing her to run once again, this time with three young children in tow. “Everything is shit,” she says. “I have no other words to describe my situation.” While anti-migrant groups and politicians crank up the pressure on Patel to take a tough line on those trying to reach the UK, human rights campaigners say the home secretary’s plans to make Channel crossings “unviable” is simply putting more lives at risk – as desperate people have little other choice but to attempt to cross regardless. Two migrants who spoke to the Guardian. The man on the right had tried to cross the Channel the night before. For those migrants here who are still waiting to get across, their precarious situation is expected to deteriorate. Choose Love, a major funder, is due to stop financing at least seven local charities in Calais and Dunkirk that provide migrants with food, water, clothing, phone charging, materials for basic shelter and firewood for cooking and keeping warm. Choose Love is one of the most high-profile funders supporting refugees in northern France; Coldplay, Dua Lipa, Olivia Colman, Jude Law, Stella McCartney and others have raised funds for it. Meanwhile, the police evictions continue. According to the organisation Human Rights Observers, police conducted more than 950 routine eviction operations in Calais and at least 90 routine evictions in Grande-Synthe in 2020, seizing nearly 5,000 tents and tarps and hundreds of sleeping bags and blankets. We watch one such morning eviction in Calais. Five police vans turn up, the migrants pick up their bedding and stand to the side, the cleaning trucks come to take away any remaining belongings, before the migrants return to the same place to bed down once more, waiting to attempt the Channel again. Today, the cleaning truck leaves empty. These migrants have no belongings left for them to take. While refugees are denied access to running water, electricity and a roof over their heads – typical war zone conditions – they are living just yards from French citizens who have access to all these things in their suburban homes. Anti-eviction protesters Ludovic Holbein, Anaïs Vogel and Philippe Demeestère in St Pierre church, Calais. The disparity is not wasted on local human rights campaigners, who have embarked on a hunger strike, which they say they will not stop until the French authorities halt the evictions. “We tried to have discussions and protests in the street, but nothing changed. So we had to take radical action,” says Anaïs Vogel, one of the strikers from the Secours Catholique charity based in St Pierre church, Calais. “We want the evictions to stop. Everyone is human and everyone is equal.” Back in Grande-Synthe, we meet Rashid, 45, a Kurdish man from Iraq. He has been in Dunkirk for only two days, but it has taken him several years to reach this camp. As an IT worker and security guard, he says he was asked to take part in state corruption, refused, and had to flee. He crossed from Turkey to Greece, where he was stuck for three years. “Five times we tried to cross to Albania from Greece, but each time we were pushed back,” he says. “We made it to Albania eventually and spent 50 hours walking through the mountains. We were so tired and wanted to stop, but we couldn’t. Here, my clothes are wet because water comes into our tent, but my life is safe. In this country, I am not scared to sleep in the street.”An international human rights investigation into the brutal civil war in Ethiopia’s Tigray province will be published on Wednesday amid concerns that the scope of the UN inquiry has been constrained by both Addis Ababa and the ongoing conflict. Due to be released almost exactly a year after the conflict began, the joint UN Human Rights Office and government-created Ethiopian Human Rights Commission (EHRC), will nevertheless be the most authoritative overview of the war and its consequences. Independent human rights groups, humanitarian organisations and foreign media are banned from Tigray, in a conflict where at least tens of thousands have died and there have been accusations of sexual violence and deliberate starvation. Investigators were allowed to visit Tigray however, because of the partnership with the EHRC – but were not able to visit all key locations, including the site of an alleged massacre in Axum in November 2020 by Eritrean troops fighting alongside the Ethiopian government. The involvement of the EHRC has left Tigrayan leaders sceptical about the investigation’s independence – while the conflict, which saw much of Tigray recaptured by rebels over the summer, has created further difficulties. David Crane, the founder of the Global Accountability Network and founding chief prosecutor for the special court for Sierra Leone, an international tribunal, said: “What you need when you go into an atrocity zone is a clean slate so outside investigators can look into it neutrally, dispassionately. “You want to do these things where you don’t build doubt, distrust from the beginning,” including among people interviewed, he added. Ethiopia expelled seven senior UN officials last month, including the human rights officer Sonny Onyegbula, who was working on the report. Addis Ababa accused the officials of “meddling in internal affairs”. Rising tensions between the Ethiopian government led by Abiy Ahmed and the Tigrayan TPLF, previously the dominant group in the country’s politics, led to the start of fighting in November 2020. Initially, Ethiopia, in alliance with neighbouring Eritrea, seized control of Tigray, amid multiple reports of atrocities. Tigrayan forces regrouped and staged a counterattack, regaining much of Tigray in June and capturing parts of neighbouring provinces. Despite a recent counterattack by Ethiopian forces in October, the TPLF claims to have gained further ground, seizing strategic towns on the road to Addis, prompting speculation that the capital itself could fall to the rebels. In a sign of paranoia around the fate of Addis Ababa, state media called on Monday for residents to register weapons in the next two days. On Sunday, Ahmed called for citizens to “use any type of weapons to block the destructive [rebel push], to overturn it and bury it”. “Dying for Ethiopia is a duty for all of us,” he said. The rights report only covers the period from November 2020 to 28 June 2021, when the TPLF recaptured Mekelle, the province’s capital, and is based on 269 interviews with victims and witnesses, as well as with other sources. Some involved in the investigation told the Associated Press that the head of the EHRC, Daniel Bekele, underplayed some allegations that fighters from the country’s Amhara region were responsible for abuses and pressed to highlight abuses by Tigray forces. But Bekele asserted the commission’s independence, saying it was “primarily accountable to the people it is created to serve” and that he and the commission had consistently cited “serious indications that all parties involved in the conflict have committed atrocities”. Bekele also said the investigation lacked the support of the Tigray authorities now administering the region. The UN has said Ethiopia’s government had no say in the report’s publication, though it was given the chance to read it in advance and to point out “anything it believes to be incorrect”. It has acknowledged there have been difficulties in accessing key locations. Last week, Ethiopia’s government released the results of its own investigations focusing on alleged abuses by Tigray forces. The ministry of justice said it found 483 non-combatants were killed and 109 raped in parts of Amhara and Afar that have been recaptured by federal forces in recent weeks. The spokesperson for the Tigray forces, Getachew Reda, said the allegations were not worth “the paper they’re written on”. Accusations of rapes and killings by Tigray forces are “absolutely untrue, at least on a level these organisations are alleging,” he said.Jacob Rees-Mogg has questioned the fairness of the Conservative MP Owen Paterson facing a six-week suspension from parliament and possible byelection, after he was found to have committed an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules. Rees-Mogg, who is leader of the Commons, raised concerns about the investigation, and expressed sympathy with Paterson’s complaint that 17 witnesses who wanted to speak in his favour were not able to give oral evidence. Ahead of a vote on whether to enforce the suspension recommended by parliament’s standards commissioner and committee, Rees-Mogg kept open the possibility the government could whip Tory MPs to reduce or cut it completely. “It is always very important that systems appear to be fair, and therefore if somebody has witnesses, it would normally appear to be fair that those witnesses should be heard,” he said on his regular ConservativeHome podcast. He said the standards commissioner – Kathryn Stone – could have appointed a senior legal figure to help in the investigation, and added: “Many people have been raising with me recently questions about the process that affected Owen Paterson.” Paterson has tried to dismiss the propriety of the two-year investigation into his business links with Randox and Lynn’s Country Foods, claiming it was not compliant with natural justice because he was acting as a whistleblower and that the anguish played a “major role” in driving his wife, Rose, to suicide last summer. Part of Paterson’s complaint was that investigators declined to take oral evidence from 17 witnesses who wanted to speak in his support. The standards committee – on which several Tory MPs sit – said the witnesses wanted to talk about their perception of Paterson’s motivations, which would not substantially alter the facts about what rules had been broken. It added: “We do not see what further relevant information could usefully be gleaned by inviting oral evidence from the witnesses concerned.” Rees-Mogg said: “That is an interesting view to come to, because other people might say: ‘How do you know whether it was relevant to the inquiry until you’ve taken their evidence and have found out the precise context of how things were done?’” Asked if Stone was mistaken, Rees-Mogg said he did not want to “prejudge” how MPs would vote on Wednesday. He confirmed that the motion to suspend Paterson would be amendable, meaning his supporters may choose to try to reduce the punishment, and left open the possibility Tory whips may instruct MPs to support such a move. Rees-Mogg said: “The government always has a responsibility to ensure that parliamentary business is dealt with efficiently, in a timely manner, and that the reputation of parliament and the government is upheld in all senses. Therefore, applying whips to individual votes – however serious they are – is perfectly reasonable.” Boris Johnson’s spokesman declined to say whether the prime minister sympathised with Rees-Mogg’s criticisms of the investigation into Paterson’s conduct. Asked about the comments by the leader of the house, he said: “This is a detailed report, a 175-page report, with complex issues and evidence which need to be looked at carefully. As the commission’s remit doesn’t look at the conduct of government ministers, I can’t comment any further.” “This is a matter for MPs,” the spokesman added. He also declined to say whether or how Johnson would vote on the sanctions against Paterson, saying only: “We’ll have to get to tomorrow.” Chris Bryant, the chair of the standards committee, said it “considered Paterson’s complaints about the process and rebutted each of his points in the report”, and added: “In the end, the facts speak for themselves.”Last week the government finally published its proposals on how it intends to ban the degrading practice of so-called “conversion therapy”. It has taken years of lobbying, several high-profile resignations, as well as various statements from senior religious leaders and indeed whole denominations – such as the Church of England and the Methodist church – to get us to this point. Was it worth the wait? In truth there is much in the proposals that can and should be welcomed. The government has shown willing to listen to the senior human rights lawyers behind the Cooper report, which I convened, and has accepted our proposal of a two-pronged approach involving both criminal and civil remedies. This means that as well as clear criminal sanctions against perpetrators, who now face sentence of up to five years and a hefty fine, it will also introduce new protection orders that will work to safeguard young vulnerable LGBT+ people from harm. That is, if you are under 18 or have been found to have been forced or coerced into conversion therapy. But this restriction, focusing purely on the under-18s, is woefully inadequate and leaves thousands still open to abuse, particularly in religious settings – which the government’s own research has shown accounts for the majority of conversion practices. The new law would still allow adults to freely seek out such therapies. However, we know that it is young adults (aged 18-24) who are vulnerable to significant risk when they leave home and find themselves wooed by fundamentalist religious groups. So why has the government left this major loophole? I think, sadly, it is for the same reason that it has taken so many years to formulate this legislation: it does not want to offend a small minority of rightwing evangelicals within its party who want to be able to continue these barbaric practices of “praying the gay (and trans) away”. As someone who underwent nearly 20 years of conversion therapy, which resulted in me being hospitalised twice, I find this utterly unforgivable. The current proposals to allow adults to give “informed consent” would not have protected me, nor indeed the thousands of others like me who willingly undertook conversion therapy because we believed it was the right thing to do. Indeed, everyone we knew believed it was the right thing to do. To not go through it would have meant being ostracised by all those around us whom we loved and respected. I believed my desires to be sinful and was told that they must have arisen as a result of some deep trauma or unhealthy relationship with one of my family members. As a result, I put myself through years of “healing prayer” ministry, sharing some of my most intimate moments and relationships with strangers in the hope that we might “find the key” as to why I was attracted to women. I was constantly told that my prayers were unanswered because of my lack of faith, or that I obviously was not walking a godly enough path. Part of the trauma of these abusive practices is that you, the victim, are always left with the burden of being told it is your fault that you are not healed. I went on to seek other forms of spiritual counselling, including many exorcisms – paying thousands of pounds in the process. Years of shame, guilt and loneliness were then added to an increasing belief that God had deserted me. It was a living hell. I am a relatively strong person, and it nearly broke me – sadly many others are not so lucky, and tragically come to a point of believing that the only way out is to take their lives. That’s why conversion practices need to be banned outright, with no exceptions. That’s also why these rightwing evangelicals need to be held accountable for the trauma they cause. The government has sadly prioritised listening to their voices over those of survivors and has been oblivious to the mounting evidence of the harm that these religious practices inflict. The government needs to think again. First, it must learn from the experiences of survivors and prioritise their concerns, for we are the true experts. We know better than anyone what needs to be banned, and how best to do this. Two short meetings with the ministers for equalities – the sum total of their direct engagement with survivors – will never get to the bottom of this; nor will trying to “balance” our views with those who have caused us such harm, and who want to continue doing so. There is no middle road here: one needs to either protect people from harm or leave the door open to abuse. We cannot have another consultation that seeks to legitimise the concerns of those who are determined to continue with these degrading practices. Second, the government needs to listen to the senior human rights lawyers who have set out in the Cooper report why religious freedoms can and must be limited when significant harm is being caused. It should follow their recommendations on how best to do this: by focusing on practices that have the “predetermined purpose” of trying to change, “cure” or suppress a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity. It must also take on board their arguments about why “informed consent” for adults cannot be a defence in law when so many people’s health, wellbeing and indeed their very lives are at risk. That is why we do not allow for consent to female genital mutilation or forced marriage, or even such everyday matters as wearing a seatbelt. Finally, it must listen to the religious leaders from around the world who have also come together to ask their governments to ban this abhorrent practice. This will also enable those leaders to work within their organisations to ensure that it is ultimately stamped out. The government cannot afford to get this wrong – too many lives are quite literally at stake. My hope and prayer is that it will, finally, listen and recognise that outlawing conversion therapy can never have get-out clauses. Anything else is a ban in name only. Jayne Ozanne is director of Ozanne Foundation and the founder of the Ban Conversion Therapy coalitionThere was a setback last month for this play inspired by a hit podcast when co-writer and performer Harry Peacock dropped out for health reasons. So how does the show fare now it’s on its feet? It certainly sends laughter rolling through the aisles, as two middle-aged divorcees – one nice, one nasty – embroil themselves in ever more baroque misadventures. But over two hours, the stage play does strain against the podcast conceit, which is that Brian and Roger communicate only via answerphone messages. One craves character development, which never really comes. The plot is circular too, in that it recounts a succession of scrapes into which Roger’s good nature allows Brian to entangle him. It begins small-scale, as the pair arrange to watch their Avatar DVD in Brian’s student digs, then proceeds to outdo itself ever more garishly. Eager-to-please Roger, pining for his family and stony broke, is coerced to take part in a seance in West Ruislip, an Albanian gambling ring in a Wiltshire abattoir, and finally a donkey trek across China disguised as a UN diplomat. All end violently badly for our hapless hero, while false friend Brian makes himself scarce. There’s pleasure to be had here, in Peacock and co-writer Dan Skinner’s ear for the bathos of their characters’ compromised lives, in which a regional manager job at Ask Pizza is the zenith of glamour. In Skinner’s performance, Roger’s pathetic pluck in the face of adversity and his never-quite-strong-enough efforts to resist Brian’s manipulation are beautifully played. They do get repetitive though, just as Brian’s cartoonish selfishness and cynicism give Simon Lipkin (stepping into Peacock’s role) only a couple of dimensions to play with. None of that’s a problem in a comic podcast, but a play needs more. Director David Babani tries to supply it, opening up space around the restricting convention of Brian and Roger’s phone messages with impressive digital backdrops (video design by Timothy Bird). In lieu of character progression, events become increasingly manic and overblown as the play progresses, leaving its most fertile dramatic terrain – the everyday poignancy of the two divorcees’ lives – in its wake. Brian &amp; Roger: A Highly Offensive Play is at the Menier Chocolate Factory, London, until 18 December.It is a sport conceived originally by the founder of the modern Olympics to help cavalry riders to develop the skills needed to survive behind enemy lines. But after 109 years, modern pentathlon’s governing body has voted secretly to remove horse riding and replace it with cycling, the Guardian can reveal. Multiple sources have said the decision was taken by the Union Internationale de Pentathlon Moderne’s executive board in recent days, and was hastened by the distressing scenes at the Tokyo Olympics when a horse was punched by a German coach after it refused to jump a fence. Those pictures made global headlines and the UIPM is understood to have acted in order to preserve its status in the Olympics in the lead-up to the Paris 2024 Games. While the decision has not yet been announced officially, it is already facing a backlash from some countries who believe that losing the horse-riding element fundamentally changes the sport. Modern pentathlon has been a core Olympic event since 1912 when it was invented by Pierre de Coubertin – and while it has since moved from a five-day event to a solitary day it has always tested athletes in fencing, swimming, show jumping, pistol shooting, and cross-country running. The UIPM refused to deny the story when confronted by the Guardian, with a spokesperson saying: “I am not able to give you any information right now.” However, the organisation later released a statement: “As part of UIPM’s commitment to maintaining a strong, dynamic profile for modern pentathlon, a series of strategic meetings are being held. These meetings will include an upcoming call with national federations later this week. The outcome of these meetings will be detailed in a press release to be published on 4 November.” The former British modern pentathlete Kate Allenby, who won a bronze for Team GB at the Sydney Olympics, told the Guardian any move to replace riding would be a “disaster” for the sport. “This needs talking about because it’s not modern pentathlon if it hasn’t got riding in it,” she said. However another British Olympian Greg Whyte, who also won a world silver medal in 1994, said he could understand the change. “I don’t think it is necessarily a bad thing,” he said. “Back in the day, the fencing part alone used to take 14 hours, while in Paris the whole event will last just 90 minutes. All sports evolve, and no sport is immune from change in the modern TV era.” The UIPM is understood to have acted after the sport was heavily criticised in Tokyo. The German competitor Annika Schleu, who had been in the gold-medal position before the showjumping, was seen in tears after her ride, Saint Boy, refused to jump over the obstacles. The German coach Kim Raisner, who was seen punching Saint Boy, was sent home from Tokyo and the UIPM promised to conduct a full review as well as disciplining Raisner. Britain won the men’s and women’s modern pentathlon events at the Tokyo 2020 Games courtesy of Joe Choong and Kate French.Here is a film that tugs at the heartstrings as it painstakingly covers the lives of 10 patients participating in stem cell research trials in the US. From a quadriplegic high-school basketball star to a mother with recurring cancers, the subjects experience remarkable recoveries thanks to this medical revolution. One of the most moving moments is when Ryan, the teenage athlete, returns home four months after his initial treatment and raises his hand to greet his loved ones at the airport, a progress that would have been unimaginable without the advent of stem cell therapy. While the treatment has proved extraordinarily successful in combating incurable diseases, the research remains controversial as it involves the use of human embryos, which is inevitably intertwined with the abortion debate hotly contested in US politics. Furthermore, pharmaceutical corporations are hostile to a medical technology that would significantly reduce the traditional reliance on medications. Indeed, in the case of cancer patients, as stem cells can multiply into healthy cells to repair damaged areas from within, the research aims to reach a point where chemotherapy would no longer be needed. Once banned by George W Bush, federal funding for stem cell studies has gradually increased, though it remains mostly awarded for non-embryonic research. This documentary is an effective emotional appeal, though perhaps it could have begun to examine the scientific side of the research earlier than the halfway point of a two-hour film. Nevertheless, the closing image of a woman with corneal damage now able to enjoy indoor mountain climbing swells with the optimism that the research will be allowed to continue on its journey. • Ending Disease is released on 5 November on digital platforms.Sausages are my go-to quick dinner, but I always rely on the same recipes. How can I jazz them up? Tessa, Glasgow “I love sausages in any guise, and the simpler, the better,” says Stosie Madi, chef and co-owner of the Parkers Arms in Newton-in-Bowland, Lancashire. “They are, however, also a wonderful driver for lots of fun dishes.” So how can you get more, er, bang from your banger? If you’re cooking for a crowd this Bonfire Night, Tom Kerridge suggests channelling pigs in blankets: “Dust your sausages with a little curry powder, wrap them in bacon, then cook them on the barbecue or in the oven,” says the chef/patron of Michelin-starred The Hand &amp; Flowers in Marlow, Buckinghamshire. Then tuck them in hot dog buns with smoked cheese and serve with “mayonnaise mixed with German mustard, chopped dill, cornichons and shallots”. For ultimate autumn vibes, Tommy Heaney, chef/patron of Heaneys in Cardiff, braises lentils, onion and bacon, tosses them with roast pumpkin, and serves topped with sausages and salsa verde. Heaney makes the latter with mint, parsley, watercress, capers, gherkins, anchovies and sea salt: “I love pork with mint,” he says. “It’s not traditional, but it works really well.” And if you’re lighting a bonfire, “brown the sausages, onions and pumpkin, put them all in a casserole with some stock and whack it straight on the fire”. Finish with a dollop of the same salsa verde, and it’s job done. Pumpkins are also welcome in a “sausage tagine-type thing”, says Madi, who mixes roast squash with ready-cooked chickpeas and spiced couscous. “The couscous is the carrier of the spice, so add cumin, harissa, a little chilli to give it some heat.” Serve with grilled sausages and garlic-yoghurt for “a lovely centrepiece”. Alternatively, up the ante with something more theatrical: “Hollow out a pumpkin, roast the flesh and make an almost-pureed, velvety soup,” she says, then pour into the pumpkin shell. “Roast some sausages, put them on skewers and dip into the soup to add a bit of fun.” While sausages defy the seasons, come autumn, they’re particularly good in pasta, traybakes, cassoulet or, Madi says, simply with spuds: “Cut up some grilled sausages, put them on a nice layer of mash, add lots of cheese and grill.” Then there are stews, which, Kerridge says, can easily be made with canned stuff. “Roast sausages in a pan to get loads of colour on them, throw in a drained tin of mixed beans, add a tin of tomato soup, bring to a boil, then reduce and add a good pinch of smoked paprika and some salt and pepper.” Serve with warm crusty bread for mopping. Perhaps the simplest solution, however, is a sausage wrap, which Madi endorses “every step of the way”. She brushes Lebanese flatbread with oil, adds the skinned sausagemeat, some cheese and/or onion if the mood takes her, folds the bread over, brushes with more oil and bakes at 180C for 12-15 minutes – “or just enough time to have a big glass of wine”. Dip into sweet chilli sauce-spiked yoghurt or serve with a tin of beans jazzed up with Tabasco. “Throw your shoes off and tuck in: there’s really nothing nicer.” • Got a culinary dilemma? Email feast@theguardian.comA Canadian official and academic specialising in Indigenous health issues has been placed on administrative leave from her university after an investigation challenged her claims of Indigenous ancestry. Carrie Bourassa, a professor at the University of Saskatchewan, has described herself as having Métis, Anishinaabe and Tlingit heritage. In 2019 she appeared at a TEDx talk wearing a blue embroidered shawl and holding a feather, where she identified herself as “Morning Star Bear”. However, an investigation by CBC television alleged that Bourassa was entirely of European descent. She recently stepped down from her role as scientific director for Indigenous peoples health at the Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR). Bourassa had been described by the CIHR as “a Métis woman, a highly regarded Indigenous researcher” who “has been a selfless leader and a tireless champion for all Indigenous peoples in this country”. The CBC investigation has drawn comparisons with the case of Rachel Dolezal, an American academic and activist who was accused of passing herself off as black. A Métis professor who worked with Bourassa told CBC she was “the modern-day Grey Owl” – a reference to Archibald Stansfeld Belaney, the British-born conservationist and writer who passed himself off as a Native American in the early 20th century. CBC reported that people who worked with Bourassa had expressed disquiet about her account of her ancestry, and some examined her genealogical records, which reportedly showed that her ancestors were of Russian, Polish and Czechoslovakian descent. In an email to CBC, Bourassa said she had been adopted as Métis by a friend of her grandfather and had subsequently been adopted into other communities. She accused the broadcaster of running a “smear campaign” against her, adding she was “shocked and dismayed at the recent attack on my identity”. In a statement released by Bourassa after the claims were broadcast she said she identified as Métis and that elders who supported her did not rely on “blood quantums” to assess Indigenous identity. In comments reported in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix, she added: “Maybe in the fact that I’m trying so hard to pull pieces together, maybe I’ve forgotten certain things. It’s hard sometimes when you’re so anxious to find some of the gaps you know are there.” The treatment of Indigenous people in Canada has been in the spotlight in recent months after the discovery of unmarked grave sites at residential schools that had attempted to eradicate the culture and languages of Indigenous populations. Among those quoted by CBC was Janet Smylie, a health academic of Métis heritage at the University of Toronto, who wrote a chapter in a 2017 book on Indigenous parenting edited by Bourassa. Smylie told the broadcaster she had done her own research into Bourassa’s ancestry. “It makes you feel a bit sick,” she said. “To have an impostor who is speaking on behalf of Métis and Indigenous people to the country about literally what it means to be Métis … that’s very disturbing and upsetting and harmful.” The university and the health agency initially supported Bourassa, though on Monday the university issued a statement saying it had “serious concerns with the additional information revealed in Dr Bourassa’s responses to the media.”Elysée officials have expressed fury at the decision of Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, to leak a private text message from the French president, Emmanuel Macron, as the diplomatic rift between the two countries deepened. “Confidence has been completely shattered,” a close adviser to Macron told French media on Tuesday. “Disclosing a text message exchange between heads of state or government is a pretty crude and unconventional tactic.” The adviser told Le Parisien that it “would never even enter the head” of the French president to disclose communications of this kind. “It is not the kind of thing that is likely to improve relations between France and Australia,” they said. In the text, two days before the announcement of the Aukus security partnership and the cancellation of a major French contract to supply submarines to Australia, Macron asked Morrison whether he could expect good or bad news on the submarines. Its publication came after Macron told reporters he “knew” that Morrison had lied to him over plans with the US and the UK to acquire nuclear-propelled submarines. Morrison rejected the claim and said he was “not going to cop sledging of Australia”. French media described the text message leak as “spectacular and extremely rare”, saying it appeared to be aimed at demonstrating that Macron had already been informed the contract might not go ahead even before it was torn up. But the Elysée official insisted the text showed rather that Macron “did not know what stage the discussions had got to” just two days before Australia called off the A$90bn (£49bn) deal for 12 conventionally powered submarines. A second French government source told Agence-France Presse that if a message existed that clearly showed that Macron did in fact know, “they would have reported that instead”. The source added: “We knew the Australians had some issues, but they only concerned technical aspects and the timetable, as with every big contract.” It was precisely those issues that the text message referred to, ahead of a discussion with submarine manufacturer Naval Group planned for the following day, the source said. It is not clear what response Morrison gave to the message. The Elysée also rejected Canberra’s account that it made multiple attempts to contact Paris to warn of the impending announcement. The official told Le Parisien only one phone call had come through to the palace, at 11am on a Wednesday – during Macron’s weekly cabinet meeting. “It is difficult to believe that the Australian prime minister has not been advised of this constraint,” the official said. “He knew very well the president was unavailable.” It was later that same day, the adviser said, that Paris had learned that the contract was being rescinded and that a press conference was to be held during the afternoon. “It’s a curious way of going about things,” the Elysée source told Le Parisien. “France was left with no opportunity to respond or to come up with a counter-proposition, which we had the means to do. Once again, it is not the choice that we denounce – that’s a sovereign decision. It’s the way of doing things.” The Elysée also said that Morrison could have sought a reconciliatory meeting with Macron in recent days, at the G20 meeting in Rome or the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow. “The president was waiting for a proposition from the prime minister, which did not come,” the source said. Morrison spoke with Macron by phone last week, and the French president used that call to urge the Australian government to propose concrete steps to repair the relationship. Morrison insists that he “made very clear” to Macron at a dinner in Paris in mid-June “that a conventional diesel-powered submarine was not going to meet Australia’s strategic requirements”. But the Australian prime minister also said he wasn’t at liberty at that stage to disclose to Macron that Australia would work with the US and the UK to acquire nuclear-powered submarines, because those plans had not yet been finalised and were held “in confidence”.The Georgia Republican responsible for running elections considered an infamous call in which Donald Trump told him to “find” enough votes to overturn Joe Biden’s victory in the state a “threat” to his safety and that of his family. Biden’s victory in Georgia was a narrow but vital part of his national win. No Democratic presidential candidate had taken the state since Bill Clinton in 1992. Trump called Brad Raffensperger, the Georgia secretary of state, nearly two months after election day, on Saturday 2 January. Telling him “it’s pretty clear we won”, the then president said: “I just want to find 11,780 votes, which is one more than we have [to get]” to surpass Biden’s total. Raffensperger, a conservative who supported Trump, resisted the president’s demands. That prompted Trump to suggest the refusal to expose mass voter fraud in Georgia – on which Trump insisted but which did not exist, as in all other states – could be a “criminal offense”. “That’s a big risk to you,” Trump said. “That’s a big risk.” In Integrity Counts, a book published on Tuesday, Raffensperger writes: “I felt then – and still believe today – that this was a threat. Others obviously thought so, too, because some of Trump’s more radical followers have responded as if it was their duty to carry out this threat.” Raffensperger details death threats texted to his wife, an encounter with men who may have been staking out his home, and being escorted out of the Georgia state capitol on 6 January as rightwing protesters entered. A recording of Trump’s call was released to the Washington Post and became a key exhibit in Trump’s second impeachment trial, for inciting the deadly attack on the US Capitol on 6 January, by supporters seeking to overturn the election. Trump was acquitted when only seven Republican senators could be persuaded to vote for his guilt. He remains free to run for president again and dominates the Republican party but his attempts to overturn his defeat in Georgia have contributed to his extensive legal jeopardy. The Fulton county district attorney, Fani Willis, is investigating. Raffensperger told the Associated Press investigators “talked to some of our folks here. We sent all the documents and she can now buy the book online”. The Associated Press contributed to this reportA plan to coordinate the global introduction of clean technologies in order to rapidly drive down their cost has been agreed at the Cop26 summit by world leaders representing two-thirds of the world’s economy. A global transition to green energy and vehicles is vital in tackling the climate crisis, and economies of scale mean that costs plummet as production increases – as already seen with solar panels and LED lightbulbs. More than 40 nations said they would align standards and coordinate investments to speed up production and bring forward the “tipping point” at which green technologies are more affordable and accessible than fossil-fuelled alternatives. At that point, the green transition and cuts in climate emissions accelerate rapidly towards a net zero economy. Among the countries signed up to the Breakthrough Agenda are the UK, US, China, India, the EU and Australia. The first five breakthroughs will be clean electricity, electric vehicles, green steel, hydrogen and sustainable farming. The aim is to make these affordable and available to all nations by 2030 and create 20m new jobs. “By making clean technology the most affordable, accessible and attractive choice, the default go-to in what are currently the most polluting sectors, we can cut emissions right around the world,” said Boris Johnson, prime minister of the UK, which is hosting Cop26. “The Glasgow Breakthroughs will turbocharge this forward, so that by 2030 clean technologies can be enjoyed everywhere, not only reducing emissions but also creating more jobs and greater prosperity,” said Johnson, who launched a £3bn finance package on Monday to support green technology in developing countries. New plans include a global electricity initiative launched by the UK and India and endorsed by 80 nations. The Green Grids Initiative aims to mobilise political will and finance to create international supergrids on all continents and to link up sunny deserts and windy coasts with population centres. By connecting many locations, supergrids are key to providing reliable electricity from renewable energy that may be locally intermittent. Another new initiative is the Global Energy Alliance for People &amp; Planet, which is focused on producing clean electricity across the global south. It has an initial $10bn from the World Bank, Rockefeller Foundation, Bezos Earth Fund and others. UK and Scandinavian pension funds also announced on Tuesday they would invest $130bn in clean energy by 2030. The authors of a report published to support the Breakthrough Agenda concluded: “International collaboration can create faster innovations, larger economies of scale, and stronger incentives for investment, to accelerate progress towards tipping points where clean solutions become the most affordable, accessible and attractive options worldwide.” The Breakthrough Agenda follows other voluntary agreements at Cop26 on ending deforestation by 2030 and cutting global emissions of methane, a potent greenhouse gas, by 30%. These commitments have been broadly welcomed, but some delegates warned that global heating would not be reduced unless the plans become reality. Nations at the two-week summit are also tasked with getting funding to poorer and vulnerable countries and finalising the rules of the 2015 Paris agreement. The cost of solar panels, LED bulbs and lithium ion batteries have plunged by about 90% in the past decade, with solar and wind power now the cheapest power in most of the world. By coordinating signals to industry, policies and standards, research efforts and investments, the governments aim to drive production up and prices down for other technologies. Electric cars are already cheaper to run than those burning fossil fuels and are close to the tipping point when they become cheaper to buy. Requiring carmakers across big markets to make a certain proportion of new cars electric, for example, could increase this. The nations will coordinate to speed up the growth of markets, but will also compete to supply those markets. A recent study from Oxford University estimated the costs of clean energy technologies such as batteries and hydrogen electrolysers could fall by 45% by 2030 and 75% by 2050 with speedy deployment. The private sector is involved in the Breakthrough Agenda with a “first movers coalition” of 25 global companies committing to buy emerging clean technologies in sectors such as steel, trucking, shipping, aviation and concrete. Firms are expected to include the shipping company Maersk and the cement maker Holcim. In farming, coordinated rules for blocking imports of beef, soy, palm and cocoa linked to deforestation could hasten the end of forest destruction. A US-UAE initiative, backed by 30 countries, has gathered $4bn (£2.9bn) for investment in climate-smart agriculture. World leaders have committed to discussing and strengthening global progress on breakthroughs every year, supported by reports led by the International Energy Agency. The Economics of Energy Innovation and System Transition report was produced by experts from the UK, EU, Brazil, China, and India. “The policies that drove major breakthroughs in low-carbon technologies like wind and solar, were challenged by traditional economic advice, which ignored the role of innovation [in reducing costs] and framed climate policy as costly,” said Prof Michael Grubb, at University College London and a co-author of the report. “We need to learn from these successes.” Prof Nicholas Stern, at the London School of Economics, said last week that most economists had badly underestimated the speed at which the costs of clean technologies fall and failed to take account of the “immense risks and potential loss of life” that could occur as a result of the climate crisis.Alex Gino’s award-winning children’s novel about a trans girl, George, is being renamed Melissa, after Gino and publisher Scholastic said they made a mistake in titling it with a name “the main character does not like or want to use for herself”. Published in 2015, the novel follows the story of trans fourth grader Melissa, who is seen by everyone as a boy named George, but who decides to reveal who she really is by playing the role of Charlotte in her class play, Charlotte’s Web. It won the American novelist, whose pronouns are they and them, literary prizes including the Children’s Stonewall award, the Lambda literary award, and a Children’s Choice book award. But Gino said this summer that it had been a mistake to title the novel George, apologised to the character and to the wider trans community, and began changing the title to Melissa’s Story when signing books for fans. “The title of my book made it seem as though it is OK to use an old name for a person when they have provided you with a different name that works better for them. I want to be clear – it isn’t,” Gino said at the time. “The cover is beautiful. Iconic, even. But here’s the thing: so many transgender people have been told that we are beautiful/handsome as a reason not to transition, myself included. We are told that we will mar something special, as though looking pleasant to others is more important than being ourselves. As if it’s not more important than seeing who’s really there, scars and all.” Gino explained that the original title came about because while they were writing the novel, they “jokingly” called it Girl George, playing on the singer Boy George. Scholastic, after acquiring the story, advised taking the word “girl” off the cover when publishing because “there would be some people who wouldn’t give the book to a boy if it had the word girl on it”; Gino, “stunned” to be published at all, agreed. “I wish I had realised to speak up then,” they said this summer. Now Scholastic and Gino are officially changing the title of the book from George to Melissa “to respect Melissa and all trans people”, said the author. Scholastic, which will publish the new edition from next April in the US, added: “What we call people matters and we all deserve to be addressed in ways that feel good to us. Once you see a mistake, you can always change it.” Gino’s UK publisher, Scholastic UK, said it would also be replacing George with Melissa from the next reprint. “No matter how many people have come to know it as George, we felt it was important to fix the title,” said Gino, urging readers to either make the title change themselves, print out new covers from Scholastic’s website, or buy a new copy once Melissa is published. “The text inside won’t change, so the name George will still appear to reflect the character’s growth within the novel, but Melissa will be the first name readers will know her by.”Jumping on board can take you through some of Europe’s most spectacular and wild scenery. We want to know about your favourite train journeys. Perhaps it was a trip on one of the UK’s heritage railways; on the steam train that chugs up the Harz mountains in Germany or along the main Riviera coastal route near Nice. Tell us about a journey that you love and why for your chance to win. If you have a relevant photo, do send it in – but it’s your words that will be judged for the competition. Keep your tip to about 100 words The best tip of the week, chosen by travel expert Tom Hall, will win a £200 voucher to stay at a Sawday’s property – the company has more than 3,000 in the UK and Europe. The best tips will appear on the Guardian Travel website, and maybe in the paper, too. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. We’re sorry, but for legal reasons you must be a UK resident to enter this competition. The competition closes on 9 November at 9am Have a look at our past winners and other tips Read the terms and conditions here If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy hereAn Israeli government minister has received an apology from Boris Johnson and the organisers of Cop26 after she could not attend the summit on Monday due to a lack of wheelchair accessibility. Karine Elharrar, Israel’s minister of energy and water resources, described how she was denied entry to the summit because as a wheelchair user she was unable to access the Glasgow venue, criticising the refusal to accommodate her as “outrageous”. Elharrar, who has muscular dystrophy, waited for two hours outside after organisers refused to let her enter the compound in the vehicle in which she had arrived, she said. Her office said she was eventually offered a shuttle transport to the summit area, but the shuttle was not wheelchair-accessible, forcing her to return to her hotel in Edinburgh. She wrote on Twitter: “I came to Cop26 to meet with my counterparts around the world and promote a common struggle in the climate crisis. It is sad that the UN, which promotes accessibility for people with disabilities, in 2021, does not provide accessibility to its events.” An official in the Israeli prime minister Naftali Bennett’s delegation said they had formally complained to organisers, the Times of Israel reported. Bennett reportedly said Elharrar’s vehicle would arrive at the summit area on Tuesday as part of his official convoy, thus ensuring her entry. Johnson later apologised personally to Elharrar when she joined a meeting between him and Bennett, saying he was sorry for the “confusion”. Bennett thanked his British counterpart for his “quick intervention on this unfortunate incident” and called it a “learning opportunity for all of us in the importance of accessibility for all”, a statement backed by Johnson. Cop26 organisers tweeted: “Regarding minister Elharrar’s experience at the entry point yesterday, this was a genuine mistake and we have apologised for that. We are pleased to see her in attendance at Cop26 today. Cop26 must be inclusive and accessible to all and the venue is designed to facilitate that.” Elharrar told BBC News she had gone into the climate summit on Tuesday “very easily” and it was “quite a different experience”. Earlier the UK environment secretary, George Eustice, said: “We deeply regret that incident.” He added there appeared to have been a miscommunication and organisers had not been aware of Elharrar’s requirements in advance and so had not made the right provisions at the particular entrance she was coming to. “I know that at most of the other entrances, wheelchair access is there. It was because she came to an entrance where they didn’t have that provision,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, adding that action should have been taken to resolve the issue. A spokesperson from the Israeli embassy in London told BBC News the country’s delegation to the summit had “communicated over the past several weeks all the details about the minister’s requirements”. The UK ambassador to Israel, Neil Wigan, tweeted that he had apologised “deeply and sincerely” to the minister. “We want a Cop summit that is welcoming and inclusive to everyone,” he wrote. The Foreign Office minister James Cleverly tweeted: “I am deeply disappointed and frustrated that minister @KElharrar could not access Cop today. The Cop venue is designed to be accessible for all. I have spoken to the minister about this and I look forward to meeting her tomorrow.” Elharrar told Israel’s Channel 12 news: “The only way they said I could come in was to walk on foot for almost a kilometre, or to board a shuttle which was not wheelchair-accessible.” She told Ynetnews.com that organisers blocked all roads leading to the conference and left her out despite the Israeli delegation’s best efforts to convince security to let her in. “It was impossible to get in with a car and I could not make that distance independently,” she said. “It’s outrageous conduct and it should not have happened. I came for certain purposes and could not achieve them today, but there will be other opportunities. “The UN calls on everyone to act in accordance with the international convention and to make places accessible, so it is fitting that its events should be accessible. I sincerely hope that today’s lesson will be learned so that tomorrow promoting green energies, removing barriers and energy efficiency will be the only things I have to deal with.”BP has warned that gas markets will remain “tight” during the winter months after rocketing global gas markets fuelled higher-than-expected profits and an extra $1.25bn returns for its shareholders. The global gas supply crisis, which threatens to increase costs for homes and businesses this winter, helped drive BP’s profits to $3.3bn (£2.4bn) for the third quarter, ahead of analysts’ forecasts of $3.1bn. The economic rebound from the depths of the Covid-19 pandemic last year has caused global oil and gas prices to surge to record highs in recent months, and lifted BP’s profits more than 38 times higher than a year ago. The FTSE 100 oil company will use its stronger cashflows to buy back an additional $1.25bn of shares, as part of the company’s plans to keep investors on side as it prepares to plough billions of dollars into renewable energy while shrinking its fossil fuel production. The BP chief executive, Bernard Looney, predicted that gas prices would stay high in the coming months. “All things being equal, of course that’s a big if, we would expect gas prices to return to normal probably by the summer of next year,” he told the Guardian. Commenting on the oil market, Looney said: “Over the medium term [the oil cartel] Opec is demonstrating strong discipline and importantly the US shale business, which typically would respond strongly in a situation like this, has become very financially disciplined. “Demand is strong but we’re not yet at pre-Covid levels.” He said it was “not unreasonable to expect prices to remain at this level for some time to come,” adding: “If oil prices remain strong and it’s very possible that they will, then you can see the sort of financial results that we can generate today.” Prices of wholesale gas have soared because of low storage levels after an especially cold winter in Europe last year and increased energy demand from Asia. The cost of gas for delivery in November hit an all-time high of 407p a therm in early October, though has since fallen back. In December last year it was just 45p. Oil prices have also climbed, and inventories have fallen towards pre-pandemic levels, BP noted. It expects oil prices to be underpinned by a further decline in inventories and possibly additional demand from gas to oil switching. It said that decisions taken on production levels by the Opec+ oil cartel of big producers including Russia continued to be an important factor in oil prices and market rebalancing. Brent crude is now trading at about $85 a barrel. Last week, Larry Fink, the chairman and chief executive of BlackRock, the world’s biggest fund manager, warned that there was a “high probability” of oil hitting $100 a barrel. Despite benefiting from higher prices in the third quarter, shares in BP were down 3.5% on Tuesday. Michael Hewson, chief market analyst at CMC Markets, said the results overall were “underwhelming”. BP expects both oil and gas production in the fourth quarter to be higher than in the third, as it ramps up big projects, particularly in gas regions, and recovers from seasonal maintenance and the impact of Hurricane Ida on production in the Gulf of Mexico. For 2021 as a whole, BP expects production to be lower than 2020 because it is selling off unwanted assets worth $6bn to $7bn as part of its plan to trim the size of its fossil fuel business by 2030. At the same time, BP is investing in renewable energy, buying a pipeline of US solar farms in June, for example. Looney, who is attending a panel at the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow on Tuesday night, said about the event: “Everybody wants to see more ambition. We want to see more concrete, realistic actions to drive emissions down. If that means burning gas rather than coal then that’s what we should be doing. I recognise that that is not popular in all camps.” Nicholas Hyett, an analyst at Hargreaves Lansdown, said BP’s profits show “that oil and gas remains a lucrative business”. “High prices have driven strong year-on-year growth in profits, and that’s being used to fund a generous $1.25bn share buyback. Coming on top of a $1.4bn buyback announced at the half year stage the group is firmly focused on shareholder returns at present. However, you can reasonably question whether that generosity is justified,” Hyett added. The analyst warned that BP will need to deliver a strong final quarter result to make sure its debt doesn’t begin to rise again. The company is making payments relating to the Gulf of Mexico oil spill in 2010 of about $1.5bn before tax this year.Chinese families have been encouraged to stockpile daily necessities, prompting panic-buying, amid surging vegetable prices linked to recent extreme weather, fears of supply shortages and an ongoing Covid outbreak. A notice posted on the website of the Ministry of Commerce late on Monday urged local authorities to stabilise prices and families “to store a certain amount of daily necessities as needed to meet daily life and emergencies”. It prompted some alarm and speculation, including that it related to increasing tensions with Taiwan. Related hashtags were viewed more than 18m times. “As soon as this news came out, all the old people near me went crazy panic-buying in the supermarket,” wrote one user on Weibo. State media urged calm and Zhu Xiaoliang, a senior commerce ministry official, told the broadcaster CCTV “the supply of daily necessities is sufficient everywhere” but varying explanations were offered for the notice. Some said the commerce department often releases such warnings in the weeks before national holidays while the People’s Daily said the ministry had issued its instruction earlier this year because of natural disasters, the surge in vegetable prices and recent Covid cases. The Economic Daily, a state-backed newspaper, warned residents against having “too much of an overactive imagination” but also said the directive was linked to the outbreak and was to ensure people were prepared in the event of a lockdown. About 500 cases of the Delta variant have been recorded across at least 16 of China’s 31 provinces. Authorities have enacted localised lockdowns, halted movement and travel, and launched mass testing. On Sunday more than 30,000 people were stopped from leaving Shanghai Disneyland until they were all tested, after one case was detected in a woman who might have visited. Despite reassurances, some were still sceptical. A Weibo user commented there had been no warnings to stock up at the outset of the 2020 pandemic. “This is the first time such a reminder notice has been issued! ! I’m a little scared.” “It is definitely not a normal reminder,” said another. “Reminding us to stockpile will inevitably make the market supply and demand unstable, price fluctuations, and cause panic among some people … It is very likely to be a special situation.” Extreme weather last month destroyed crops in China’s biggest vegetable growing region, Shandong, threatening this year’s efforts to increase supplies before the lunar new year holiday early next year. Last week, prices of cucumbers, spinach and broccoli had more than doubled from early October. Spinach was more expensive than some cuts of pork at 16.67 yuan ($2.60) per kg, a vegetable price index in Shouguang, a trading hub in Shandong, indicated. Although prices have eased in recent days, economists expect a significant year-on-year increase in consumer price inflation for October, the first in five months. The commerce ministry said local authorities should buy vegetables that could be stored well in advance and also strengthen emergency delivery networks. Information about prices and supply and demand of commodities should be released in a timely manner to stabilise people’s expectations, it added. China also plans to release vegetable reserves “at an appropriate time” to counter rising prices, according to a state TV report on Monday. It is not clear which vegetables China holds in reserves and how big those reserves are.Name: Sleep deprivation. Age: Dates to somewhere around the early 19th century. Before that, nobody knew how much sleep they were supposed to get, so they didn’t feel deprived. Appearance: Characterised by red eyes, poor focus and an unsteady gait. That’s being drunk. It is also being sleep-deprived. A new study published in Scientific Reports indicates that a lack of sleep could affect your ability to walk steadily. Why? Gait is not an automatic process: you have to make constant adjustments in response to external cues, and that requires brain power. And not getting enough shut-eye messes with your brain? Exactly. The study involved a group of sleep-deprived Brazilian university students, with one acute group staying up all night before taking a treadmill test, trying to walk in time with a metronome. How did the acute sample do? “They were off the rhythm, they missed beeps, and were performing, in general, worse,” said the study’s lead author, Arturo Forner-Cordero. Is that the only effect? Nope. Chronic sleep deprivation leads to more than stumbling students. It can increase your risk of any number of conditions. Such as? Obesity, heart disease, diabetes and death. It could also have a negative impact on your immune system, your sex drive and your fertility. How much sleep do I need just to avoid bumping into things? “Ideally, everyone should sleep eight hours a night,” said Hermano Igo Krebs, another of the study’s authors. “But if we can’t, then we should compensate as much and as regularly as possible.” How do you compensate? By sleeping when you can. Test subjects who were allowed to make up a sleep deficit in their free time did better on the treadmill. So a lie-in is good for you. One recent study suggested that people who catch up on lost sleep at the weekend have a lower risk of depression than those who don’t, but other studies have shown mixed results. The pressure to get eight hours unbroken sleep every day is the sort of thing that keeps me up at night. It’s more recent than you think. Historical evidence shows that, from ancient times to the 18th century, people tended to split their night’s sleep into two distinct chunks of about four hours each, with an hour or two of reading, eating or sex in between. I could get used to that. No you can’t; you’ve got work. Do say: “A cure for chronic sleep deprivation? Certainly! Walk this way.” Don’t say: “If I could walk that way, I wouldn’t need the cure.”Before we get into it all, let me begin by saying nothing could ever make me question the immense dignity, sanctity and class of the US legal process. It’s really just the latest jewel in the royal family’s many, many crowns that the 95-year-old Queen’s son is now being represented by the guy also defending Armie Hammer over his whole cannibal-fetish-rape situation. Hammer denies all, but you probably know that. And you certainly know most of the Andrew facts. He is accused in a US civil court by former Jeffrey Epstein sex slave Virginia Roberts Giuffre, who alleges that the prince sexually assaulted her at Epstein’s mansion in Manhattan and at other locations in 2001 when she was 17. He denies all the accusations – and it’s been a long old road to get to even this point. But once Andrew had finally allowed lawyers to serve him the papers relating to this civil case, a certain change of pace was inevitable. I guess we all grow out of our family’s heritage law firms eventually, and want to make our own way in the world of more avant garde legal possibilities. At some point in recent months, the prince seems to have decided that the people who deal with the Queen’s dog licences and estates exemptions and so on aren’t the kind of hip-and-hardcore legal eagles more suited to his specific needs and aspirations. We all want to be our own person, you know? Even if that person is “61-year-old former chum of a known paedo whose mum is paying his legal bills”. The chum’s legal bills, not the paedo’s. Prince Andrew is simply accused of sex offences against a minor – accusations he has long denied. So there is absolutely no suggestion that at some point Andrew finally tired of being in social seclusion in this deer park or on that grouse moor, and screamed: “Just get me what Armie Hammer’s having!” (Apart from anything else, that kind of order could lead to a quite grotesque misunderstanding.) But the fact is, HRH is now being represented by Hollywood power attorney Andrew Brettler. And the gloves are suddenly well and truly off. How else to explain a new legal filing that teeters on the edge of victim blaming – and then plummets right into it, rolls around it, wallows deeply in it, and then finishes off by making snow angels in it? Lodged with the US district court in Manhattan last Friday, this 36-page motion begins by saying that Giuffre “may well” be a victim of sexual abuse at the hands of Epstein, in which case “nothing can excuse, nor fully capture the abhorrence and gravity of Epstein’s monstrous behavior against Giuffre”. Indeed, Andrew’s lawyers would like to proceed “without diminishing the harm suffered as a result of Epstein’s alleged misconduct”. Alas, the filing then goes on to: accuse Giuffre of seeking “another payday” at the prince’s expense; claim she has “milk[ed] the publicity” of her association for years; reference a tabloid newspaper article in which nameless former associates brand her a “money-hungry sex kitten” and “head bitch”; break out a whole section supposedly dedicated to “Giuffre’s role in Epstein’s criminal enterprise”; claim she recruited and trafficked young girls for sexual abuse and did so in a way that was “wilful”; suggests her long-running pursuit of justice is diverting judicial time and resources from true victims of abuse; and more – so much more. Which all feels – let’s go out on a limb here – fairly diminishing. Anyone wondering vaguely whether Andrew’s reputation could be damaged any further now has their answer: yes, most definitely. At first glance it might seem bizarre that the guy who inspired such outrage for completely failing to express sympathies for Epstein’s victims during his infamous Newsnight interview should be doubling down on that front. Indeed, that original glaring omission was followed by a friend of his materialising in the newspapers to insist that, while the prince didn’t regret the interview itself, “the fact he was unable to appropriately or sufficiently convey his sympathy for the victims of Epstein is of course a source of regret”. Is it bollocks. There are two overriding impressions to be gleaned from this latest filing. One, that Prince Andrew has finally decided he’s in the dogfight of his life, and will now say absolutely anything to prevail in it. And two, that his total blindness to the silly little tragedies of Virginia Roberts Giuffre and all the silly little girls like her has lifted not one iota, despite everything that has happened. I don’t know about being biologically incapable of sweating, but on this evidence he certainly seems biologically incapable of having the first or faintest clue. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistYahoo has announced its withdrawal from the Chinese market in the latest retreat by foreign technology firms responding to Beijing’s tightening control over the industry. “In recognition of the increasingly challenging business and legal environment in China, Yahoo’s suite of services will no longer be accessible from mainland China as of November 1,” the company said on Tuesday. The timing of the pullout coincided with the implementation of China’s new data protection law, which came into effect on Monday. The legislation, which was years in the making, was likened by some to the Chinese equivalent to the stringent GDPR in Europe. The law limits the conditions under which companies can gather personal information and sets rules for how it is used. Chinese laws also stipulate that companies operating in the country must hand over data if requested by authorities, making it difficult for international firms to operate in China as they may face pressure at home over giving in to Beijing’s demands. In the run-up to the implementation of the new legislation, foreign tech companies have been informing their users of the changes in their services in recent months. Yahoo’s withdrawal came less than a month after another US tech company, Microsoft’s professional networking platform LinkedIn, announced it was shutting down operations in China.. In public, the company blamed a “significantly more challenging operating environment” as well as “greater compliance requirements in China”. On Tuesday, Yahoo users in mainland China were told the company’s services would no longer be accessible. The products affected included Aol.com and news outlets such as TechCrunch. Users of apps such as Yahoo Weather were told in October that it would be discontinued this month, according to the Wall Street Journal. Yahoo has had a tumultuous and controversial existence in mainland China. In 2007, the company was criticised by lawmakers in the US after it handed over data on two Chinese dissidents to the the authorities, eventually leading to their imprisonment. In recent years, as regulations toward foreign tech companies hardened and domestic competition grew, Yahoo began to downsize its operations in China. In 2015, it closed its Beijing office. Analysts say Yahoo’s withdrawal from China is largely symbolic as at least some of Yahoo’s services, including its web portal, have already been blocked. China has also blocked other US internet services, such as Facebook and Google. Mainland users who wish to access these websites use a virtual private network (VPN) to circumvent the block. The Associated Press contributed to this reportStephen Colbert Late-night hosts recounted Biden’s first major international tour over the weekend, starting with the G20 summit in Rome, also the first major international conference since the Covid-19 pandemic. “The first time you see people in person post-pandemic is always awkward,” joked Stephen Colbert on Monday’s Late Show. “Which explains the G20 itinerary: see another world leader approaching; wonder if they’re going for a handshake; notice they’re actually coming in for a hug; hug them, only to realize maybe they weren’t, and you just made it awkward; call out the fact that you made it awkward and joke about how you’ve forgotten how to interact with other humans; solve climate change?” At the conference, G20 leaders pledged to achieve “global net zero greenhouse gas emissions … by or around mid-century”. “That doesn’t sound very urgent,” Colbert mocked. “It’s like calling 911 and having the operator tell you the EMTs will be there sometime between the hours of noon and the funeral.” The summit wrapped with a group of leaders symbolically tossing coins into Rome’s famed Trevi fountain. “Not a great sign when global cooperation has reached the stage of ‘wish!’” remarked Colbert. Trevor Noah On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah recapped the president’s visit with Pope Francis before the G20 summit. Biden, a Catholic, ended the three-hour meeting by saying “God love ya” and gifted the pope a sentimental “challenge coin”, historically collectible items which originated in the military. According to Biden, the coin included insignia of the 261st Signal Brigade unit in the Delaware army national guard, in which his late son, Beau Biden, served as a captain. “You’ve gotta give it to Joe Biden, because it took everything in his power as an old man to not make that coin appear behind the pope’s ear,” joked Noah. “Also, the fact that he said ‘God love ya’ to the pope – that is the most unnecessary ‘God love ya’ in history,” he continued. “You don’t need to say ‘God love ya’ to the pope, he knows God loves him! He had dinner with him last night. “But I do think that meeting was cool to see,” he concluded, “because it’s nice that even though these two men are some of the most powerful leaders in the world, when it comes down to it, they’re just a couple old guys hanging out, showing off their coin collection, talking about alcohol, making inappropriate ethnic jokes. I mean, forget the Vatican, these two should’ve been meeting in a sauna.” Seth Meyers On Late Night, Seth Meyers highlighted a trove of documents from the Trump White House detailing the events of 6 January that the former president is trying to keep hidden from the investigating House committee In a court filing on Saturday, the National Archives released a list of over 700 pages of documents from call logs to handwritten notes and schedules during and around the riot on 6 January that stormed the Capitol. “Personally, I’m shocked the Trump White House even had any records at all,” Meyers said. “I assumed that place was like a RadioShack in a zombie movie. Most of the call logs probably say ‘some guy called – sounded French’ or ‘Rudy Giuliani butt dial’ over and over again. “And there’s an obvious reason Trump wants to keep those records hidden,” he continued. “Trump and cronies had a detailed plan for overturning election results, and they tried to execute that plan, and they almost succeeded. It wasn’t an impulse or a whim; it was a plot.” Jimmy Kimmel And in Los Angeles, Jimmy Kimmel mocked Donald Trump for attending a World Series game in Atlanta despite repeated distancing of team ownership. Major League Baseball denied making an invitation to Trump and said in a statement: “He requested to attend the game.” The former president and the Atlanta Braves have a one-sided, tumultuous history. Just months ago, when Major League Baseball pulled the All-Star game from Atlanta over Georgia’s new law restricting voting rights, Trump called on his followers to “boycott baseball”. “That was in April of this year. Six months later, he’s guzzling Diet Coke and doing the ‘Tomahawk chop’ at a Braves game in Atlanta,” Kimmel said. “The only exercise he gets is if it’s something racist. “People were wondering if he would do the ‘Tomahawk chop,’” Kimmel added of the gameday tradition dance which has come under scrutiny for racist appropriation from Native Americans. “Of course he would do the Tomahawk chop! I give him two days before he starts telling people he invented the Tomahawk chop. “Trump has a lot of resentment toward Native Americans because they know how to run successful casinos,” he quipped. Saturday’s game also marked Melania Trump’s first public appearance since July, and she did not seem enthused. While being introduced by an announcer with her husband, the former First Lady appeared to grimace. “If we could somehow harness the energy of Melania’s hatred for Donald Trump, we could power the world,” joked Kimmel.For its supporters, the 55-metre-tall turbine-blade-like sculpture jutting out of an isolated Northumberland hilltop will attract tourists and be a fitting tribute to Queen and Commonwealth. For opponents it will be “ecological vandalism” that spoils the landscape, an artwork that would not look out of place in communist-era eastern Europe. On Tuesday, a government planning inspector came down in favour of the sculpture, overturning a 2019 decision by Northumberland county council to refuse planning permission. It means the the scheme’s backers can go ahead with plans to install the work, nearly three times higher than Antony Gormley’s Angel of the North, on Cold Law, a small hill near Kirkwhelpington. The Elizabeth landmark, which will come with a walking trail, is called Ascendant. It has been designed by the artist Simon Hitchens and is intended as a tribute to the Queen in her platinum jubilee year. Made from steel, the work is meant to look like a thin slice of the hillside, which has been cut north to south through the bedrock and then tilted and elevated. Mary Ann Rogers, a local artist and gallery owner, said she thought it looked outdated, like something from behind the iron curtain. She is a co-founder of the campaign group Keep the Wannies Wild, which, with 2,000 supporters, has been fighting the plan. “I am absolutely devastated,” she said. “I live only a couple of miles away from the site and it is a really special place. It’s somewhere I go to walk and be quiet and listen to the birds so I am absolutely gutted that they are going to do something so mad there.” Rogers said she was a fan of public art but there was no good reason for the sculpture. Nor was it appealing. “To me it is strident, it’s triumphant and it is vast. It looks more like a scimitar or a knife or a sword.” It was, she said, “ecological vandalism” and there was “monumental irony” that the decision was being announced during the Cop26 summit. The landowner and driving force behind Ascendant is the 3rd Viscount Devonport, Terence Kearley, who has been adamant that the development will have a minimal effect on the natural environment. He was, he said, delighted by the decision. “It is our ambition to create a sculpture that is not only celebratory of Queen Elizabeth II and the Commonwealth, but which is also a magnificent piece of artwork that acts as a beacon for visitors and tourists to the region – benefiting the local rural economy and businesses.” The task now is to raise the estimated £2-3m for the project, with campaigners conceding the battle is lost. Hitchens said his sculpture’s design “acknowledges the past, respects the present and aspires for a better future. “I believe the landmark will be a valuable asset to local communities and the north-east of England, as a cultural destination with a global reputation.”More than 100 civilians in the Yemeni province of Marib have been killed or injured in the past month as fighting rages for the country’s last major government-loyal stronghold. Marib city has been under sustained attack since the beginning of the year from Houthi rebels, whose forces have steadily closed in on the central desert area on three different fronts. The fight for control of the oil-rich region has become one of the bloodiest and most important battles of Yemen’s seven-year-old civil war. If the rebels succeed in taking Marib they will effectively have beaten the Yemeni government and Saudi-backed coalition, which has managed to cling on to the city with the use of intensive airstrikes. On Sunday, at least 29 civilians were killed in a rebel missile strike which hit a mosque and religious school to the south of Marib city. The unverified death toll for all sides is now believed to run into the tens of thousands. “The situation has become very bad. It’s not just the fighting, it’s the economic collapse too,” said Hamas al-Muslimi, a 23-year-old student living in Marib but originally from Dhamar. “We used to be able to buy five pieces of bread for 100 rials [£0.30], but now we can only buy two.” For several years, Marib’s relative quiet and prosperity made it a beacon for more than 1 million Yemenis fleeing fighting in other parts of the country, like Muslimi and her family. Many live in vast displacement camps with no water or health facilities and no schools, and have been cut off from the little aid they do receive by Houthi advances over the last two months. According to aid agencies, about 10,000 people have been displaced in October alone, in what amounts to the biggest wave of displacement recorded in a single month this year. “Our staff can reach only a small portion of those in need in Marib, and what we provide is just a drop in the ocean compared to the staggering needs,” Erin Hutchinson, the Norwegian Refugee Council’s country director for Yemen, said in a statement. “We call on all parties to spare civilians and ensure that we can keep reaching them with life-saving aid. We also call on the international community to provide the promised funding to keep Yemenis alive in this hour of need.” Yemen’s war between the Iranian-backed Houthi movement and forces loyal to the exiled Yemeni government broke out in 2014 but deteriorated sharply after the intervention of a Saudi-led coalition the following year. The Houthis, also known as Ansar Allah, have imposed strict religious edicts on the people living under their control, while the coalition has been widely criticised for bombing civilian infrastructure. The conflict has since spawned the world’s worst humanitarian crisis, with more than 70% of the population of 30 million in need of aid to survive. About half are food insecure, with 5 million already starving in pockets of famine-like conditions. Prior to the Houthi offensive on Marib, the war had largely deteriorated into a stalemate. Extensive UN-brokered talks in April and May to discuss a ceasefire for both Marib and the wider country stalled after the Houthis rejected a deal. Diplomatic observers fear that the rebel leadership has since decided that escalating efforts to capture Marib will transform the bargaining calculus. The UK, which is the current penholder for Yemen at the UN security council, has licensed an estimated £20bn in arms exports to member states of the coalition since the conflict began. Earlier this year, the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office slashed the UK aid budget for Yemen by 60%.As world leaders, negotiators and activists converged on Glasgow for the start of the Cop climate summit, curious delegates who picked up a Scottish newspaper may have seen a small advert from the Scottish National party. Its main image was of Skye’s famous crags bathed by sunshine, with a soft-focus portrait of the first minister, and it read: “A nation in waiting welcomes the nations of the world.” Despite the simplicity of that proposition, public enthusiasm for independence has fallen since it reached a record high of 59% at the peak of the pandemic in October last year. Most opinion polls over the past six months have shown the yes vote trailing no by between four and eight points. Was that message misplaced? Her pro-UK opponents have accused Sturgeon of pursuing a “divisive obsession” as the rest of the world focused on a collective effort to combat a global crisis – a charge she denies. Hardliners inside the independence movement fear Sturgeon has lost her spark, fatigued by the long hours she invested managing the Covid crisis, the impacts of Brexit and the Alex Salmond crisis, and running her government. Last week she broached the issue of life after politics, disclosing to Vogue magazine she may foster children in the future. Some internal critics, bolstered by their allies in Salmond’s small breakaway party Alba, are openly challenging Sturgeon on the timing of a referendum, and question her appetite for staging one. Angus MacNeil, a dissident SNP MP who chairs the Commons trade committee, implied in a newspaper column last week that Sturgeon knew Boris Johnson would never agree to a referendum and that the supreme court would block any attempt by her to stage one without his approval. She had to find another route to secure independence, he argued. Yet there are few concrete signs Sturgeon is as ambivalent as her critics allege. When she set out her programme for government in September, she said civil servants had been told to start drafting a new case for independence. Conscious, too, of the public mood, Sturgeon insists that combating Covid takes immediate precedence over pushing for a fresh independence vote. And her strategists have their eyes on other factors, the Cop climate talks among them. What Cop may do is nudge cautious Scottish voters into taking a more green- and climate-minded worldview. If so, that could work to Sturgeon’s long-term advantage and that of the wider independence movement. Her SNP government is sharing power for the first time in 14 years with the pro-independence Scottish Greens. For the first time since devolution in 1999, there are Green ministers at Holyrood and their agreement includes staging an independence vote before the next Scottish election. Glasgow’s designation as host city – perhaps chosen by Conservative ministers in London to show the UK embracing Scotland – directly influenced Sturgeon’s decision to sign the deal with the Greens. It was a political decision, and not based on numerical advantage at Holyrood: she has aligned the SNP with a more leftwing party to amplify her government’s pro-climate claims, at a time when green politics, thanks to Cop, is ascendant. While Sturgeon does not have a seat at the negotiating table – no devolved administrations do at Cop – she is enjoying a significant profile at the conference locally, welcoming Greta Thunberg and the Minga Indígena collective, and campaigning for the voices of women and girls to be advanced in the talks. She is sufficiently distant from any policy failures at Cop not to be tainted by them, while able to point to the differences she says independence would bring. That strategy is likely to emerge clearly later in November, when the SNP is to hold a short party conference at which Sturgeon is expected to prioritise the drive for a second independence vote. Any policy failures at Cop and her government’s heavier emphasis on the climate and environment will feature heavily. If Cop helps shift the Scottish electorate’s mood, and finally makes voters amenable to the tougher changes to their energy use, and driving, shopping and holiday habits that cutting CO2 emissions involves, Sturgeon has gambled that the SNP and the case for independence will gain.Elon Musk has six children and four companies. He is trying to put chips into our brains, build self-driving cars, save the world from an artificial intelligence apocalypse, and colonise Mars. In short, the guy has a lot going on. One would think he would barely have time to eat, let alone tweet – and, indeed, Musk has claimed that he is in meetings most of the day and the time he spends on Twitter is “like, almost nothing”. Still, the casual observer would be forgiven for thinking that the billionaire lives on Twitter. Musk seems to make headlines every other day because of his inane online activity, which largely consists of cracking juvenile jokes (including a recent sexist gag about T.I.T.S), opining on cryptocurrencies, and getting into online spats. Musk’s latest Twitter beef is with David Beasley, the director of the World Food Programme (WFP). Beasley’s crime was this: he suggested that Musk, who recently became the richest person in the history of the universe and the first person ever to be worth more than $300bn, might help the hungry. According to the WFP, 42 million people are on the brink of famine due to a combination of the climate crisis, structural poverty, conflict and the pandemic. In a recent interview with CNN, Beasley called on the 1% to “step up now, on a one-time basis” to give $6bn, which is just 0.36% the total increase in net worth of the world’s top 400 billionaires last year. Beasley then name-checked Jeff Bezos and Musk, pointing out that the latter saw a $6bn increase in his net worth in just one day last week. Asking obscenely rich people to help prevent imminent catastrophic famine seems reasonable enough to me. Musk, however, was very prickly about being asked to chip in. “If WFP can describe on this Twitter thread exactly how $6bn will solve world hunger, I will sell Tesla stock right now and do it,” he tweeted on Sunday. (This, by the way, was appended to a snarky tweet from one of his acolytes asking why the WFP hadn’t solved world hunger already, seeing as it raised $8.4bn in 2020.) Musk added that he would only pony up the money if the WFP used “open source accounting, so the public sees precisely how the money is spent”. The not-so-subtle subtext here was: I would obviously help end world hunger, but I can’t trust the WFP. Musk’s excuse for not handing over a tiny portion of his wealth to the WFP is hardly original. Billionaires love to sorrowfully declare that they are dying to pay more tax, but they can’t bear to see their money used inefficiently, so, for everyone’s sake, they had better hoard it instead. Last week, in response to a (very short-lived) plan by the Democrats to tax billionaires, BlackRock CEO Larry Fink said he would happily part with more of his dosh if there were assurances it would be spent well. “If we could find solutions where the money could be directed in a proper way, I have more to give.” Fellow billionaire Ray Dalio also said he would willingly pay more tax if it accomplished “greater productivity” but sadly, he wasn’t sure that it did. Musk, meanwhile, insinuated that he was doing us all a favour by not paying more tax. “My plan is to use the money to get humanity to Mars and preserve the light of consciousness,” he tweeted last Thursday. A couple of days later he darkly warned that a billionaire tax would trickle down. “Eventually they run out of other people’s money, and then they come for you.” The government, of course, has already come for the majority of us. The median American household paid about 14% in federal taxes in recent years (that doesn’t include state taxes). Billionaires pay only a tiny fraction of that. ProPublica has calculated that Musk’s “true tax rate” is a minuscule 3.27%. But that’s OK; he is working overtime to “preserve the light of consciousness”. Millions of people may be on the brink of starvation, but Musk has a plan. Let them eat space! Arwa Mahdawi is a Guardian columnistTitania McGrath, the “radical intersectionalist poet and Twitter activist” created by Andrew Doyle and played by actor Alice Marshall, is back with a new “mxnifesto”. The show, originally staged in 2019, has been rewritten to include developments from the intervening years, during which Doyle has become a regular on GB News. The show takes aim at predictable targets: Greta Thunberg, trans athletes, Meghan Markle and Nish Kumar. Tonight, we’re part of an educational seminar. “If you’re unsure which opinions to have, this is the workshop for you,” McGrath tells us. Doyle says he created the character as a way to challenge the erosion of free speech and the degradation of political debate. There are deep wells of potential material – the censorious Twitter culture found on both left and right, the tendencies to wilfully misread social media posts and double-down rather than admit mistakes. McGrath only skims the surface. Doyle himself performing standup as the support act engages with his chosen topics more successfully and provides bigger laughs. Barely a minute into McGrath’s section, the show attempts to provoke with a “joke” using outdated ableist terms. Is the punchline McGrath’s faux pas or are we supposed to find the idea that you’d avoid these phrases amusing? What are we laughing at? It’s a question raised again when a photograph of a trans athlete is presented as a punchline, and when we’re invited to mock McGrath’s defence of Shamima Begum. It’s not always clear whom the character is parodying – does a wealthy slam poet dressed in Zara-style office-wear conjure the grains of truth that make great satire? The recurring joke is that she’s a hypocrite (a supporting character even spells this out in case we missed the message), but it quickly feels repetitive. Some jokes – on remainers patronising working-class people and the tweeness of anti-Trump protests – do land. But many do exactly what the show accuses online activists of, reducing complex topics to nuance-free quips. There’s a surprising number of Hitler jokes too, Godwin’s law IRL. In these ways, it does bring Twitter to the West End. I hesitate to give this one star. A show that skewers the terminally offended will no doubt wear it as a recommendation. And yet, here we are. Don’t mistake this for courting controversy, it simply isn’t very funny.The UK’s age-old “frenemy” relationship with France never fails to ignite passion, and no more so than when the frequent fishing wars are thrown into the mix. Post-Brexit, there is undoubtedly added piquancy to the cross-Channel insults. “After le showdown, now it’s LE SURRENDER”, trumpeted the Daily Mail, after France retreated from threats to clog up exports and ban UK fishers from landing catches on its coast in the latest row over licences. Other tabloid headlines evoked similar sentiment – “Le Surrender” (Metro); “Le Climbdown” (Express). From the hundred years war of the late middle ages through to the 19th-century Napoleonic wars, beyond the signing of the entente cordiale in 1904 and to the present fishing dispute, the UK’s relationship with France has had its rocky moments. The most recent “fishing wars” have provided an excuse for metaphors, and columns revisiting the Allies’ second world war liberation of France, to be dusted down and re-employed as they always are in Britain’s spats with its near neighbour – with French-baiting Franglais an irresistible element. “Clambusters”, railed he Sun, neatly melding the second world war and seafood, after Jean Castex, the French prime minister, wrote to Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission president, last week saying the UK should be shown it caused more harm to leave the EU than to remain. More conflict imagery was dispensed by Clément Beaune, France’s Europe minister, after the Scottish-registered scallop dredger Cornelis Gert Jan was seized in Le Havre. “Now we need to speak the language of force,” Beaune told French television. “Unfortunately, it’s the only language the British government understands.” The impounding of the British vessel was a dream for headline writers. “Done like a S-kipper,” said the Sun. “Ship’s hit fan,” shouted the Daily Star. “Go on Macron, blow up that boat and shock us out of our shellfish behaviour,” ran one Sunday Times article. Others urged the EU to “Tell Macron to sling his hook” and to “reel in maverick Macron”. Boris Johnson, who greeted France’s fury over a new AUKUS military pact between the UK, US and Australia with the Franglais “donnez-moi un break”, has also been unable to resist the odd pun. “We have bigger fish to fry,” he said, in a lame joke ahead of meeting the French president at the recent G20 and ongoing Cop26. Fish puns were much in evidence as recently as May. “Fish and ships: UK flexes its mussels,” is how the Sun reported Johnson’s deployment of gunboat diplomacy by dispatching two Royal Navy patrol vessels to Jersey after French trawlers threatened to blockade the port of St Helier. This dispute is the latest in a long line with France over fishing, including the Great Scallop War, or guerre de la coquille, which in October 2012 led to a confrontation between French and British vessels off Le Havre over a difference in fishing restrictions. A second Scallop War in 2018 involved fishing boats colliding and projectiles being hurled. For now, though, France has de-escalated. Or, as the Sun put it: “They blink – it’s trawl over.”Black Mirror meets Succession in this arthouse-y psychological vampire drama, the story of five super-rich millennials – the bored, entitled offspring of global billionaires – who become vampires. The satirical dig here, of course, is that they’re already soulless, uncaring bloodsuckers, even before waking up with actual fangs. But director David Verbeek’s script doesn’t quite wield the scalpel with enough sadistic glee. Instead, this film feels ever-so-slightly sluggish and dour in places. What Verbeek does brilliantly is to create an eerie parallel world of sterile luxury: glass-walled, penthouse restaurants and gleaming, first-class lounges. The film was shot in the Taiwanese capital Taipei, where the five old friends have jetted in. Money can buy whatever they want; but what this lot craves is new experiences. So they have formed an elite club, staging elaborate events and pranks for each other. For his turn Bin-Ray (Philip Juan) fakes his own death. Next up is vacuous Instagram influencer Anastasia (Anna Marchenko). She arranges a spiritual cleansing trip for the group in the mountains that goes spectacularly wrong: the five pass out after a tribal shaman rubs blood into their foreheads. Flying back to the city on a chopper, they discover that they’ve suddenly grown vampire fangs – there’s a terrific scene of them fiddling with their choppers like six-year-olds with wobbly teeth. Back in Taipei they try to work out whether they are vampires for real: daylight isn’t harmful, but drinking blood (procured from a male stripper) pumps up Alex (Yen Tsao). The film trundles on middlingly until a few late twists: mildly satisfying, they feel a bit muddled and create some serious plot inconsistencies. And the whole thing hinges on a fantasy that, deep down, the fabulously wealthy – some of them, at least – despise their money and status. I’m not sure I’m buying it. • Dead &amp; Beautiful is released on 4 November on Shudder.When the chant of “You don’t know what you’re doing” rang around the Tottenham Hotspur Stadium last Saturday as the subs’ board signalled for Lucas Moura to leave the pitch in favour of Steven Bergwijn, it was one of those defining moments football serves up. Nuno Espírito Santo was doomed from that moment, but the ire of fans was not simply a product of discontent with a manager’s decision. The chairman, Daniel Levy, is reported to have been furious after the game. As a Spurs fan, he had every right to be. But was the fury also based on the chants of “We want Levy out” that followed the opprobrium directed at Nuno? Whatever prompted the decision to sack the 14th manager of Enic’s reign as owner, the club’s board are firmly in the spotlight. Nuno lasted 17 games, an appointment made after a bungled and highly public flick through a Rolodex of managerial names that filled no one – probably not even Nuno – with confidence. It was an appointment that had to be got right, made after the failure of the last appointment that had to be got right. And has led to another appointment that has to be got right. There is open discussion now about whether the board are able to recognise the mistakes made or know how to put them right. But in the absence of any takers, this is the board we have. So we need them to get it right. Our role as a Supporters’ Trust is to help ensure the club achieves the best it can and we have to work with what we have to do that. We’ve been criticised by a small section of fans for not organising protests, but we exist to find solutions, not just take an oppositionist stance to please the gallery. Last Saturday’s expression of anger was all the more powerful for being spontaneous and unorganised. Fans don’t need to be told what to think or given permission to protest. But they would like to know the answers to the questions we’ve put to the board regularly over the past two years and that we set out again last month. None of those questions are unreasonable, none differ from the type that would be asked of any board or business in similar circumstances. Bland and evasive answers about focusing on success and being a family don’t cut it, especially when the club posts a statement urging everyone to stick together one day and sacks the manager the next. Antonio Conte needs to be able to assert some leadership, create some direction and identity, and be backed. There’s an air around Spurs that suggests everyone is looking over their shoulder, afraid to make a mistake, focused only on avoiding blame. Anyone who has worked in that kind of environment knows how destructive that is. The need for a change in organisational culture is the most pressing challenge. Without it, we’ll be back discussing another new appointment within 18 months. Fans are often criticised for wanting too much, for not understanding what the great geniuses who run our game understand. But fans just want to be proud of their club, to know that even if the team don’t succeed they will have given it a good go, to have an identity and some hope, above all to be entertained. And they know the difference between price and value. Spurs had another glimpse of all that not so long ago, after a sustained period of drift. That shows it can be done. But there needs to be a change of approach from the very top. Martin Cloake is co-chair of Tottenham Hotspur Supporters’ TrustANOTHER DAY, ANOTHER SPURS MANAGER Antonio Conte has enjoyed consistent success throughout his managerial career, winning the title at his last three clubs, Juventus, Chelsea and Internazionale. All good things must come to an end, though, and on Tuesday he was named as the new manager of Tottenham Hotspur. Presumably the 52-year-old Spaniard Italian is an ardent believer in the rule of three, or has come to the conclusion that his next championship will be more satisfying in pure narrative terms if the main character suffers a setback and has to overcome severe difficulties along the way. Either way, it’s a clean snap. But does this reduce Spurs to little more than the status of a MacGuffin? Not sure. Erm. Maybe. Perhaps. Surely not, though. Merriam-Webster defines a MacGuffin as “an object in a story that serves to set and keep the plot in motion despite usually lacking intrinsic importance”. Oh Spurs. “I am extremely happy to return to coaching, and to do so at a Premier League club that has the ambition to be a protagonist again,” cheered Conte, framing the news firmly in the context of his own journey, although to be fair at one point he almost allowed the sides of his mouth to turn upwards and form the semblance of a smile, as he posed with the shirt of the club whose name he couldn’t bring himself to say. Conte had, you’ll remember, told the North London MacGuffins to do one in the summer, sparking a chain of non-events that led to the Nuno fiasco and all the way back here. Conte explained away his volte-face with typical Italian romanticism. “Our union did not happen because the end of my relationship with Inter was still too recent and emotionally too involved,” he extemporised, “but the contagious enthusiasm and determination of Daniel Levy in wanting to entrust me with this task had already hit the mark. Now that the opportunity has returned, I have chosen to take it with great conviction.” The Fiver wishes him the best of luck, and if he can convince Harry Kane to start running around again with similar determination, expect Tottenham to climb a few places before the main protagonist of Title Act IV comes in with a better offer. LIVE ON BIG WEBSITE! Join John Brewin from 5.45pm GMT for hot Big Cup MBM coverage of Malmö 1-2 Chelsea, before Scott is on hand for Atalanta 2-2 Manchester United at 8pm. QUOTE OF THE DAY 9 July 2021: “He was offered a very, very good deal by the club but he wasn’t willing to back himself and has decided his future lies elsewhere” – frustrated Hartlepool manager Dave Challinor on Rhys Oates rejecting a new contract to join Mansfield. 1 November: “Dave Challinor has informed the Hartlepool United board that he wants to leave and join Stockport County” – the Pools boss apparently isn’t willing to back himself and plans to drop back down a division. RECOMMENDED LOOKING Here’s David Squires on … Spurs and other Premier League managerial hijinks. FIVER LETTERS “Further to Mark McFadden’s letter regarding Spurs needing Saint Anthony, the patron saint of lost things (yesterday’s Fiver letters), perhaps they should appoint Jude Bellingham. Saint Jude being the patron saint of lost causes” – Phil Davison (and 1,056 others). “I googled recently-canonised martyrs to charity, hoping to find a clue to Newcastle’s next miracle worker manager. Turns out there’s a Saint Maximilian Kolbe among them – might Allan Saint-Maximin be (almost) nominatively pre-determined to become player-manager?” – Justin Kavanagh. “I feel for Nuno Espírito Santo. He went from managing Wolves to being thrown to them at Spurs” – Peter Oh. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Justin Kavanagh. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Sepp Blatter and Michael Platini have been charged with fraud and other offences by Swiss prosecutors on Tuesday after investigating a controversial payment of about £1.35m for six years. Newcastle’s new owners like what they see in Unai Emery and intend to prise him back to the Premier League from Villarreal. Rafa Benítez reckons if it wasn’t for Everton’s pesky knack he wouldn’t be wedged into the managerial crisis chair. “I think we are close but missing the players that can make a difference,” he sighed, after a 2-1 defeat by Wolves in which his missing-in-action players made the difference. Perhaps because he’s an adult, Jürgen Klopp isn’t bothered that Diego Simeone won’t be shaking his hand after Liverpool host Atlético in Big Cup. “Now I know he doesn’t want to do it after the game it’s not a problem,” blabbed Klopp, who prefers a bear hug anyway, the big tactile softie. In news that will hurt José Mourinho’s ears, Chelsea boss Tommy T has declared that wing-backs aren’t defenders, which is why he expects goals from them against Mälmo. “They are more free to attack the opponents’ box than they are in the role as a full-back,” he blathered. Ole Gunnar Solskjær seems to like criticism a bit too much. “I’ve always enjoyed [it],” he winced, while fiddling with his cilice belt. “Keep that coming, it’s fine.” And Pep Guardiola has got his Manchester derby mind games in early. “I think this game is much more important than the United game,” he honked before Wednesday’s 5-0 Big Cup win over Club Brugge. STILL WANT MORE? Making sense of Tottenham: Nicky Bandini explains why Antonio Conte appealed – he wins stuff, simple as, while Fabrizio Romano explains why Nuno Espírito Santo was never the right man and Martin Cloake offers a fan’s view. It’s all going right for the Green Army, with Plymouth Argyle flying at the right end of League One. Ben Fisher explains why. Aston Villa need to sort themselves out, starting with defensive midfield, explains Martin Laurence. Chelsea’s forwards could learn from their wing-backs’ potent attacking intent, writes Jacob Steinberg before their trip to Malmö. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! DO READJust before lift-off, I’m asked if I’ve ever done anything like this before. Following a nervous shake of my head, the news is broken that it “might feel quite unnatural”, but that we would be taking it slow. “Are you ready?” aerial director Gwen Hales asks. Soon I can feel empty space beneath my feet. Even though I am not afraid of heights, I’m suddenly very aware that I am dangling mid-air. This flying lesson feels more secure than I’d imagined but my heart still starts to beat faster. “A lot of people do have a very physical reaction, a bit like a panic attack, when they are taken up,” says Hales. We are at the rehearsal studios for an adaptation of CS Lewis’s The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe, which has just started a tour of the UK. The show was first staged at Leeds Playhouse in 2017 and transferred to the Bridge theatre in London in 2019. Hales was originally a circus performer: for 20 years she specialised as an aerialist, and then began directing when her body “started to crumble”. I’m attached to a harness that is tightened around my hips, that works by being clipped on to two metal wires connected to an electrical system. The instructions given are to let the machinery take me into the air. “Try not to fight it,” Hales says. But even with the mechanics pulling me upwards, my immediate reaction is to resist and stay on the ground. To fly, you need strong core muscles. “Anyone can be lifted, but doing choreography needs physical strength,” explains Hales. Before rehearsals start, she sends actors a training plan, mainly involving exercises such as planks. “If they haven’t done them, you can really tell,” she says. And my own lack of preparation makes following some of her directions difficult – such as lying flat. When performing aerially, the ability to stay horizontal is vital. “You don’t see a lot of people flying upright, so we have to do a lot of work to get it right,” says Hales. From a standing position, she instructs me to tip myself so I’m downwards facing. I’m told to stretch out my arms and balance myself while working hard to remain level. “You won’t fall out of the harness,” she says. But, as I wobble and slip just a little bit too far forward, I can’t help but worry. For Robyn Sinclair, the actor playing Susan, it is her first time properly flying on stage. Though she describes the feeling as a “fizzy excitement”, she tells me she initially felt nervous when she was lifted high up. “It was frightening. I don’t think I’m a natural. It takes me a long time to get used to being at a particular height. But once you do, it is a very powerful feeling.” As Susan, Sinclair only flies once in the show, in a scene when Aslan takes her and her sister Lucy on a journey through the skies of Narnia, but it is a moment she looks forward to performing. “I’m playing a human character, so luckily, I get to act shocked, which makes it easier!” Flying is one of the tools used in this production to evoke the Narnia universe, in addition to puppetry and live music. The tour is directed by Michael Fentiman, based on the original production by Sally Cookson, with set and costumes designed by Rae Smith. Fantasy is the reason we return to the tale again and again, says Samantha Womack, the former EastEnders actor who is playing the White Witch. “The narrative makes your imagination soar,” she says. “Even as adults, people need to experience magic.” Womack argues that Lewis’s story has taken on an even greater relevance during the pandemic. “The last year has been heavy. People have lost their sense of self and have struggled to understand what it means to have their freedom taken away,” she says. “This story is all about what matters [in life]. It’s a good time to escape the real world for a bit – and the flying adds excitement.” My time in the air was, unexpectedly, very moving. Hales tells me this feeling is something she hopes the audience will share. “I like to believe we’re physically connected to the people we watch on stage, so when we see them lifted, our bodies understand the sensation.” Theatrical flight demands that we suspend our belief in reality for a while, and, as I’m lowered on to the ground for the final time, I’m reluctant to say goodbye to my spell in the sky. “How did it feel?” Hales asks. “Superhuman,” I reply. The Lion, the Witch and the Wardrobe is on a UK tour until 9 April.Nicolas Sarkozy has appeared in court as the first former French president to be ordered to testify as a witness – but refused point blank to answer any questions. “It is an essential principle of democracies known as the separation of powers, and as president of the Republic I do not have to account for the organisation of my office or the way in which I exercised my mandate,” he told the court in Paris on Tuesday. France’s president from 2007 to 2012 told the court that the order, which the judge said was necessary “to determine the truth” since Sarkozy had probably “influenced the acts of which the defendants are accused”, was “entirely anti-constitutional”. Sarkozy said he was accountable “to the French people, not to a court”. He has not been charged or interrogated in the case, in which five of his former aides and allies are accused of misusing public funds on polling contracts. The former head of state had said earlier he would refuse to testify in the trial, but told the court he had reconsidered because he “respected and have always respected” the judicial system, even if he considered the order to testify “totally disproportionate”. Sarkozy then exercised his right not to answer a lengthy series of questions from the judge and a lawyer for Anticor, the anti-corruption association that brought the case. Both the public prosecutor and the defence team declined to ask him anything. Five aides and allies of Sarkozy, including his former chief of staff Claude Guéant and ex-adviser and consultant Patrick Buisson, have been on trial since 18 October accused of favouritism, conspiracy and misuse of public funds. Prosecutors say the polling contracts, worth €7.5m (£6.4m), signed by the five during Sarkozy’s term in office were negotiated in secret and without competition, breaking French laws on transparency and competitive bidding in public contracts. Sarkozy, 66, no longer has immunity from legal prosecution and is embroiled in several cases. In September, a judge handed him a one-year prison sentence over the illegal financing of his failed 2012 re-election bid. In March, he was convicted of “corruption and influence peddling” and given a three-year prison sentence, two years suspended, for trying to bribe a senior judge in one of several legal cases involving him. He is appealing against both verdicts. In October last year, he was placed under formal investigation on an accusation of “criminal association” over allegations the Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi helped finance his successful 2007 presidential campaign to the tune of up to €50m. He has denied the allegations. He was cleared of involvement in another 2007 campaign financing scandal involving allies from his UMP party who were accused of accepting illegal payments from L’Oreal heiress Liliane Bettencourt in cash-filled envelopes.Pep Guardiola believes Manchester City may be in the “best moment” of his five years as manager, despite defeat in the past two matches by West Ham and Crystal Palace. The reverse at West Ham was in the Carabao Cup via a penalty shootout but Palace won 2-0 in the Premier League with a convincing display when City were reduced to 10 men and decidedly second-best. Guardiola said he was content before his side host Club Brugge in Wednesday’s Champions League group game. “We are playing at an incredible level – the way we have been playing in the last month, month and a half,” he said. “I would say one of the best moments, maybe the best moment since we’ve been here. The results are many things, circumstances, and we have to improve. Our solidity, in terms of the process, we are doing really, really well.” Guardiola denied any frustration that results have not recently matched quality. “Football is a game where you win and lose. I’m only concerned about the way we play. Defeat was tough but we know the calendar, how busy it is. We want to finish this run well with the [Manchester] United game [on Saturday] before the international break.” City beat Brugge 5-1 two weeks ago and are second in Group A, a point behind Paris Saint-Germain and two ahead of the Belgian club. “This is more important than United – this game gives us an incredible possibility to make a step forward to qualify for the last 16,” Guardiola said. “In the Premier League there are many games; in this competition just six [in the group] and now three left: they are decisive, three and four – the most important games.” Despite stating City are in their best moment, Guardiola found fault when reviewing the win at Brugge. “Some things we have to improve: defensively, our pressing, it’s normal, every game,” he said. “I saw the game against Brugge and saw many bad things we have done.” Kyle Walker, who played in the match, said the squad might discover later on Tuesday what the manager meant. “We will have to wait for today’s training session and find out,” the said. “He has probably been doing his homework and picked up on something to help the team.” Walker is confident Jack Grealish, who cost a British record £100m will find his best form, having scored twice and made three assists in 14 appearances. “I can assure you he is a nightmare for defenders,” Walker said. “He has not played badly, he’s probably not quite hit the assists and goal levels he was getting at Aston Villa, but we like to share the load here.”Thierry Henry has accused social media companies of making money from hate and said he has no plans to end his boycott of the industry because platforms are “not really trying” to tackle online abuse. The former Arsenal star and World Cup winner announced a social media boycott in March in protest at the platforms’ failure to tackle racist abuse, triggering a wave of similar moves that culminated in a weekend-long blackout by football and other sports in the UK on 30 April. Speaking at the Web Summit in Lisbon, Henry said the business model of social media companies was a barrier to action. “When you find that they generate money through hate, it is very difficult when your medicine is your poison.” He added: “Being genuine and being nice doesn’t generate money.” Henry, 44, currently an assistant coach for the Belgian national team, said previous attempts to talk to social media firms had met with silence before his boycott. “I tried to reach [out] at times. They didn’t want to talk, but when the boycott happened they wanted to talk to me. I was like: ‘I don’t know what we need to talk about now’.” Henry said social media companies had not done enough since launching his boycott, which he said he would end once platforms started tackling racism and bullying properly. Speaking at a press conference after his Web Summit appearance, Henry said there had been no action. “They are not really trying to change anything about it.” Asked if he would return to social media, he said: “I am OK without it. I sleep well.” Henry also welcomed Monday’s report in the Times that online trolls could face a two-year jail sentence for posting content or sending messages that caused psychological harm. The criminal clauses would be included in the online safety bill, which Boris Johnson has promised to fast-track through parliament. Asked if he would support two-year sentences, Henry said: “Yes I would. I think that’s a big and massive start.” He said people shouting abuse in the street would be arrested or told to stop by police, but online “it seems you can do whatever you want”. Referring to the speed at which videos are removed from sites for breaching copyright, Henry added that social media companies would act if something had an “impact on their pockets”. Speaking in support of Puma’s Game of Our Lives anti-online hate initiative, he also expressed scepticism that Instagram would deal with complaints by Wilfried Zaha, the Crystal Palace forward, over abuse he received after his team defeated Manchester City at the weekend. Zaha has been told by Instagram to report each instance of abuse after the game. Henry said: “You need to report it for each [abusive] message – if they do answer.” A spokesperson for Meta, the parent company of Facebook and Instagram, said: “No one should have to experience racist abuse anywhere, and we don’t want it on our platforms. We remove hateful content as soon as we find it and respond quickly to valid legal requests to help with police investigations.” It is also understood that Instagram has banned all the accounts that sent abuse to Zaha. Nick Clegg, the vice-president of global affairs at Meta, used his Web Summit appearance to defend the business against renewed criticism from the whistleblower Frances Haugen, who spoke in Lisbon on Monday. Clegg denied Haugen’s claims that Facebook deliberately “spoonfeeds” hateful content to keep them on the platform. Clegg said advertisers, who account for most of Meta’s $86bn (£63bn) annual revenues, did not want their ads placed next to extreme content. “It misreads the commercial self-interest of Meta,” he said.Four Pacific-facing Latin American nations have committed to joining their marine reserves to form one interconnected area, creating one of the world’s richest pockets of ocean biodiversity. Panama, Ecuador, Colombia and Costa Rica announced on Tuesday the creation of the Eastern Tropical Pacific Marine Corridor (CMAR) initiative, which would both join and increase the size of their protected territorial waters to create a fishing-free corridor covering more than 500,000 sq km (200,000 sq miles) in one of the world’s most important migratory routes for sea turtles, whales, sharks and rays. The move comes amid growing clamour for action to protect rare marine species and commercial fish populations against foreign fishing fleets exploiting the region’s rich marine biodiversity, as well as to limit illegal, under-reported and unregulated (IUU) fishing by local fishing communities. The president of Colombia, Iván Duque, announced an additional 160,000 sq km of marine protected area on top of the country’s existing 120,000 sq km at Cop26 in Glasgow on Tuesday. The day before, Ecuador’s president, Guillermo Lasso, took the first step by announcing the expansion of the current 133,000 sq km Galápagos marine reserve by 60,000 sq km. “Just as all the world leaders here have called for action not words, I believe this is a concrete action on behalf of Ecuador that goes beyond any words we can say here,” Lasso told the Guardian after the announcement. “This is a sovereign decision of the Ecuadorian government but I have to point out that it is the result of five months of dialogue, which we’ve held with small-scale and industrial fishermen. For that reason I don’t expect any problem of rejection or protest because it is a consensual decision,” he said. Lasso added that the plan for a wider joined-up reserve was “an absolutely direct response of middle-income countries with a commitment to humanity” to the increased presence of industrial fishing fleets. He said the expansion involved one of the world’s largest debt swaps for conservation, but did not give any details or figures. The expansion creates a “safe swimway” connecting Ecuadorian with Costa Rican waters, where “important endangered migratory species, such as sharks, whales, turtles and manta rays travel”, said Ecuador’s environment minister, Gustavo Manrique. “In spite of the fact we’re a developing country, despite the fact we have [one of] the largest [fishing] fleets in the Pacific, we have decided to reduce the fishing effort,” Manrique told the Guardian. “This is the new language of global conservation. Never have countries with connecting maritime borders joined together to create a public policy.” This new Galápagos protected area would be split into two: a no-take zone of 30,000 sq km to the north-east of the Galápagos Islands connecting Ecuador’s waters with those of Costa Rica, along the underwater seamounts of the Cocos Ridge, a key migration route for ocean-going species. Another 30,000 sq km area is a no-longline fishing zone wrapping north-west around the existing Galápagos marine reserve. Alex Hearn, a British marine biologist who has worked in the Galápagos Islands for two decades, said it was a step forward. “This is a moment to relish, but there’s a lot of work which needs to be done.” Hearn said the eastern tropical Pacific was “one of the last bastions of what ocean biodiversity would look like in a pristine world”, and described the seas that connect the Galápagos, Malpelo, Cocos and Coiba islands as a living laboratory for scientific research. “Just protecting the waters around them is not enough. There’s a connectivity between the areas and that’s what we need to protect,” said Hearn, who belongs to the Migramar network of scientists, which provided evidence for the reserve’s expansion. He noted that the populations of highly migratory species had been falling this century, among them turtles, rays and sharks, particularly the critically endangered hammerhead species that congregates to breed around the Galápagos’s Darwin and Colombia’s Malpelo islands. In June, as part of the UK-led “30x30” initiative to secure at least 30% of the world’s ocean as protected marine areas by 2030, Panama more than quadrupled the Cordillera de Coiba marine protected area – from about 17,220 sq km to 98,230 sq km. Max Bello, an ocean policy advisor with the NGO Mission Blue, said: “With this commitment, Latin America again consolidates its leadership in marine conservation, but more is needed. We are hoping to continue towards at least 30% of protection in all of the [maritime] countries.” “A new era – to provide protection to species which know no frontiers – has been born,” he said.How can I get my young kids out the door without running late for once? Dentists recommend brushing children’s teeth for two minutes at a time. Doing my four-year-old son’s can take 20. If that sounds orally retentive on my part, rest assured very few of the 20 minutes are actually spent brushing. (Truth be told, it’s likely fewer than two.) Usually there are several minutes of asking, followed by a few gentle reminders, several increasingly terse requests, and then a melange of pleading, bribery and blackmail. By that stage he’s at least in the bathroom. Approximately three seconds after the toothbrush makes contact with its targets come the questions. Nowhere on the toothpaste tube does it specify that fluoride stimulates curiosity in children’s brains, but I can confirm the correlation. I can’t be mad at him, of course, because he’s not doing anything naughty. He’s just being a delightfully distracted four-year-old boy with zero concept of time or what it means to be late for work. I envy him, if anything, and don’t want to impinge upon his carefree childhood outlook with my banal adult agenda. It would, however, be nice not to start every day with a dose of frustration mixed with cortisol as we scramble to get to work. Not long after we had his elder sister, our first, I remember lamenting to a colleague at work about the early wake-up calls. “Don’t worry,” she said, “you’ll be screaming at them to get out the door in no time.” Such was my naivety, I thought this was a joke – that she was referring to the teenage years, and how they grow up so fast. Turns out, not so much. Of all the least fun parenting roles to play, that of the nagger is surely right up there. Even I hate the sound of my own voice. This cuts to the central irony of parenthood, an activity which expands your very understanding of love, connection and purpose – helping you identify what’s truly important in life – only to simultaneously lump you with such copious quantities of tedious shit that you soon forget all about it. Especially when much of the tedium takes far longer than it needs to! I’ve seen Bluey, OK. I know it’s the tedium that’s the problem. And when I’m my best parenting self I even have Bandit’s capacity to turn household chores into fun adventures that capture their imagination. But who has the energy for that all the time? Catching up with my mate Pete at the park later, at least I know I’m not alone. I can tell this because his son is wearing pyjamas. While lamenting our inability to inspire action in our offspring, we marvel at how their preschool teachers somehow make it look so effortless. “They’re like child whisperers,” suggests Pete, and it’s true. They don’t raise their voice, never seem to nag, and yet somehow they manage to coerce not just one but 20 small children to carry out their wishes. It’s only later that I decide to stop lamenting and start asking. I decide to wage a war on faffing. Vicki Schaefer is hardly what you’d consider a drill sergeant. A softly spoken preschool teacher of 22 years, and the creator of Little Wise One, Vicki appears a model of serenity as she goes about her job. Talking to her about parenting is a bit like watching Bluey: soothing and reinvigorating, if capable of provoking mild feelings of shame at my own relative impatience. She is, however, very kind, and willing to share some of her wisdom. Vicki’s tips for motivating little people into action Eye level is super important. Get down to them – it helps them feel “seen”. Tell them what you want them to do, not what you don’t want. “Put your feet on the ground” instead of “don’t climb on that”. Five words or less works well. “I need you to…” In times of conflict over choices, give them two (no more) options – both that work for you. They feel empowered as the final choice is still theirs. Pause before responding. “Breathe, listen, respond.” Model all behaviours. Children see, hear and copy everything you do. Lastly, speak with love and kindness. Preschoolers have only been on the planet four years which isn’t that long. They might be capable of many things, but we need to remember there’s still so much for them to learn. I love how practical some of these are. We’re trying them and they do work … sometimes. Our house is not yet a zen temple, but we’re slowly making progress. And we’re OK with that. For many of us, the early years of parenthood are about making peace with “slowly making progress”. There is value in lowering your expectations of how much you can get done in a day. This has not come naturally – both my wife and I like to be busy. But there are unexpected benefits to leaving more free time. Just yesterday I was asked to pretend I was a zombie and my son, a fellow zombie, had discovered a volcano shooting out brains. I mean, really, can my adult day produce anything better than that worth rushing off for?A major Melbourne hospital is down 51 staff who are refusing to be vaccinated against Covid, a requirement to work in Victorian healthcare facilities. The state government directive applies to all workers including contractors and those who are self-employed, and covers roles such as administration and retail staff within healthcare settings, doctors, nurses and people doing diagnostic imaging. The deadline for health workers to receive a first dose in Victoria was Friday 29 October. A Royal Melbourne hospital spokesperson said eight staff had chosen not to get vaccinated and had resigned, a further eight had their employment terminated after stating they would not get the jab, and another 35 staff had been stood down. “This is to allow them to potentially rethink their position and us, as an organisation, to go through the process that may potentially lead to further terminations of employment,” the spokesperson said. The 51 staff impacted represents just 0.45% of the hospital’s 11,000-strong workforce. They held a range of roles including nursing, administration, ward clerks and clinical positions – though none were doctors. A professor of epidemiology with the University of Sydney, Alexandra Martinuik, said the staff losses at the Royal Melbourne hospital were reasonable. “A kind gesture from the hospital could be to reach out to these staff to ask them if they have any questions about vaccination, or if there is anything more the hospital could do to help them choose immunisation,” she said. “But if these staff continue to choose not to be immunised then I do think it is reasonable for someone working in healthcare to resign, or be stood down if they are not Covid vaccinated and they don’t have a medical exemption, as it is much less safe for them and their patients and colleagues if not immunised.” Guardian Australia asked a number of major hospitals about the impact of the vaccine mandate in Victoria. The Royal Melbourne hospital was the only institution to provide a response. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In New South Wales, the impact of the mandate on health worker numbers is being collated by the state’s health department. A NSW Health spokesperson said work was under way to reconcile data from across local health districts, networks and organisations. “With regard to the final number of people who may no longer work with NSW Health as they decided not to be vaccinated against Covid-19, this will become clear once this work is complete,” the department said. “This is because not all these people will resign due to their views, and each person’s particular circumstances need to be worked through by the local health districts and due process needs to be applied to all employees.” The data would be made available “in due course,” the spokesperson said. In early October, NSW Health said fewer than 0.1% of its staff had resigned as a result of the Covid vaccination mandate, contradicting claims opposition to the jab could lead to staff shortages. On Monday, Queensland’s health minister, Yvette D’Ath, said more than 7,000 health staff were yet to confirm their vaccination status as required and about 4,000 were set to receive show-cause notices and be suspended on full pay. “We will put in place measures to manage any workforce shortages that might occur,” the minister said. Mandatory Coivd-19 vaccination for health workers is a move supported by the Australian Medical Association, with president Omar Khorshid saying legal protection should also be given to healthcare employers who mandate vaccinations. The AMA has welcomed mandatory health worker vaccinations in Victoria, NSW, Western Australia, Tasmania and Queensland but want a nationally consistent policy that applies to GPs and practice staff, pharmacists, hospital staff, ambulance staff, cooks and cleaners, with no exemptions except for legitimate medical reasons.Coalition MPs are split over the government’s revised religious discrimination bill, with the attorney general, Michaelia Cash, holding urgent meetings with MPs before parliament returns to try to resolve the issue. The push to introduce a bill in the final sitting fortnight this year comes almost three years after the prime minister, Scott Morrison, promised to introduce a new religious discrimination act after a review into religious freedom undertaken by Philip Ruddock in 2018. Cash, who took over the bill’s progress from Christian Porter when she became attorney general in March, is now consulting on a third iteration of the draft legislation in an attempt to overcome internal resistance and fulfil an election promise. Three issues are understood to face some resistance within the party room: the inclusion of a “Folau clause” that would give legal protection to someone expressing a statement of belief; conscientious objection provisions that would allow health practitioners to refuse to provide certain treatment; and the ability for religious institutions to discriminate against staff on the basis of religion to maintain a “faith-based ethos”. The Australian Christian Lobby has boasted it successfully pressured the government into including a Folau clause – a provision that would legally protect an individual from having their employment terminated as a result of them expressing their religious views. The issue gained prominence after footballer Israel Folau was sacked by Rugby Australia for social media posts suggesting homosexuals, adulterers, atheists and other “sinners” would go to hell. Liberal MP Warren Entsch, who attended one of a number of briefings with Cash this week, said he did not support the Folau clause. “I just have serious concerns about a number of issues in relation to it [the bill] and the Folau clause is a major concern,” Entsch told Guardian Australia. He said his position had not changed after previously indicating he would not support a bill that “reimposed” any discrimination through a religious discrimination act. Other MPs and senators, including Andrew Bragg, Dean Smith, Tim Wilson and Dave Sharma are understood to hold similar reservations. The third draft of the bill, which is still being finalised by Cash, comes more than two years after Porter released the government’s first exposure draft in early 2019. That bill, which was described as “friendless”, received almost 6,000 submissions during the consultation process and was later revised after the backlash. The government’s second exposure draft, designed to appease concerns of religious groups, was roundly criticised by the Australian Human Rights Commission, the Australian Medical Association and LGBTQ+ groups. Conservative MPs, however, are pushing for the bill to be made a priority, warning that faith communities were expecting Morrison to deliver on the promise made before the last election. It is understood that WA senator Matt O’Sullivan spoke to the party room during the past sitting fortnight about the issue, questioning the government’s priorities after it signed off on a bill relating to the legalising of mitochondrial donation. Before the last election, Morrison penned a five-page letter to the heads of churches, promising to legislate a religious discrimination act as an election commitment. He said in the letter that he would introduce legislation “to make it unlawful to discriminate on the basis of a person’s religious belief or activity, including on the basis that a person does not hold any religious belief or does not engage in any religious activity”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning South Sydney Anglican Bishop Michael Stead would not comment on his discussions with the government on the legislation but said the bill was “well and truly overdue”. “It’s indefensible that there is not protection for religious freedom,” Stead told Guardian Australia. “We are very keen to see this resolved during this term of government, we don’t want this to be an election issue and we would hope for bipartisan support, for the Labor party’s support of the bill. “We recognise that Covid has had an impact, we are not insensitive to the fact that a whole lot of the government’s legislative timetable and commitments have been disrupted, but that is why we are very keen to see it resolved now.”Australia’s federal budget is set for a post-lockdown bounce before settling into deficits of $60bn a year due to higher social services and defence spending, an independent analysis has warned. Deloitte Access Economics’ budget monitor, released on Tuesday, projects cumulative deficits will be $45bn lower than expected over the next four years as momentum built before the Delta wave is unleashed through a sustained recovery in a highly vaccinated society. But in 2024-25 the deficit will be at least $36bn on announced policies and it’s tipped to reach $60bn including $25bn of new spending not yet announced. The federal government will then have an “ongoing shortfall” so large it would require interventions as drastic as raising the GST to 17% or raising marginal income tax rates by 5.5% to wipe out the deficit. The report calls into question the sustainability of stage three income tax cuts – which flatten the tax rate to 30% for all workers earning between $45,000 and $200,000 – supported by both the Coalition and Labor. Deloitte forecasts the budget deficit will shrink from $116bn in 2021-22 to $49bn in 2024-25 because “when nations get sufficiently ahead of Covid for their economies to open up, their tax revenues go on a tear”. In the medium and long term, Australia’s budget will be in deficit – not because of Covid spending measures, as the cost of servicing Australia’s debt actually decreased due to low interest rates – but due to baked-in spending. The May budget added $15bn a year to ongoing spending on social services, with large investments in disability, mental health and aged care, in part to rectify historical underspending identified by the royal commission. Deloitte warned of “a fast widening gap between what experts expect the NDIS to cost and what’s budgeted for it”, a gap also noted by the government services minister, Linda Reynolds, who has suggested “hard discussions” will be needed to make the scheme sustainable. The fastest-growing budget item, defence, is expected to continue to grow as the Aukus pact responds to dangers in the Indo-Pacific region with higher spending. Australia will also have almost one million fewer people due to Covid border closures, Deloitte projected, which will weigh on the budget. Deloitte warned that income tax cuts to battle bracket creep are “overdelivering” because “bracket creep is driven by wage growth, but that’s slumped to record lows”. “Worse still, the national debate on these tax cuts focussed on fairness, whereas the problem with these tax cuts was always their size,” it said. “So just when we should be turning our minds to how to pay for higher social and defence spending, we’ll deliver a tax cut that’s too big.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Deloitte Access Economics partner Chris Richardson told Guardian Australia that the nation didn’t “need fiscal repair any time soon” because the top priority was to “repair the economy”. Richardson said stage three tax cuts, set to take effect in 2024-25, and how to finance the deficit if they proceeded, were “the story of the next election”. “Do not let either side of politics hide from the difficult questions … there are no easy answers … important decisions need to be made and they won’t be fun.” There is disquiet within the Morrison government’s own ranks about the size of programs to combat the Covid recession including the $90bn jobkeeper wage subsidy scheme, which Deloitte said could have been better targeted but played a “starring role” in supporting the economy. In September 2020 the treasurer, Josh Frydenberg, signalled the Coalition will continue to prioritise reducing the unemployment rate ahead of debt reduction, promising that it will not begin the work of substantial debt and deficit reduction until the unemployment rate was “comfortably” back under 6%. Labor, burned at the 2019 election for proposing wide-ranging tax changes to franking credits, negative gearing and capital gains tax has ditched all these revenue-raising measures and promised not to scrap the stage three tax cuts. Frydenberg said the monitor was “a further vote of confidence in Australia’s economic resilience” and showed “temporary, targeted and proportionate economic support has underpinned our strong economic recovery”. “Lower taxes and investment in skills and infrastructure will continue to support the economy as we recover from the biggest economic shock since the Great Depression,” the treasurer said. Labor’s shadow treasurer, Jim Chalmers, said the budget monitor “confirms the significant challenges Australians face” and that improvements in the near term were “despite the Morrison government not because of it”. “This government has promised eight surpluses but delivered none, real wages are going backwards, and year after year its budgets have been weighed down by waste and riddled with rorts,” he said.Australians trying to order goods could face a nightmare before Christmas, as shortages caused by blockages in global supply chains continue to bite. The pandemic has stretched supply chains to breaking point, which may make some goods scarce until 2023. Shoppers are still complaining of empty shelves, long after the toilet paper buying frenzies and personal protective equipment shortages of 2020. There are shortfalls of goods from medicines to coffee, to electronics and bicycles and clothes. Dan Murphy’s has said some alcohol products will be hard to source, and Australia Post has warned presents may not make it in time to go under the Christmas tree. There is no single reason for the shortages, but rather a combination of factors arising from the global disruption caused by the pandemic and local obstacles such as state border closures and industrial disputes on the wharves. The chief economist at the Committee for Economic Development of Australia, Jarrod Ball, says there was a “massive shift of consumption” into goods over services during Australia’s lockdowns, as governments pumped out wage and benefit subsidies and restrictions prevented spending on travel and hospitality. But as demand for goods grew, the problems with supply got steadily worse. The chief executive of the Australian Retailers Association, Paul Zahra, says that has caused a nightmare for his members. “Our supply chains are under incredible pressure at the moment and there’s a myriad of issues at play here that are creating the perfect storm for retailers and consumers.” Where are the bottlenecks? Most of Australia’s imports come from China, followed by the US. As an island, Australia is particularly vulnerable to shipping delays, all the more so when the number of flights arriving in the country has been drastically curtailed. “At a global level, retailers are reporting that the capping of incoming flights has put significant pressure on shipping, and we are seeing container costs escalating up to four times their usual rate,” Zahra says. The price of shipping containers has exploded, as has the cost of chartering a ship to move things around the world, as the domestic spending boom on consumer goods in the US and the general disruption to pre-pandemic flows of containers has caused logjams of container ships in US ports, and shortages elsewhere. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning When containers do arrive, they face more delays at Australia’s ports. The Maritime Union of Australia is locked in a battle over pay and conditions, with rolling strikes set to continue this month. Pallets, the wooden containers used to transport many items, are also suddenly undergoing a mismatch of supply and demand. “The pallets are a really good example of all these factors coming together in a way people might not have foreseen,” Ball says. “You’ve got a massive spike for consumer goods but at the same time a big lift in demand for timber due to lots of building and the renovations that are going on. “Add to that disruption to the factories that make the pallets, and that all adds up to a pallet shortage.” Covid itself continues to have a direct effect on crucial links in the chain. Distribution centres have been shut down, or staff forced to isolate, slowing the flow of goods. Australia Post has been overwhelmed at times during lockdown restrictions, and courier companies are also feeling the strain. “Some distribution centres and warehouses have been impacted by reduced staffing levels due to Covid cases, we’ve had industrial disputes from delivery drivers and port workers, while state border controls and limited domestic flights are also impacting the movement of goods,” Zahra says. Finally, there is a shortage of the right people for the right jobs. Infrastructure Australia warned in October that two in three key occupations necessary for construction were “likely or potentially in shortage”. There are nationwide shortages of engineers and architects, and potential shortages of bricklayers, concreters, carpenters, electricians and other tradies. Which products are worst affected? Cars and electronics The pandemic has increased demand as people buy more computer products to work from home or entertain themselves in lockdowns. But the global dearth of semiconductors used in electronics such as whitegoods, phones and cars means even Apple has struggled to get chips for iPhones, Macs and iPads. All computer manufacturers are facing similar difficulties. Toyota Australia says current demand exceeds supply, with long delays for parts. People are waiting months for some of its most popular models. Nissan, General Motors and Volkswagen are all facing delays. Food and groceries The Australian Food and Grocery Council has pulled together a taskforce to deal with supply problems, including the pallet crisis, which is hampering supermarkets shifting goods around the country. The council’s chief executive, Tanya Barden, says Covid staff shortages and shutdowns mean products have been kept in storage on pallets for longer. “The issues include impacts on global shipping and sector shutdowns based on health authority orders,” she says. She hopes that as states open up, pallets will be emptied and put back into distribution. “New measures for management of Covid close contacts in the workplace should also have beneficial flow-on effects to address pressures on labour capacity issues in supply chains.” Specific issues have further complicated the picture for other products, including coffee and some alcohol brands. Building materials Even before Covid, Australia was facing timber shortages because of the 2019-20 bushfires, which burned commercial plantations as well as native forests. Demand for construction materials skyrocketed during the pandemic as the federal government poured stimulus money into construction. That happened globally, too, so imports couldn’t make up the shortfall. Steel and other construction supplies are also in short supply. Steel mills around the world wound back production when Covid hit, expecting things would slow down, the Australian Steel Association chief, David Buchanan, has said. But then the stimulus money did what it was intended to do, and demand soared. The Australian Institute of Architects has warned that insulation, bricks and plaster board could also face shortages. When will it end? In July, the Productivity Commission warned that increasingly complex global supply chains meant they were more at risk from trade wars, natural disasters, financial crises, pandemics and infrastructure-related failures such as cyberattacks. Ball says the consensus is the shortages will not end anytime soon. “It won’t really be until 2023 that we start to see some moderation in this,” he says, warning that even then there is a risk of worker shortages in service industries. Zahra says the only thing consumers can do is try to plan ahead wherever possible. “It’s the season to shop early,” he says.Ramesh Mario Nithiyendran likes things bright. The Sydney-based sculptor and ceramicist is known for his vivid technicolour creations, which make use of materials as varied as concrete, bronze, fibreglass and LED. Until 13 November, a new exhibition of Nithiyendran’s work will be on display at Sydney art gallery Sullivan+Strumpf. Titled The Guardians, the exhibition is inspired by mythological figures designed to protect from evil. It comprises 21 ceramic works, as well as four drawings. Whatever shape his work ends up taking, Nithiyendran has found keeping visual diaries essential to his practice. He rates those spiral bound diaries – which he fills in with texta sketches of potential sculptural works – as his most useful object. Here, he tells us why those pages are so hard to part with, as well as the stories of a few other important personal belongings. What I’d save from my house in a fire I’ve listened to many fire evacuation briefings. When I hear the “leave all your belongings” protocol, I get chills. It sounds dramatic, but I have so many loved objects! My house fire situation would probably resemble a comedic skit. I’d pack a suitcase full of things and probably fling it out the window. But what would be in this suitcase? I’ve made an effort to surround my home with inspiring handmade objects and artworks from various parts of the world. I just acquired the most beautiful traditional Tibetan rug, which was made in India by Tibetan refugees. I love that this tradition is being sustained. It’s hand knotted and has two regal tigers amongst bamboo on it. Tigers are one of my favourite animals. So when my friend linked me to the Instagram account of Tim Roodenrys, where it was being sold, I pounced on it. I would also hurriedly put artworks I own in this (big) suitcase. I don’t have any of my own pieces in my home. I look at my work all day in the studio, so I prefer to have artwork made by other people in my living space. But I only really collect handmade things. I’d have to make room in the suitcase for an etching I recently bought by Ms N. Yunupingu and a vase made for me by my friend James Lemon. My most useful object This is where I lean into the clichéd artist category! I have always kept visual diaries. My mind incessantly chucks ideas, images, thoughts and fantasies at me. Some of these ideas suck, but that’s just the nature of things. My best ideas often emerge at unpredictable times. The ideas can come like earthquakes. They make me want to run into the studio and start making. I remember being at a party once and having to find a moment to draw a multi-headed figure. I wanted to make it on my phone so I wouldn’t forget it. What I have found most useful are spiral bound diaries with blank pages and packets of humble textas. Nothing fancy! When I was a kid, I would draw and scribble all day with these textas. And I still do! I love the sounds these markers make when you drag them across a page. I never get sentimentally attached to my artworks, but I am so sentimental about my diaries. The Powerhouse Museum recently acquired four of my diaries alongside a recent work. It was like giving away my babies. I feel like within these diaries are drawings that can birth infinite new sculptural works. The item I most regret losing I’m currently in the process of compiling my artist archive. This collection of small sculptural maquettes, diaries and other bits of relevant studio detritus will soon go into a collection of the Art Gallery of New South Wales. As I sift through all this material, I just wish I had the first ceramic I ever made. I’m not sure how reliable my memory is, but I seem to clearly recall this work. I made it during a short weekend ceramics course called “clay for kids” somewhere in western Sydney when I was about 10 years old. I don’t think I was particularly talented with clay at the time, but I remember loving the smell of it. The work was a head with big lips and curly hair. It was about the size of my adult fist and was glazed badly with a glassy brown. It was super wonky, but I was chuffed when it came out of the kiln. I also wish I had some of my scribbly childhood drawings. I’d love to see those!There are few greater joys than watching a performer as skilled as Kirsten Dunst really go for it, whatever “it” may be. Showtime’s On Becoming a God in Central Florida, which first aired in 2019, lets Dunst play with her trademark mix of ennui and stoicism in a deliciously heightened world. We watch her ride a hot pink ATV with a baby strapped to her chest, hunt alligators, teach water aerobics and perform a curious “puppet dance”, all while furiously navigating the hierarchies of a pyramid scheme. Dunst plays Krystal Stubbs, a waterpark employee and new mother embroiled in a multi-level marketing scheme by her misguided husband, Travis (Alexander Skarsgård) – a mulleted man who appears constantly on the brink of tears. Set in 1992, co-creators Robert Funke and Matt Lutsky explore a period in which these companies seemed especially pervasive, festering in American homes like a slow rot. In On Becoming a God, which Dunst also executive produced, Krystal confronts Founders American Merchandise (FAM), an exploitative home goods company headed by Obie Garbeau II (a perfectly cast Ted Levine). Garbeau’s voice provides recurring narration via motivational tapes selling various forms of the same false promise: wealth and upward mobility are attainable to those who work hard. To regain control over her and her daughter’s lives, Krystal attempts to play FAM’s game while simultaneously hacking it, refusing to return to the impoverished childhood she barely escaped. After being met with generally positive reviews, the show was renewed for a second season in September 2019. However, this decision was overturned after the pandemic hit, and it was officially cancelled in October 2020. The cancellation stings, yet isn’t surprising: the show is darkly, knowingly weird, with an often surrealist tone that may be pleasurable to some and tedious to others. If you aren’t on the show’s wavelength, its digressions are less likely to land. Nevertheless, On Becoming a God’s strange alchemy strikes a nerve. Characters are desperate for something to believe in, for the fantasy of being their “own boss” to distract from how little power they realistically have. And Garbeau, fashioning himself as a divine figure, is willing to capitalise on working-class hope, promising something better to people who’d rather have faith in something false than none at all. The comic standout of the ensemble is Théodore Pellerin as Cody Bonar, a devout Garbeau-believer with whom Krystal begins a complex entanglement. Then there’s Mel Rodriguez, giving the show its heart as Krystal’s neighbour Ernie Gomes – his pure nature unfortunately putting him at the greatest risk of corruption. This all makes for a thrilling (if stressful) watch, that at times feels like watching a sinkhole where everyone’s bound to get swallowed up. It recalls Good Girls, another recent title about characters being consumed by corruption after the American dream they’re sold fails them. In both shows, it’s easy to buy into a system – a crime ring or a pyramid scheme – but not so easy to pay your way out. In some ways, Krystal feels like the culmination of Dunst’s most notable roles, combining her charm in Drop Dead Gorgeous and Bring It On with the ferocity of Bachelorette’s Regan. This is particularly true when Krystal is winning over audiences at FAM events or wrapping Cody around her finger. Underneath this facade, the character is defined by the dejection of being repeatedly diminished and confined, familiar themes for fans of her collaborations with Sofia Coppola or her critically acclaimed turn in Fargo. Except here, Dunst’s often enigmatic presence (consider Lars von Trier’s Melancholia) is traded for something more unruly and kitsch. We see Krystal’s degrading quest for stability under FAM wear on her physically, sometimes reducing her to a battered husk of overwhelming denim ensembles. It’s this weight of desperation tempered by the buoyancy of small wins, however, that propels On Becoming a God. And when Krystal gets even a semblance of dominance, boy, does she get it. Her face is radiant with the kind of power that was never meant for a minimum-wage widow, tricking you for just a moment into thinking this unwinnable system might be won after all.No 10 is likely to break its promise to increase the number of GPs in England by 6,000, Sajid Javid has admitted. The health secretary disclosed that the figure, a key promise in the Conservatives’ general election manifesto in 2019, was unlikely to be met given the number of GPs retiring early. He made the disclosure while giving evidence to the cross-party Commons health select committee. Asked by the committee chair, Jeremy Hunt, if the government was on track to implement the 6,000 pledge, Javid relied: “No. I’m not going to pretend that we’re on track when we are clearly not.” Increasing the number of GPs in England by 6,000 by 2025 was one of the commitments to improve the NHS Boris Johnson repeatedly made in the election campaign. Others included expanding the nursing workforce by 50,000 and offering 50m more GP appointments a year. Labour accused Javid of having “casually dropped” the pledge. “It is staggering that Javid has abandoned Boris Johnson’s key election promise to recruit 6,000 extra GPs”, said Jonathan Ashworth, the shadow health secretary. “Patients struggling to get an appointment will be appalled that this promise has been so casually dropped.” The British Medical Association, which is at loggerheads with Javid over his plan to force GPs to see more patients face-to-face, said unmanageably heavy workloads were prompting growing numbers of experienced doctors to quit. “The latest workforce figures for England show that we have lost the equivalent of more than 1,800 full-time, fully qualified GPs since 2015, despite pledges to increase numbers by 6,000”, said Dr Richard Vautrey, the chair of the BMA’s GPs committee. “So while the health secretary’s admission today is long overdue, it is absolutely not news to GPs and their colleagues working in surgeries across the country that have been decimated by workforce shortages. “The bottom line is we are haemorrhaging doctors in general practice. While more younger doctors may be choosing to enter general practice, even more experienced GPs are leaving the profession or reducing their hours to manage unsustainable workloads.” He blamed the growing numbers taking early retirement on the government’s failure to include measures to relieve the pressure on GP surgeries in its recent plan to guarantee in-person consultations for patients who want one. “A failure to show any meaningful support for GPs or efforts to retain experienced doctors – something completely absent in the government’s recent ‘rescue plan’ that has been overwhelmingly rejected by the profession – ultimately impacts how easy it is for patients to access their GP practice.” Javid also: • Confirmed he is pressing ahead with plans, opposed by GPs, to publish details showing how many patients each surgery in England sees face-to-face. • Claimed that “a significant proportion of people are turning up for emergency care when they could have gone to their GP”. • Announced that NHS England would be publishing an “elective recovery plan” by the end of the month to tackle the 5.7m-strong backlog of operations. • Warned that the coming winter “will be extra tough” compared with normal. During the evidence session, Hunt recalled how, when he was health secretary, he had to break the promise he had made in 2015 to increase the number of GPs in England by 5,000 by 2020. He attributed that to the increasing number of doctors opting to go part-time or retire early. He cited the results of a BMA survey published in May, which found that more than a third of GPs planned to go part-time over the next year to reduce their workloads. Javid’s rowback on the pledge came as research showed that many GPs were cutting back on the amount of time they spent dealing directly with patients in order to protect their mental health. Exhausted GPs were displaying “resilience surface acting” – pretending to cope with work pressures better than they actually were – in order not to be seen as weak, the study found. GPs “appear to be resolving this issue by reducing their clinical working hours”, according to the findings, published online in the British Journal of General Practice on Tuesday. Warning of the “huge implications” of this trend, the authors added: “The cumulative effects of fewer mid-career GP hours worked, combined with increased retirement and reduced intake into the profession from newly qualified doctors, are potentially grave concerns for the stability of the overall GP workforce, the NHS and the health of the UK population as a whole.” The research was undertaken by Lucy Martin, a GP in the West Midlands, and Almuth McDowall, a professor of organisational psychology at Birkbeck, University of London. They based their findings on qualitative interviews with 27 GPs about their resilience. Prof Martin Marshall, the chair of the Royal College of GPs, said: “It isn’t surprising to hear that the government are not on track to keep their pledge of 6,000 more GPs by 2024. This has been clear for some time. But it is disappointing. The college has consistently been raising the alarm about the intense workload and workforce pressures facing general practice – and the impact it is having on patients – while the government focuses on ‘sticking plaster’ solutions to address them that do not address the fundamental challenges.”There is a “chronic” lack of investment in primary school libraries in the UK, with teachers often forced to buy reading materials for children with their own money, according to a new study. But an alliance between the National Literacy Trust (NLT) and Penguin Random House UK (PRH) is setting out to transform 1,000 school libraries, with organisers calling on the government, businesses and charities to back their efforts. Schools are not statutorily required to have a library on their premises, and the report, The Future of Primary School Libraries, reveals that four out of 10 have no dedicated library budget. Some respondents to the study said they were relying on donations from families or buying books from charity shops to stock their shelves. “Most teachers spend their own money adding to these resources, owing to lack of school funding,” said one. The lack has long been protested by authors, with current children’s laureate Cressida Cowell writing in April to Boris Johnson asking him to dedicate £100m a year to revitalising “deteriorating” primary school libraries across the country. According to the NLT, one in eight primary schools in England do not have a library, with the proportion climbing to one in four in schools with a higher proportion of pupils on free school meals. The NLT said that this is a sign of the “widening literacy attainment gap between disadvantaged pupils and their better-off peers”, which has been exacerbated by the disruption of Covid-19. The literacy charity has teamed up with PRH to call for large-scale public and private funding in order to equip 1,000 primary school libraries with training, new books and resources by 2025, supporting 500,000 pupils over the next four years. The alliance is already backed by Arts Council England, which has awarded more than £900,000 through its National Lottery Project Grant programme to expand the World of Stories project, run by PRH and the NLT. PRH is investing more than £1m in additional support, and retail bank Chase has also pledged its support. World of Stories has already worked with 225 primary school libraries over the last three years. “One in 11 children on free school meals don’t own a single book of their own. With the latest research … it paints a very concerning picture of how these children and young people are able to access new books and unlock a lifetime of potential through reading. Together, we are committed to changing this,” said NLT chief executive Jonathan Douglas. Pledging support for the initiative Alison Tarrant, chief executive of the School Library Association, said that school libraries are in desperate need of funding. “Primary school libraries are essential to children’s literacy and learning and yet the recent research continues to highlight disparity across the UK, impacting the development of reading and writing skills, wellbeing as well as overall academic attainment,” she said. Last week’s budget from chancellor Rishi Sunak promised large sums to “renovate, restore and revive” public libraries but none of that money will be allocated to schools. A Department for Education representative said: “Individual schools will decide how best to provide and maintain access to books for their pupils. To support schools in making sure children get the education they deserve, we are providing an additional £4.7bn in school funding by 2024-25, investment that will support teachers and resources such as library provision.”Morrisons supermarket group has apologised after it labelled a chicken product as containing British poultry and “non-EU salt and pepper”. The decision to detail the origin of the ingredients on its £4 oven-ready chicken crown prompted a threat of boycott from some customers. The company, which has long prided itself on the sale of British produce including “100% British fresh meat, milk and eggs”, immediately backtracked, telling customers the non-EU part of the label was a mistake. “The wording on the packaging is an error for which we apologise. We are changing the packaging immediately,” it tweeted. It is understood that the labelling was a result of a “misinterpretation of packing and labelling regulations”. After Brexit, label rules largely follow EU regulations – which state any food product marked British by flags or words must include a statement about the origin of any “primary” ingredients that are not British. In Morrisons’ case the name of the product included salt and pepper, so they are classed as “primary” elements and their provenance must be stated on the label in 75% of the size of the font used for the word “British”. The incident is the latest sign of a new front in the culture wars opening on supermarket shelves with some who agree with packaging that celebrates Britishness and others who do not. On Tuesday Morrisons said it was fully compliant with labelling rules but did not want to get drawn into Brexit culture wars. “Our chicken label is adhering to British packaging regulations, however we will be redesigning it to make it clear this is not a political commentary,” it said. One customer, David Bright, said: “I’m done with shopping @Morrisons … I can live with union flags on bananas, but the gratuitous slight on the EU is too much.” Another customer tweeted: “Have I missed this new trend for our groceries to celebrate their exclusion of any EU condiments?” Ghislaine Hull wondered why Morrisons made a point of advertising the fact the condiments it was using were both non-British and non-EU. “Aside from anything else I’d have thought most normal people want to know where foodstuff IS from not where it isn’t.” Others liked the label because it was divisive. “Have to say a very well done to Morrisons, this has upset all the right people.” The controversy comes as supermarkets navigate the meaning of post-Brexit Britain in labelling. A Crosse &amp; Blackwell survey this year revealed more than half of British shoppers are looking to buy more domestic food. But some are put off by what they see as a politicisation of food, objecting to labels celebrating Britishness. One customer described the union flag on Mornflake porridge oats as “very unpleasant and quite intimidating”. And last summer Co-op supermarket was mocked in some quarters after it labelled a package of ice cubes as “made with British water”. “What next, British air?” quipped one customer on social media. “Brexit may be behind us now, but make no mistake: a divided country remains,” Callum Saunders, head of planning at Zeal Creative, which works with Nestlé, Pringles and McCain, told The Grocer earlier this year.It is being described as the “museum of the future”, with institutions across the world including London’s V&amp;A set to follow the path pioneered by Rotterdam’s Boijmans Van Beuningen. From Saturday, in what is a world first, the King of the Netherlands, Willem-Alexander, will open the Depot, a bowl-shaped warehouse next to the Boijmans museum’s original 1930s building in which all 151,000 items in its revered collection, from the Van Goghs to its Magrittes and Dalís, will be on permanent display to the public. As is the case with major museums across the world, the Boijmans, first opened in 1849 to show off the collections of Frans Jacob Otto Boijmans and Daniël George van Beuningen, has for a long time only been able to display about 4% of its treasures in permanent and temporary exhibitions. But from this weekend, for €20, visitors – wearing protective coats and asked to restrict themselves to carrying a small bag for the purposes of security – will have the full gamut of the museum’s crown jewels to view across six floors. Those entering the 40-metre-high building, whose exterior is made up of soaring curved mirrors, will be able to watch the museum’s art restorers as they work, learn about the internal workings of the institution, and travel through five different microclimates made suitable for metal, plastic, paper, black and white and colour photography. The works, including more than 63,000 paintings, photographs, films, pre-industrial and design objects, contemporary art installations, sculptures and 88,000 prints and drawings, are being stored, organised and displayed on the basis of their size and conservation requirements rather than theme or artist. Due to the lack of curating one would expect within such a collection, it is hoped that there will be an element of discovery and adventure for those looking around. Objects are displayed on movable racks, or in display cases, efficiently packed in, with objects sensitive to light or heat kept in cabinets, only to be inspected on appointment. “You’ll go through the collection like you would visit a library looking for a book and finding three others,” said Sjarel Ex, the museum’s joint director. “We also decided to take private collectors, to give private collectors opportunities to work with us in the same building. So you see when you go around and you see the floors, you will meet with several collections that enjoy a collaboration with the museum.” Boijmans is setting a global trend, says Ina Klaassen, the museum’s second joint director. The Victoria and Albert Museum has been taking soundings from the Boijman over its plans for its own version, the Storehouse, in London’s Queen Elizabeth Olympic Park. “But we have had conversations with people from Korea, Stavanger, Norway, Singapore, they all came along, and yesterday there was a delegation from Qatar,” she added. “We did a symposium three months ago that was joined by over 200 colleagues in the world and with their staff,” said Ex. “It’s certainly a new typology, that all museums [are considering].” The idea had been first mooted in Rotterdam in 2004 as a solution to a typically Dutch problem: flooding. It has been an issue for decades and a major flood in the museum’s cellars, the old depot, in 2009 was followed by many more. The Boijmans was spending an increasing amount of money on external warehouses. “So we went to the city and said: ‘Well, we have this great idea. We think that we want to show more collection because the city actually owns the collection, well like 85%,’” said Klaassen. “They said: ‘Well, that is interesting, but maybe you should start fundraising.’” The museum did so and has now ploughed €55m (£50m) into its “open storage” facility, thanks in large part to a €27m donation from the De Verre Bergen Foundation. Inconveniences along the way included having to send back the mirrored glass for the facade on arrival from China as it was deemed to be too brown. In a nod to the danger of water to art, the round building’s footprint is small, at just 40 metres, with a 10-metre overhang. The reflective facade is made up of 6,609 sq metres of glass, divided into 1,664 panels. Birches, grasses and pines planted on the building’s roof help retain rainwater, which is used throughout the building. Winy Maas, the building’s architect, described the Depot as a “Noah’s ark”. But, however impressive, the Depot is not an alternative to the main museum, under renovation and not due to reopen until 2028, says Klaassen. “That is a completely different story,” she said. “We can’t function without a museum. This is just the first stage of the museum of the future.”Joe Root fancies the shellacking England’s Twenty20 side handed out to Australia last Saturday has increased confidence before the Ashes campaign, even if the personnel, format and conditions will differ from the World Cup in the United Arab Emirates. England’s tour of Australia officially gets under way on Thursday when a squad of 13 red-ball specialists – including the recently added Ben Stokes – and 15 Lions players fly to Queensland to begin preparations for the five-match series that starts at the Gabba on 8 December. Of the five players set to join them after the World Cup – the final of which is on 14 November – four played in the eight-wicket group stage win against Australia, although only Jos Buttler and Dawid Malan appear certain starters in the Test side. Jonny Bairstow and Chris Woakes will push for spots, while Mark Wood, yet to feature in the UAE because of an ankle injury, will have to prove his fitness. Nevertheless, along with the significance of India winning in Australia this year, Root sees some relevance from a short-form victory over a team that included five Test regulars in David Warner, Steve Smith, Pat Cummins, Josh Hazlewood and Mitchell Starc. “India proved to the rest of the world that Australia is not a place you can’t go and win,” Root said. “They took them on in their own way, they played to their strengths, but they didn’t take a backward step at any stage. It’s making sure we do the work now and we give ourselves that confidence. “And also probably try and lean on that confidence and performance the T20 side put in the other night. There will be guys from both teams involved in that series and you want to try and capture as much confidence as you can.” The start of the Ashes tour will be like no other before it. England’s players and a backroom staff initially led by Graham Thorpe are expected to touch down in Brisbane and then travel to a resort on the Gold Coast for a two-week quarantine period where they will spend the first three days isolating in hotel rooms. The enlarged squad will then be allowed time outside and begin training at the multipurpose Metricon Stadium in Carrara; once the fortnight is complete, further freedoms in line with local restrictions will follow, even if the focus will be on the two intra-squad matches that serve as their only warm-up cricket. A bubble of sorts will still be in place and mindful of the need to establish protocols on the ground and avoid any breaches, the England and Wales Cricket Board is understood to be flying out Steve Elworthy for the first month of the tour in what represents a final outing for the director of events before he takes up his new role as Surrey’s chief executive. Elworthy masterminded the ECB’s behind-closed-doors summer of 2020 and the bubbles that prevented any Covid-19 cases; as Root stressed on Tuesday after a training session at Loughborough, it is imperative the players remain respectful of the rules, even if bubble life is grating after 18 months. On England’s own experience of facing India during the summer, a series they finished 2-1 down but will not be decided until the rescheduled fifth Test next year, Root said: “There were a couple of occasions when games could have gone either way and India just grabbed it ahead of us. “We have to have the bit between our teeth and stand up at those key moments and say: ‘Right, we are going grab this game,’ and make sure that we are the ones in that tight moment who get across the line and get the win. It’s a great lesson for us all. “I’m very wary about commenting too much on Australia, I don’t think that’s the right approach for us. It’s never really been something that we’ve paid too much attention to. “We’ll do our research and make sure we’re very well prepared for what Australia are likely to throw at us, but ultimately we need to make sure our own house is in order, that we’re as ready as we can be.”Jordan Henderson has cited Luis Suárez as a major influence on his development at Liverpool and believes the controversial striker deserves a warm reception at the end of his Anfield return with Atlético Madrid. The former Liverpool forward was jeered for his antics during Barcelona’s Champions League semi-final collapse in 2019, his first competitive appearance at Anfield since leaving five years earlier, and sparked a spat with Virgil van Dijk in a 10-minute cameo when the sides met in Madrid a fortnight ago. Henderson, however, insists that fiercely competitive edge benefited him and Liverpool during Suárez’s three and a half years with the club and the Uruguay international’s contribution should be recognised on Wednesday. “We all know he’s a top player, has been for a long time, who produced so many good moments at Liverpool,” the midfielder said. “I learned a lot from him while he was here. I’m quite close to him and still speak to him. Now and again I’ll call him to see how he is doing, how his family is doing and things like that. “I took a lot from him. He helped us a lot when he was at Liverpool with the mentality side of things – how he was in training, how he always wanted to win and how he played through pain barriers. He just wanted to get out and play football and try his best for the team. He helped me massively and made me grow in confidence as a player. I had a good relationship with him on the pitch but also off the pitch as well.” The Liverpool captain believes any appreciation for Suárez from the crowd should be reserved until after the game, although the 34-year-old may not be overly concerned by his reception. “When Luis was here he was phenomenal for a number of years; he was outstanding,” Henderson said. “The fans know that and will appreciate what he did at this football club. I don’t think Luis will be too bothered [at the reception]. Maybe not during the game, but it would be nice after the game for him to get a nice reception from the crowd.” Liverpool were drawn in a Champions League group full of European pedigree but Jürgen Klopp’s team can qualify with two matches to spare with another victory. It would be the first time Liverpool have won their opening four games in a Champions League group and intensify the pressure on Diego Simeone’s side, who are level on four points with Porto. Fabinho and Thiago Alcântara are in contention after injuries. Klopp, who will be taking charge of his 50th Champions League game as Liverpool manager, said: “It would be big [to qualify early]. We usually have a final in the group but I hope that doesn’t happen this year. Of course we want to avoid that, but we can’t take the second step before the first step. We just have to win, and then afterwards we can talk about what kind of achievement that would be. “For the moment we have to prepare a football game against one of the best sides in the world, one of the best organised and one of the best motivated. They go for everything all the time. We play them now for the fifth time, including a [pre-season] tournament in Munich, so we know a lot about each other. There should not be a lot of surprises.”Ethiopia has declared a state of emergency after forces from the northern region of Tigray said they were gaining territory and considering marching on the capital Addis Ababa. The declaration came as Joe Biden accused the government of “gross violations of internationally recognised human rights” and said he that he was removing Ethiopia from a key US trade program, clearing the way for further economic sanctions over its failure to end the nearly year-long conflict. Jeffrey Feltman, the US special envoy for the Horn of Africa, warned that the US would take further measures against the Abiy government within days rather than weeks if it does not end the conflict. He said “We can proceed down one path that inevitably leads to sanctions and other measures or we can go down another path where we can revitalise the partnership that started when prime minister [Abiy Ahmed] took office. The US wants the latter.” “Prolonging the war, dodging genuine negotiations to lead to de-escalation and a ceasefire, and refusing unhindered humanitarian access to avert catastrophe are actions that are taking Ethiopia [in] a dangerous direction,” he said. The announcement of the state of emergency came two days after the prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, urged citizens to take up arms to defend themselves from the Tigray People’s Liberation Front (TPLF). Earlier on Tuesday, authorities in Addis Ababa told residents to register their arms and prepare to defend their neighbourhoods. The state of emergency was imposed after the TPLF claimed to have captured several towns in recent days and said it was considering marching on Addis Ababa, about 380km (235 miles) to the south of their forward positions. The city administration said people should register their weapons and gather in their neighbourhoods. House-to-house searches were being conducted and troublemakers arrested, a statement said. “Residents can gather in their locality and safeguard their surroundings,” it said. “Those who have weapons but can’t take part in safeguarding their surroundings are advised to hand over the weapon to the government or their close relatives or friends.” The governments of four of the country’s 10 regions also called upon Ethiopians to mobilise to fight against the Tigrayan forces, state-affiliated Fana TV said. On Monday night, Tigrayan forces said they had linked up with fighters from an Oromo force also fighting the central government. The Oromo are Ethiopia’s biggest ethnic group. Many of their political leaders are currently in prison. The conflict in what was once considered a stable western ally in a volatile region has plunged about 400,000 people in Tigray into famine, killed thousands of civilians and forced more than 2.5 million people in the north to flee their homes. Speaking in Washington, Feltman said the US was seeing signs of famine and near-famine and that it was mostly government restrictions that were preventing humanitarian help from getting to people. He said: “It is not too late to retrace our steps towards the path not taken but the change in direction must occur in days not weeks. It requires the Ethiopian government to take steps we have been raising for months’’. He said he was willing to travel at any time to the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa to mediate and secure a peace deal with the TPLF. Feltman said there were “credible and repeated stories of looting, displacement, executions, reports of rape and sexual violence as a tool of war” in which all factions were implicated to some degree. He said that the US will be encouraging “international justice and accountability against those responsible for the horrors they have imposed on the Ethiopian people”. He added “the Ethiopian people who have suffered are going to want to see some kind of justice and reckoning for the horrors they have been through due to this needless conflict.” The conflict started over the night of 3 November 2020, when forces loyal to the TPLF – including some soldiers – seized military bases in Tigray, a northern region. In response, Abiy sent more troops there. The TPLF had dominated national politics for nearly three decades but lost much influence when Abiy took office in 2018 after years of anti-government protests. When he first came to power, Abiy enacted significant political reforms but rights groups say many of those freedoms have since been rolled back. He was awarded the Nobel peace prize in 2019 for ending a long-running border conflict with Eritrea. Troops from Eritrea, whose president is an arch-enemy of the TPLF, later entered Tigray to support Ethiopian forces.In the war of words over fishing rights in the Channel, much attention has been paid to a single line in a leaked letter from Jean Castex, the French prime minister, to Ursula von der Leyen, president of the European commission. The nuances of the offending sentence vary in translation, but the gist is that European public opinion should be left in no doubt that there is more pain associated with leaving the European Union than staying in it. To the Eurosceptic ear, that was confirmation of a spiteful motive on the continent. France, it was alleged, wants to “punish” Britain for choosing freedom. Viewed from the other side, Castex was merely restating the obvious logic of Brexit: it is a repudiation of European solidarity and a bet on the advantages that a sole trader might gain in rivalry with a syndicate. The syndicate members have an interest in that gamble not paying off. British Eurosceptics are weirdly prickly about that banal strategic fact. It is simply the corollary of their own florid rhetoric down the years, denouncing Brussels as a parasite that saps national vitality and extolling Brexit as proof of EU obsolescence – the first step in a great unravelling. Self-evidently, the European project is bolstered if Boris Johnson is humbled, and vice versa. In the fisheries dispute, France deserves an ample portion of blame for cynical escalation. President Macron is sabre-rattling with an eye on his domestic audience ahead of elections next year. But his attitude is coloured by seething contempt for a British prime minister whom he sees as a stranger to probity. That feeling was much aggravated by the recent poaching of a lucrative defence contract to build Australian submarines as part of the Aukus security deal with Washington. But it is Johnson’s treatment of the Northern Ireland protocol in the Brexit withdrawal agreement – signing a treaty with no intention of implementing its terms – that convinced the French president that Downing Street had gone full rogue. The crisis in Northern Ireland is vastly more dangerous than a kerfuffle over cod. But they are symptoms of the same syndrome: a Brexit model that makes a sacred principle of sovereignty. All trace of EU institutional leverage must be scoured from the land and dredged from the sea. That fixation guarantees tension at every frontier where old, free-flowing habits are subject to the friction of new checks, forms and licences. The material gains from maximising sovereignty in this way are nil, while costs are mounting. But conceding that the model is flawed is unthinkable in Johnson’s Tory party. Or rather, unsayable. There are MPs who understand what has gone wrong but anticipate only ostracism if they were to speak out. That leads to two policy choices. First, exaggerate or invent fictional benefits from scrapping EU rules. Rishi Sunak dabbled in this with his budget speech last week, disingenuously presenting cuts to alcohol duty as a Brexit dividend. (Booze classifications will indeed diverge from European directives, but the accompanying price drops would still have been permitted.) Second, turn international rancour to domestic political advantage: cite cross-Channel disputes as proof of Brussels’ malevolence, then rebadge the economic pain intrinsic to Brexit as a vindictive backlash from the continent. Already this tactic is being rehearsed in Northern Ireland. What the EU calls implementation of a signed agreement, Eurosceptic hardliners denounce as a blockade. It is a feasible political strategy, albeit a nasty one. But it lacks one crucial element: the heroic destination. Throughout history, revolutionary movements have made excuses for their failures by blaming foreign sabotage. But they have also sustained momentum with visions of a utopian future. That was the Brexit method, too, for as long as EU membership could be made the scapegoat for a whole range of social and economic ills. Now the ills remain but the proposed remedy has already been taken. In that sense (and only that one) Brexit is a victim of its own success. Britain cannot get any further out of the EU. David Frost is scraping the sovereignty barrel. The Tory awkward squad that hounded David Cameron into a referendum, and then harried Theresa May out of office for seeking compromises with economic reality, got all they could have wanted from Johnson. They know their battle is won and are saddling different hobby horses, riding out to new fronts in the culture war, grumbling about the cost of cutting carbon emissions in the tone they once used for “Brussels’ red tape”. Johnson has tried to sustain the rhetoric of Brexit as sunlit upland. His party conference speech last month promised a high-wage, high-skill economy that would spring up in the absence of migrant labour. But that was an essay-crisis utopia, cobbled together from scraps of news about labour shortages and broken supply chains. Besides, by far the most memorable thing Johnson ever promised about Brexit is that he would get it done. That legacy is diluted every time the issue foists itself into the news, as will keep happening. The hunt for purer sovereignty will generate tension with neighbouring countries, which will then be cited as proof that only the purest sovereignty will suffice. This is not the typical revolution where the ends can justify the means. The ends have already been reached. EU membership has expired. We are stuck instead in the purgatory of endless means: a sisyphean nightmare of rolling negotiations that reach a certain point of agreement before breaking down and restarting. Johnson’s Brexit condemns Britain to re-enact forever the tedious, embittered process of leaving with no hope of satisfaction, because we have already left. Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnistFrance backed down on its threats to clog up British trade and ban UK fishers from its ports after Jersey offered to speed up approval for “five or six” new fishing vessels in its waters. Ian Gorst, Jersey’s minister for external affairs, said the offer from his administration, which was mirrored by the UK government over an undisclosed number of boats, had proven to be a “good way to move things forward”. Paris had set a deadline of midnight on Monday by which it demanded further licences for its vessels in UK and Jersey’s coastal waters, only for Emmanuel Macron to announce he would shelve his government’s plans after last-ditch talks called by the European Commission. “It’s not while we’re negotiating that we’re going to impose sanctions,” the French president had told reporters in Glasgow, where he was attending Cop26. The boats expected to have their approval expedited, having been initially rejected, are replacements for old vessels that had a track record of having fished in the coastal waters of the UK and Jersey. Gorst said that as the talks had gone on in Paris, there also appeared to have been a realisation that triggering the threats would lead to “entrenched positions”. “There are some issues around replacement vessels that we can sort out earlier than we might have envisaged, that is for both us and the UK,” he said. “I think that would be quite a good way to move things forward and allow more time. Of the vessels that the EU is asking us to reconsider, at least a handful, about five or six, are replacement vessels … “The French have taken the view that it is better to try to deal with the individual vessels than trigger countermeasures whereby everybody will become entrenched.” Asked about the issue by reporters at the Cop26 summit, Boris Johnson indicated the UK had not changed its position and played down the issue’s importance. The prime said: “We are working very, very closely with our French friends and partners on the things that matter most to the people of the world, and that is tackling climate change and reducing CO2. “By comparison with that hugely important issue, the ones you mentioned are really vanishingly unimportant, but since you ask about whether the UK has changed its position on the fishing issue, the answer is no.” The French government has said that half of the vessels applying to fish in UK and Jersey waters have been rejected unfairly and in breach of the trade and cooperation agreement. The UK and Jersey have said they will issue licences only to boats that meet the test of being able to prove that they have previously operated in their coastal waters. Jersey has so far rejected 55 applicants, of which “five or six” are replacement boats. Gorst said his government was willing to examine any new evidence “boat by boat” for the rest after a request by the commission. French minister for the seas, Annick Girardin, told the National Assembly that France wanted clarity from the UK by Tuesday evening on how 14 vessels could secure licences in its waters. She also called for swift agreement on the issue of replacement boats and requested that Jersey agree to reconsider its position on a further 13 boats whose applications to fish in the Channel Island’s waters had been rejected. The row until now has been dominated by a dispute over the type of evidence that is acceptable, with France insistent that a set of data known as Sacrois, which provides a rough approximation of a vessel’s movements should be enough. Gorst said there appeared to be a “softening” from Paris on that point, however. Talks will continue between officials for the next 48 hours. The UK cabinet minister Lord Frost is to meet Clément Beaune, the French minister for European affairs, in Paris on Thursday. Gorst said the developments had created “breathing space” but admitted to concerns that relations could again turn sour if France was unable to offer extra evidence to secure permits beyond the “handful” of replacement vessels. “We have been here before,” he said. “What we would ask about that is, if they have not been able to provide evidence to date it would seem strange to say the least that they could provide evidence for the 55 in the course of the next three days. We believe the evidence has got to be provable.” Macron, who faces an election in six months’ time, is being urged across the political spectrum in France to take a tough line with the UK. “I’m all for giving it an extra 48 hours but we’ll have to be very tough indeed with the British at that point,” centre-right presidential candidate Xavier Bertrand told France 2 television. Earlier on Tuesday, UK environment secretary, George Eustice, had claimed France had retreated from threats of immediate measures because it “looked more closely at the evidence”. “We just very much welcome the fact that France has stepped back from that course of action. And of course we continue to have dialogue if there are additional vessels that qualify,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Gorst said his government supported the comments from the foreign secretary, Liz Truss, who had threatened tit-for-tat sanctions through the EU-UK trade and cooperation agreement against France if it imposed sanctions on UK and Jersey boats. A Downing Street spokesman said the talks taking place were on individual licence applications, rather than “the underlying approach”. “No new licences were issued to French vessels over recent days,” the spokesman added.Covid restrictions are being stepped up in parliament, with MPs told to wear masks, tours of the building cancelled and some staff told to work from home. The move came after the UK Health Security Agency warned the risk of the virus transmitting between those who work in the Palace of Westminster had become “greater”. Social distancing has also been encouraged again “as far as possible” around the Commons, with committee rooms identified as one of the key areas where the virus is spreading. Non-parliamentary business such as banquets and receptions have also been cancelled for the next two weeks. New guidance issued on Tuesday stated that officials who “do not need to be on the estate are advised to work remotely”. It added that face-to-face meetings should be avoided as much as possible. Although the contingency measures to guard against further infections in parliament have been activated, the law as it applies to England remains that there is no requirement for people to follow social distancing or wear masks. While people have been advised to wear face coverings in crowded rooms for months, cabinet ministers and most Tory MPs continued to sit shoulder-to-shoulder in the Commons chamber maskless. That changed last week, when the prime minister, Boris Johnson, and other Conservatives wore a face covering during the budget, though three did not – including the Commons leader, Jacob Rees-Mogg. The Labour MP Ben Bradshaw hit out at those MPs continuing not to wear a mask. He tweeted: “You get chucked out of parliament for not wearing a jacket and tie. If you won’t wear a mask – a recommended public health measure to protect others – nothing. What an antediluvian Alice in Wonderland this remains.” The Speaker, Lindsay Hoyle, urged MPs to do the “right thing”. He said: “If we can get through these two weeks, I believe we’re then through to next year … numbers have been rising on both sides of the House and within staff. Unusually, the transmission has been on the estate – and that’s why it’s a greater worry than we’ve had before.” However, the Tory MP Karl McCartney, praised an “excellent speech … about the usefulness of masks” by the the peer Viscount Ridley, who said last week that preventing aerosol transmission of Covid with masks was “like catching midges with a tennis net”. Another senior Conservative backbencher told the Guardian they were concerned that telling MPs to wear masks in parliament would create “the perception that there is one rule for us and another for everyone else”.US president Joe Biden has unveiled a multinational plan to control methane, regarded by the administration as the single most potent way to combat the climate crisis in the short term. Leading an alliance of 90 countries, including for the first time Brazil, on Tuesday Biden set out new regulatory measures to limit global methane emissions by 30% from 2020 levels by the end of the decade. The alliance includes two-thirds of the global economy and half of the top 30 major methane emitter countries. China, India and Russia have not joined the pact known as the Global Methane Pledge. The pledge was first announced in September but Biden’s officials have since been working hard to increase the number of signatories and the momentum behind the pledge. The detailed US proposals may prove to be one of the lasting successes of the Cop26 climate conference being held in Glasgow. Many of the regulatory measures do not require Congressional approval, and so give Biden some short-term effective measures to which he can point. The oil and gas industry is reckoned to be responsible for 30% of methane emissions in the US. A new Environment Protection Agency rule that regulates leak detection and repair in the oil industry repealed by Donald Trump will be restored and for the first time applied to new operations in gas, including regulation of natural gas produced as a by-product of oil production that is vented or flared. The Biden team hopes that 75% of all methane emissions will be covered. The other major sources of methane in the US are municipal landfills, thousands of abandoned oil wells and coal mines, and finally agriculture. New rules, due to be phased in, will require companies to oversee and inspect 3m miles (4.8m km) of pipelines, including 300,000 miles (480,000km) of transmission lines and 2.3m miles (3.7m km) of lines inside cities. In Boston alone it is estimated that 49,000 tonnes of methane leak each year. The administration says it is working in concert with the EU and is using a mix of incentives, new disclosure rules and regulation. It stressed that the plan will create thousands of unionised jobs.Geert Jan van Oldenborgh, who has died aged 59 of multiple myeloma, was co-founder and member of a team of scientists who identified — at speed and while politically a hot topic — the links between human-induced climate change and forest fires, heatwaves, drought, flood and other specific meteorological catastrophes. This is trickier than it sounds. Extreme events have always happened, and for decades most climate scientists were not willing to say that this or that flood or heatwave was directly powered by ever-higher greenhouse gas emissions driven by profligate fossil fuel use. If they did, it was usually long after the event. That began to change six years ago, when Oldenborgh co-founded World Weather Attribution, an initiative designed to examine with scrupulous care the signal of climate change within individual and seemingly random extreme weather events. In August 2021 he and colleagues established that the murderous floods of July 2021– in which more than 200 died – in Belgium and Germany were made significantly more probable by global heating. In July, the researchers found the unprecedented temperatures that in June scorched the US Pacific northwest and Canada would have been “virtually impossible” without climate change. After an unusually warm March, sudden April frosts devastated vineyards and orchards in central France; by June, Oldenborgh and his collaborators had identified once again the fingerprint of climate change. And in this year alone, using the traditional – and much slower – medium of the peer-reviewed scientific paper, Oldenborgh and his partners also established the role of human-triggered climate change in the forest fires that seared Sweden in 2018; the hazard of Australian bushfires; the pattern of drought and higher temperatures in East Africa; and the heatwaves that hit Europe in June and July 2019. A fifth study pronounced the prolonged heat in Siberia in 2020 “almost impossible” without human influence. All this in the last 10 months of his life. He was also the creator and guardian of an extraordinary digital platform called Climate Explorer, home to a vast assembly of data – including systematic measurements of global temperatures; global ozone loss; sunspot counts; sea current strengths; sea ice cover; UK temperatures since 1772; Netherlands rainfall since 1906; ocean temperatures to depths of 100 metres, 700 metres and 2,000 metres; tropical cyclones and Atlantic hurricanes; Asian monsoon droughts reconstructed from 1300 to 2005; and even Netherlands beechnut harvests from 1930 to 1967 – all now exploited by thousands of researchers worldwide. In April, his work with Climate Explorer earned him the European Meteorological Society’s technology achievement award. In the same month, he was made a knight of the Order of the Netherlands Lion for his research. In September, his work with World Weather Attribution earned Oldenborgh and his research partner Friederike Otto, of Imperial College London, a place among Time magazine’s annual list of the world’s most influential people. He was born in Rotterdam to Jan van Oldenborgh, a lawyer, and Wil Lijbrink, a psychoanalyst. While still at school in the Netherlands he won a scholarship to Lester B Pearson College, near Victoria, British Columbia, where he studied Chinese. He graduated from Leiden University in the Netherlands in 1986 with a master’s degree in theoretical physics, which he pursued along with mathematics and Chinese, and then in 1990 completed his PhD at the University of Amsterdam, and at NIKHEF, the Netherlands Institute of Nuclear and High Energy Physics. He taught and continued research into elementary particles at the Ludwig Maximilian University in Munich and the Paul Scherrer Institute in Switzerland, and returned to Leiden in 1994. In 1996 he joined the Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute, known as KNMI, to begin working on ways to improve forecasts of that recurring natural climate phenomenon in the Pacific known as El Niño, which every few years upsets global weather patterns. “Climate research turned out to be much more suited to my personality and offer more possibilities,” he told an interviewer last year, “and hence it was simpler to make significant contributions. It was also much easier to explain to the public and the answers more relevant for society.” He put his name to more than 150 peer-reviewed research papers. His research career took him into the complex worlds of seasonal forecasting, climate modelling and – eventually – event attribution. He contributed directly to one of the global reports by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in 2013, and in 2019 was appointed visiting professor at the University of Oxford. He would later recall two “really nice” moments in science when he felt he had discovered something new. The first had been during his career as a particle physicist. The second occurred while brainstorming with a KNMI colleague to understand why Antarctica could be melting while the extent of the sea ice around it was increasing. They reasoned that warming ocean currents would be eating away at the base of the shelf ice, while, counterintuitively, the melting land ice made it possible for the area of the shelf to increase in the southern winter. “In my maybe simplistic philosophy of science, the truth is the way the world really operates. The scientific method prescribes a way to approximate this truth,” he said. “Although it can never fully describe it, it can come closer.” In 1982, he met his wife, Mandy, a psychotherapist and clinical psychologist; they married in 1987 and had three sons. In 2013, he was diagnosed with Kahler’s disease, an incurable form of blood cancer also known as multiple myeloma. “I had been walking around with it for at least one and a half years before that,” he said. But he continued to work through years of treatment. On 20 September he apologised for a difficulty on the Climate Explorer website. “Unfortunately, my health only allowed me to fix it tonight,” he wrote. “Please report remaining problems.” It was his last entry. He is survived by Mandy and their sons, Elwin, Leon and Ingo. • Geert Jan van Oldenborgh, physicist and climatologist, born 22 October 1961; died 12 October 2021Leaves on the line may have been behind a train crash at Salisbury that left 13 passengers needing hospital treatment and a driver with life-changing injuries, it has emerged. Inspectors from the Rail Accident Investigation Branch (RAIB) said early findings pointed to “low adhesion between the wheels and the track” as the reason why the South Western service failed to stop at the junction where two lines merged and crashed into the side of a Great Western train. Such low adhesion is most often caused by leaves on the line. The collision was the first significant crash between two moving trains in passenger service in two decades. Andrew Hall, RAIB’s deputy chief inspector, said on Tuesday: “From the initial evidence we have collected, we know that that the passage of the Great Western train travelling from Eastleigh across Salisbury tunnel junction was being protected by a red signal. At this junction, trains coming from Eastleigh merge with those from Basingstoke, so the South Western service coming from Basingstoke was required to stop at that signal. “Unfortunately, it did not stop and struck the side of the Great Western train at an angle such that both trains derailed and ran alongside each other into the tunnel just beyond the junction. “Initial evidence indicates that the South Western train driver applied the brakes as it approached the junction and the red signal, but the train was unable to stop before passing the signal. “This evidence suggests that the most likely cause of this was wheelslide, almost certainly a result of low adhesion between the wheels and the track. We are continuing to pursue this as a line of investigation amongst others.” Hall said the RAIB had worked with British Transport Police to examine the track and train, and they were continuing to analyse evidence from the trains’ data recorders, signalling systems and CCTV. He said the investigation was “progressing well” and fuller initial findings would be published later this week. Train services have been disrupted in the area since Sunday, but inspectors said they would be able to hand parts of the crash scene back to Network Rail later on Tuesday. The collision happened at about 6.45pm on Sunday when the a South Western Railway train from London Waterloo to Honiton in Devon ran into the GWR train from Southampton to Cardiff, as they entered the Fisherton tunnel close to the centre of Salisbury, carrying 92 passengers in total. Gareth Dennis, a railway engineer and writer, said the most likely cause of the “low adhesion” was leaves. He said: “The South Western train was shown red to wait. It looks like as he applied the brakes there was a low adhesion event – the wheels were sliding. This is a serious problem we have had on our railways for a long time.” Dennis said he believed there were two possible reasons. In some conditions a mist can sit on the rails. But he said it was more likely that leaves were involved. “Given the season, I would put money on leaf fall,” he said. “You get a mulchy paste forming on the rails, which is an incredibly effective lubricant.” The approach to the tunnel is tree-lined, and Dennis said: “It is best not to have trees overhanging.” Martin Frobisher, Network Rail’s safety and engineering director, said: “Sunday’s accident was incredibly frightening for everyone involved and our thoughts are with everyone injured or affected in any way. “Initial findings suggest that low adhesion played a key part in causing the collision. It’s an issue that affects railways across the world and is something that we, and our train operator colleagues, work hard to combat – so that we can run trains safely and reliably throughout autumn, and why incidents such as the one in Salisbury at the weekend are incredibly rare. “We will continue to work closely with investigators to understand what happened and what more we can do to help prevent this happening again.”Stan Perry, who has died aged 97, was the last surviving wartime officer of the Sherwood Rangers, the unit with more battle honours in the second world war than any other in the British Army. A working-class boy who won a commission, he was badly wounded in Normandy during D-day fighting, but made a brave return to take part in operations in Germany before receiving even worse injuries that left him facing death – and then returning again to action before the cessation of hostilities. Perry’s travails in Normandy began on the morning of 16 August 1944, when he found himself sitting in the leading tank of an attack across the deep valley of the River Noireau, a crossing he had personally reconnoitered the previous evening. A troop leader in C Squadron, the Sherwood Rangers Yeomanry, he was confronted with engineers furiously clearing mines on the far side while also attracting plenty of enemy fire himself. No one thought this was going to be a push-over, least of all Perry himself, for although the German forces in Normandy were now just days from defeat, they were still fighting hard and without let-up. Although the Sherwood Rangers had given armoured support to the 43rd Wessex Division on many occasions since landing on D-day, the attack across the Noireau and up on to the ridge beyond – designed to capture high ground around the village of Berjou – was to be carried out alongside the Duke of Cornwall’s Light Infantry, with whom they had not operated before. Co-operation between infantry and tanks was invariably fraught when going into action together for the first time, and this was no exception. On the far side, the infantry commander ordered Perry to follow him along the river bank, but Perry had his own orders, which were immediately reconfirmed, to take the ridge instead. As a result, he and his fellow five-man crew in their Sherman tank found themselves in the lead, with no infantry support at all, climbing up a winding track that led through a dense wood to the summit of the ridge. Nearing the top, their tank was hit by a panzerfaust, a simply fired hollow charge, which damaged their radio and with it any hope of communicating with the rest of Perry’s four-tank troop or even the rest of the squadron. Pressing on regardless, his Sherman was hit by a second panzerfaust as it emerged into the clear of the high ground, breaking one of its caterpillar tracks and making further advance very difficult. Shortly afterwards Perry was hit by a bullet in the arm from a sniper. Although isolated and unable to communicate with any other tank, he and his crew, with considerable skill and fortitude, managed to manoeuvre along the edge of the tree-line and made their way back to safety. They had been lucky, for although Berjou was eventually taken later that evening, it was a terrible day for C Squadron, with eight killed including four tank commanders, and a further ten wounded. Every year since, Perry would become introverted and morose as he remembered that day and the friends he had lost. He was born in Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, to Sidney, a labourer on the production line at the nearby Tate and Lyle sugar beet factory, and his wife, Hilda (nee Banham). Intelligent and good at sports, he won a scholarship to Culford, a local private school, and from there gained a scholarship to study mathematics at Emmanuel College, Cambridge. By that time, however, it was 1941, and Perry joined up for the war effort instead. He was posted to the Royal Armoured Corps at Bovington in Dorset, soon selected for officer training, and then sent to Sandhurst. Much to his frustration, from Sandhurst he was sent to be a motor transport officer with the 142nd (Suffolk) Regiment at Catterick, and so he applied to join the SAS, who were busily recruiting for forthcoming operations in France. Accepted, he soon fell foul of the recently commissioned Johnny Cooper, one of the SAS “originals”, who repeatedly referred to him as “posh boy”. Perry, who was proud of his working-class roots, eventually punched Cooper to the ground, at which point Blair “Paddy” Mayne, the 1 SAS commander, suggested he either face a court martial or find another regiment. Perry opted for the latter, joining the Sherwood Rangers Yeomanry on 10 June 1944, just four days after D-day. He quickly found his feet and soon proved an exceptional troop commander. Tactically astute, he repeatedly drilled his men in the importance of quick escape from the tank, and had a natural flair for command and leadership. He led his troop throughout the Normandy campaign before returning home following his injuries at Berjou. During his recuperation he met Anne-Lise Berg, the daughter of a Danish businessman living and working in Britain. Within three months of meeting, and with Perry urgently requested to return to the Sherwood Rangers, they married in December 1944. Leading a troop once more during Operation Blackcock, against the German border town of Heinsberg in January 1945, he was severely wounded a second time on 22 January 1945, when hit in the chest and arm by mortar fragments. For several days his life hung in the balance, but he was unquestionably saved by the leather wallet his wife had given him; shrapnel had hit it in his breast pocket, gone through, and was eventually discovered resting against the edge of his heart. Although he managed to rejoin the regiment later that summer, once the Sherwood Rangers were dispersed Captain Perry was posted to Northamptonshire to become adjutant of a German prisoner of war camp. He left the army in 1948 and joined a printing firm in Copenhagen as a translator, before returning to Britain and working for Unilever, where initially he helped to design new ice cream flavours and eventually rose to be a factory general manager, remaining with the company until retirement. Having represented the army at rugby union, for a number of years he was also a first XV player at Sale rugby club. Perry reckoned he bore three scars from the war. “There’s the first, your conscience, that you actually killed some young chap who was probably not very different from you,” he said. The second was the conscience of the mind: “Had you been a better soldier, had you deployed differently on a certain occasion, would that have saved the life of some of your men?” This bothered him to the very end. “And then the other scars you have, of course, are the physical scars from wounding.” Security machines at airports always caused problems because of the shrapnel still inside him. Perry was predeceased by Anne-Lise, to whom he was married for 72 years. He is survived by their son and two daughters, three grandchildren and six great-grandchildren. • Stanley Perry, wartime tank commander, born 8 November 1923; died 6 October 2021Police Scotland has apologised to women in Glasgow who had to walk home in darkness on Monday night after well-lit streets were blocked off due to Cop26 climate summit security concerns. Residents near the Cop venue said police guarding the security cordon told them to walk long distances through Kelvingrove Park and sidestreets in Finnieston because main streets had suddenly been closed off. One woman tweeted that she had been followed by a man who said he was a police officer despite requesting he leave her alone. Others said they had been told to use longer diversions when their homes were close by. One Twitter user, Katy, wrote: “We were sent away from one exit to the main gate, then told we had to do exactly that detour to get to Partick. On the way found a 1st year student in tears because she was in the same position and had had a man following her through the dark path; a male police officer …” Kayleigh Quinn tweeted: “Wow, Finnieston residents currently on the north side of the street who live on the south side of the street being told to walk through Kelvingrove, down Byres Road to Patrick and then back to Finnieston to get to their flat 100 yards away. It’s dark.” Nina Lakhani, a Guardian journalist, said she had the same experience: “I had to walk back through unlit Kelvingrove park, took an extra 30 minutes and was damn dangerous with the wet leaves. I asked a cop how I was meant to get home, and he suggested I come back the following day!” Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, said women’s safety, particularly after the murder of Sarah Everard by a serving Met police officer, was paramount. “So if there is even a perception that women were put in a position where they weren’t safe, I know the police would want to make sure that that wasn’t something that happened again,” she said. Assistant chief constable Gary Ritchie said Monday night’s diversions, which affected Argyle Street and Dumbarton Road, two major thoroughfares, were imposed at short notice due to “real-time changes to operational plans”. They would not be reintroduced, and the force would talk to Glasgow city council about improved lighting in Kelvingrove Park, he promised. He implied his officers would be reminded about their duty to ensure public safety in such situations. “While late changes and some level of disruption is inevitable when policing an event the size and scale of Cop26, we understand and apologise for the concern these changes caused and for the inconvenience to those diverted,” Ritchie said. “We do, in particular, recognise and acknowledge the commentary from some women who had to walk through the park on their own last night, we want to keep everyone safe and we know that the onus is on us to recognise when we could provide some more support and visibility to reassure people in our communities.”Police are questioning a 45-year-old man after the body of a woman was found dumped in a suitcase four days after her wedding. The woman, named by detectives as 52-year-old Dawn Walker, of Halifax, was found dead in the village of Lightcliffe, three miles east of Halifax, West Yorkshire, on Sunday. Her family paid tribute to Walker in a statement released by police. “We write this with a very heavy heart that yesterday we lost a loving daughter, mother, nanna, sister, auntie and friend. “In circumstances beyond our control, you were taken from us so suddenly. We ask at this time as a family, that you respect our privacy and allow us to grieve.” A friend of the dead woman told YorkshireLive that Walker had a young son and got married the previous Wednesday. The friend, who asked not to be named, said Walker was kind, caring and friendly. Her body had been discovered in a suitcase on a grassed area at the back of some trees in Lightcliffe, which was cordoned off by police. “She got married on Wednesday and died on Sunday morning,” the friend said. “Dawn was a sound woman. She got married on Wednesday and now this has happened. “She was the soundest person you could meet. She was friendly and generous. She once paid for a disabled man’s shopping when he was short.” George Robinson, who represents the Hipperholme and Lightcliffe ward on Calderdale council, said: “This is devastating news for our community. On behalf of everyone in the ward, our thoughts and prayers go out to those that have lost their loved one. This is all very raw, and it would be improper to speculate on the circumstances.” Robinson said he had contacted the council and police to ask what plans there were to engage and support the local community. “I’ve also asked if the local schools have been briefed and how our young people will be supported,” he said. “We’re a closeknit community in Lightcliffe, and it’s an upsetting time for everyone. Please do check in on your neighbours to ensure they are OK.” West Yorkshire police issued a formal appeal for information from anyone who witnessed suspicious behaviour in the area of Aysgarth Avenue, Lightcliffe, or the surrounding streets between 1pm and 4.38pm on Sunday. DI Amanda Wimbles, of the homicide and major inquiry team said: We would like to reiterate the family’s wishes for privacy at this extremely distressing time and ask for people not to speculate on the circumstances regarding Dawn’s death. “We are continuing to hold a 45-year-old male under arrest in custody at this time as our investigation progresses.” She asked that anyone with information contact police on 101 or using the 101Live Chat facility on the website quoting log 1317 of 31 October.My friend Derek Hood, who has died aged 56 from cancer, managed to succeed in two very different fields of creativity – rock drumming and design-based fine bookbinding. Behind the drum kit, playing in bands such as All About Eve and the Auteurs, he was a solid, inventive presence who, being a songwriter himself, always played with an innate sense of musicality. In his book design studio in Bath, he worked on commissions for collectors and institutions around the world. His books were exhibited in the V&amp;A, the British Library and the bibliophile Grolier club in New York. Derek was born in St Andrews, Fife, to Mae (nee McCulloch) and Tom Hood. He went to school at Madras college, leaving at 16, and was encouraged to join the successful family-run DIY store business in St Andrews, along with his elder brothers and younger sister. Punk rock, and the Clash in particular, had fired Derek’s musical imagination, however. By then a drummer in a local band, he instead pursued a rebellious path of resistance, opting to work as an assistant school janitor. At first somewhat reluctantly, he went on to study printing and bookbinding at Napier University in Edinburgh, before working as a fine binder at the library of the University of St Andrews, where his keen artist’s eye and craftsman’s obsession with detail came to the fore. After Derek moved to London in 1994, his drumming skills pulled him back into music, and he played and recorded with such diverse bands as Baader Meinhof, Grand Drive and Babybird. Of his musical talent, Julianne Regan of All About Eve remembers that – as captured on the group’s 2001 album Live and Electric at the Union Chapel – “Del was able to balance living in the moment of flow, with maintaining a considerate awareness of the aesthetic of the overall sound, and of the experience of his bandmates.” In his later years as a bookbinder, Derek was regularly invited by the organisers of the Booker prize to create one of the bespoke, one-off editions commissioned for each of the six shortlisted titles, which were then gifted to the authors. The 2020 winner, Douglas Stuart, author of Shuggie Bain, took to social media to praise Derek’s “beautiful, hand-bound special edition… a terrific job”. Those close to Derek will remember him for his infectiously buoyant personality, freewheeling and surreal humour and sense of empathy. He is survived by his wife, Wendy (nee Jeacock), whom he married in 1999, and their children, Dylan and Cecily.In the immediate aftermath of a gruelling but ultimately thrilling victory over Sri Lanka on Monday, Eoin Morgan was – as he had for so long earlier that evening – restraining himself, refusing to let circumstance and emotion carry him away. The match may have ended for England in a joyful clatter of wickets and the increasingly familiar taste of success, but Morgan’s mind was stuck on the period between him arriving at the crease with his team’s innings still young and hitting his first boundary, eight overs that rank among the most awkward of his career. “Jos [Buttler] and I talked about it being as hard as we’d faced just to get the ball away, never mind looking for boundaries,” he said. “A normal risk-taking shot would have been sweeps, but we didn’t feel sweeps were on with the guys they were bowling and the way the wicket didn’t really bounce at that time. We’re thankful that we just hung in and trusted in our experience. Even really quiet overs, shocking really, but we had nowhere to go, literally nothing to do, and it was better than just slogging it up in the air.” With Sri Lanka’s two spinners, Maheesh Theekshana and especially Wanindu Hasaranga outstanding, and their seamers providing disciplined support – at least until they lost their length in the latter stages of England’s innings – Buttler’s first 50 was his slowest in international Twenty20 cricket. He may have ended the innings with a 67-ball century but it took until his 46th delivery – the ball before Morgan finally scored his first boundary – to reach halfway. “Even Jos, who’s in unbelievable form, really did find it tough. When I got to the wicket he talked about just getting something going, and even he struggled to rotate the strike,” Morgan said. “You take in all that information and realise how tough it is, and believe it will get better or you will get a bad ball, and even if you don’t you’re still doing the right thing and trusting the process.” There are several possible criticisms of England’s innings: when Hasaranga dismissed Jonny Bairstow in the sixth over they might have promoted Moeen Ali, who is in excellent form and has a good record against spin, rather than send in their captain; once batting Morgan might have shown intent more quickly given the batting talent to follow, most of which ended up unused; and any strategy that results in a score of 47 for three at halfway and is entirely reliant on Buttler compiling the greatest innings of his career – Morgan admitted that “without that absolutely unbelievable knock we’d have been nowhere” – is not a very good one. But the 35-year-old insisted that he and Buttler were always playing to a plan. Asked to recall his first boundary, a sweep for four off Hasaranga, he said: “I took a gamble, it worked, it came off, it’s what happens. You have to take risks at different stages. I didn’t take one before then because we didn’t think it was really necessary.” This is a really telling statement. Before scoring 40 against Sri Lanka Morgan had managed only 46 runs in his 10 previous Twenty20 innings for club and country, a sequence that in many might provoke significant soul-searching. He then came in, scored only eight runs off his first 19 balls on a difficult surface, watched his team’s tally creep to 61 for three after 12 overs and still thought his partnership with Buttler would end up being so fruitful risks were not really necessary. It is a level of confidence in yourself and in your teammates that is simply awe-inspiring in scale. “You sort of always have to believe,” Morgan said of his own form, “because if you don’t believe nobody else will.” This is why Buttler enthused after the game that, even if it was much less comfortable than their wins over West Indies, Bangladesh and Australia, “what this will do for us as a side is fantastic”. It was a night when nearly everything went wrong, and still enough went right. Apart from one dropped catch England’s fielding was outstanding and, despite the dew and the heat – on a steamy night in Sharjah Chris Jordan sweated so profusely a coach had to be positioned just across the rope with a bespoke Jordan-mopping beach towel – every bowler impressed except Tymal Mills. He limped off with a quad injury after nine balls which went for 19 runs – and England’s medical team are awaiting results of a scan with crossed fingers, as Mark Wood is not yet pain-free after his ankle injury. But the greatest impact of the victory will be on England’s mindset: it might have taken a miracle innings to save them from defeat, but now they believe in miracles.The Bank of England is facing criticism over the way it is conducting its first climate stress tests, with politicians and campaigners warning that a lack of penalties for dirty assets will give banks little incentive to clean up their act. While the regulator has been praised for committing to the exercise, the Bank of England has come under fire for so far refusing to publish data for individual firms, and stopping short of introducing immediate capital requirements, which would make it more expensive to offer loans and services to fossil fuel companies and high carbon projects. Campaigners are concerned that one of the UK’s most lucrative industries is being given a free pass. “Finance is one of the priorities of Cop26, but the UK’s credibility as hosts risks being undermined by the fact it has let its banks pour more than £200bn into fossil fuels since the Paris agreement was signed,” the Green MP Caroline Lucas told the Guardian. “It needs to rectify these failures if it is to have any credibility during climate finance negotiations.” The Bank of England is not the only regulator moving cautiously. So far, the European Central Bank and the Banque de France – which are among the few central banks to have conducted climate stress tests for their respective financial sectors to date – have only published aggregate data covering their finance industries, and have not introduced any restrictions, or deterrents, for banks serving polluting firms. That is despite warnings from both regulators that banks will be severely affected unless they ramp up their response to the climate crisis. Any deviation from the Paris agreement would result in higher loan losses for banks, according to the ratings agency Moody’s, rising anywhere from 3.5% in the “least disorderly” scenario, to 20% under the most extreme climate outcomes. It has raised concerns that the banking sector itself will suffer financially without swift action, which could had a ripple effect throughout the global economy. Globally, reporting standards are low. A report by the Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TFCD) published last year found that while bank reporting has improved since 2017, the sector continues to have the lowest percentage of disclosure for climate-related targets across all global industries, with 19% of firms meeting TFCD standards. By comparison, figures for the energy and transport sectors are 44% and 35% respectively. Part of the challenge is that regulators are intent on gathering as much data as possible before introducing deterrents such as capital requirements, which determine the kind of financial cushion that banks must hold to protect them from risky loans and products on their balance sheets. With such a complex exercise that looks at potential climate scenarios over the next 30 years, campaigners say the Bank of England may be setting an impossible task. Its first climate tests – which it has not yet committed to repeat after this year – are far more complex than the regulator’s annual financial stress tests, which were introduced after the 2008 banking crash and measure banks’ resilience against economic shocks like a surge in unemployment, or a sudden collapse in house prices. Instead, the climate tests will put banks through three scenarios with a 30-year time horizon, covering physical and transition risks, including one in which governments fail to take further steps to curb greenhouse gas emissions, resulting in average temperature increases of 3.3C, and a 3.9-metre rise in sea levels. The exercise will also look at how those scenarios could affect potential loan losses, as customers default on their loans due to slowing growth and economic uncertainty. “If you’re looking for the perfect data set, you’re going to be disappointed because it’s never going to happen – there is always uncertainty” said James Vaccaro, who is an executive director of the Climate Safe Lending Network, which represents banks, academics and investors hoping to decarbonise the banking sector. “You’re always trying to extrapolate the past, but right now in terms of climate change, the past is not a good predictor at all of the likely future,” he said. If that was not challenging enough, the Bank of England is also letting lenders determine how they measure their exposure to those climate risks individually, a move that it believes will foster innovation and unearth best practices that can be shared across the industry. However, that means it will take even longer for UK banks to produce comparable data that will help the public, governments and investors determine where they should apply the most pressure, or pull their business. “At the moment the financial system is enabling and financing the forces that are driving climate change,” Lord Oates, the Liberal Democrats’ spokesperson for energy and climate change in the Lords, said. “And so the regulators have a duty to act now [and] in the absence of perfect information.” International regulators have proved they are willing to consider capital requirements when new risks emerge. In June, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, which consists of regulators from the world’s leading financial centres, highlighted the potential risk around cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin, saying banks should be forced to put aside enough capital to cover 100% of potential losses. Campaigners are calling for similar rules for climate risks. Last week, activists and academics including the historian Adam Tooze, signed an open letter to the Cop26 president, Alok Sharma, calling for the introduction of one-for one capital requirements, meaning that for every pound invested in fossil fuel projects, financial institutions such as banks and insurers would need to hold the equivalent to absorb future losses. But not all central bankers are convinced that capital requirements on dirty assets will fully protect against financial shocks, since renewable energy and other innovative green assets could carry investment risks. There are also concerns that introducing capital requirements could cause market turmoil, since forcing a swathe of banks to raise money simultaneously could spook investors and make it more expensive for lenders to secure funds. However, Vaccaro warned that near-term pain might be necessary to create a sustainable future for both the climate and financial system. “We are potentially and unwittingly, perhaps even unconsciously, sacrificing long-term stability for short-term stability. In other words: don’t rock the apple cart now. But by not rocking it we basically totally hobble it from the perspective of actually getting it fit for the massive shocks that we’re expecting.” The Bank of England said in a statement that “climate scenario exercises are new and complex across a number of dimensions”. A spokesperson said that it launched the exercise without having a perfect framework in place, since it may have taken years to do so otherwise. “A key intention of the exercise was to build capabilities, and in some regards learn through doing. Consequently, we do not feel individual firm level disclosure at this juncture is appropriate.”We’re winding up our live UK politics coverage now. You can continue to follow coronavirus updates on our Covid live blog here: And updates from the Cop26 climate conference here: In UK politics news today: Covid restrictions are being stepped up in parliament, with MPs told to wear masks, tours of the building cancelled and some staff told to work from home. Jacob Rees-Mogg has questioned the fairness of the Conservative MP Owen Paterson facing a six-week suspension from parliament and possible byelection, after he was found to have committed an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules. MPs will vote on the matter on Wednesday. France backed down on its threats to clog up British trade and ban UK fishers from its ports after Jersey offered to speed up approval for “five or six” new fishing vessels in its waters. Ian Gorst, Jersey’s minister for external affairs, said the offer from his administration, which was mirrored by the UK government over an undisclosed number of boats, had proven to be a “good way to move things forward”. Was he snubbed by Emmanuel Macron, who left early and is already back in Paris, after their falling out, and was he offered more generous terms over French fishing boats in order to keep talks alive? The UK hasn’t changed its position on the fishing issue, Johnson puts it: We are working very, very closely with our French friends and partners on the things that matter most to the people of the world, and that is tackling climate change and reducing CO2. By comparison with that hugely important issue, the ones you mentioned are really vanishingly unimportant, but since you ask about whether the UK has changed its position on the fishing issue, the answer is no. Johnson denies the Chinese aren’t engaging, saying they didn’t come to Cop because of the pandemic. Same goes for Putin, he adds. We do want more from China, but we want more from everybody, he says. We need China to make more commitments as we see further pledges from other countries when they do, he says. Asked about concerns about rising household costs to achieve a lower carbon economy, Johnson says he thinks people will understand this is a moment for growth and building towards being more green. And there have been enough referendums, he adds. Johnson says developed nations have a moral duty to make cash available to help developing countries move away from carbon. The prime minister is taking questions from the media now. He says there had been a sense of working together to bring down CO2 emissions at Paris but it was “floaty” and “there was no roadmap”, so countries had “no idea” how they were going to do it, which is the difference starting to be seen at Cop. This is from Boris Johnson The British prime minister is due to give a press conference shortly, from which I’ll be bringing you live updates. The prime minister is due to give a press conference very soon. In the meantime, here’s a summary of the latest news: The government faced questions from MPs as the Commons closed the budget debate. Opposition MPs told ministers the childcare announcements were inadequate to help reduce costs for parents and boost quality, that it was incredible they had declined to invest in greener transport options and were challenged on a burgeoning cost of living crisis. The arrival of an Iranian delegation at Cop26 should be used by UK officials to press for the release of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, Amnesty International said. The organisation said officials at the climate summit in Glasgow should be prepared to “seize the opportunity” presented by the arrival of a delegation from Iran to raise the issue of the country’s detention of UK nationals. The prime minister Boris Johnson has been “bluffing all along”, according to a French MP from the president Emmanuel Macron’s party. Bruno Bonnell spoke as tensions between the UK and France continued over post-Brexit fishing rights. Citing plans for further talks between representatives of the two sides this week, Paris stepped back from its plan to begin enforcing tough measures on British vessels last night. The UK government has claimed this morning that the French did so because they “looked more closely at the evidence”. David Cameron’s shame after it emerged he acted as a paid lobbyist for Greensill Capital to get it access to the government’s coronavirus loan schemes should act as a “deterrent” to other politicians, the head of a review into the scandal said. Nigel Boardman defended the investigation he led earlier this year, saying he had not been “soft” on ministers by finding Cameron had not broken lobbying rules nor acted unlawfully, and instead praising the current regulations as having “worked well”. I’m handing over to my colleague Lucy Campbell, who’ll bring you all the news from Boris Johnson’s press conference once it starts. Amnesty International UK’s chief executive, Sacha Deshmukh, said: The UK should seize the opportunity of Ali Salajegheh’s attendance at Cop26 next week to once again press for the release of Nazanin, Anoosheh and all other arbitrarily-detained UK nationals in Iran. Liz Truss has claimed that she and the government are ‘working tirelessly’ on behalf of Nazanin and others – here’s a chance to prove that. Some of Nazanin’s supporters have been pointing out that if the government can’t resolve the issue of British nationals being picked up in Iran, then it’s unlikely to be able to fix the climate crisis. Let’s hope it can do both. Richard Ratcliffe has called for Liz Truss and her colleagues to be “brave” over diplomacy on these cases – a firm representation to Ali Salajegheh next week would be a useful start. The government needs to grant diplomatic protection status to Anoosheh as soon as possible and set out a clearly articulated strategy for bringing Nazanin and other arbitrarily detained British nationals back home from Iran. Everyone at Amnesty has enormous respect for Richard’s unflagging spirit. I’m going to spend a little time with him today to reassure him that we stand in full solidarity with him in his brave campaign for Nazanin’s release. Zaghari-Ratcliffe was taking her daughter Gabriella to see her family when she was arrested and was sentenced to five years in prison shortly afterwards, spending four years in Evin Prison and one under house arrest. According to her family, she was told by Iranian authorities that she was being detained because of the UK’s failure to pay an outstanding £400m debt to Iran. Boris Johnson has been heavily criticised for his role in the affair while serving as foreign secretary. In 2017, he wrongly told MPs Zaghari-Ratcliffe had been “teaching people journalism” before being detained by Tehran. Her family and her employer both maintained this was untrue but, within days, Johnson’s erroneous statement was cited as proof she was engaged in “propaganda against the regime” during a previously unscheduled court hearing. The arrival of an Iranian delegation at Cop26 should be used by UK officials to press for the release of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, Amnesty International has said. Zaghari-Ratcliffe, a British-Iranian dual national, has been in custody in Iran since 2016 after being accused of plotting to overthrow the government. Her husband, Richard Ratcliffe, is on day 10 of a hunger strike outside the Foreign Office in London, which he started after his wife lost her latest appeal. Amnesty International said officials at the climate summit in Glasgow should be prepared to “seize the opportunity” presented by the arrival of a delegation from Iran to raise the issue of the country’s detention of UK nationals such as Zaghari-Ratcliffe and Anoosheh Ashoori. The human rights group said the delegation will arrive next week and will be led by Dr Ali Salajegheh, the vice-president and head of Iran’s environment department. McDonnell further claimed that the City of London should start pulling its weight and contribute to the UK’s economy overall. I was hoping that we would see something at least beyond words of fair taxation. Fair taxation means not cutting the tax on the bankers who caused the crisis of 2008. It also means a fairer taxation on wealth, that’s capital gains and also the wealthiest. I actually say also, it is time now that the City starts pulling its weight. That’s why the financial transaction tax, now nearly designed over the last month, by the Robin Hood campaigners actually could be a realistic way in which the City contributes better to our economy overall. I also say this: I expected more in this budget, significantly more, after the Pandora Papers, about tackling tax avoidance in British overseas territories funnelled through the City of London along with the money laundering that is taking place on a criminal scale. The chancellor said this was a budget for an era of optimism, I warn him: this will create crushing disappointment which will tarnish our whole politics and that crushing disappointment will come out elsewhere on demonstration, occupations, as people’s anger is fed by the disillusionment caused by this budget. Labour’s former shadow chancellor John McDonnell has criticised the government’s levelling-up agenda, arguing the current system of distribution is “not good enough”. Now, in this budget, telling local councils that they can have spending power but not the resources to back up that spending power, we know what is going to happen. Local councillors of all political hues will be blamed either for the cuts forced upon them or for the council tax increases, and it is predicted now council tax will increase by at least £400 by 2026. What we need now is what we have been promised for a decade. The reform of local government finance that provides an independent, adequate resource for local authorities, and that does include the reform of business rates. On capital investment, it is now estimated that it will take £30bn a year investment to level up the regions to the investment levels in London and the south-east. In this budget there is nowhere near the amount to tackle that issue. McDonnell insisted the system of distribution needs to be fair, adding: To have a chancellor stand up and list the towns and areas that will be showered with his or her beneficence is not good enough. What we need is a system which is open, fair and transparent. In the distribution resources across the UK, Scotland and Wales etc, there is Barnett formula. We should introduce a Barnett formula that’s open and transparent, otherwise there will be accusations of pork barrel politics which will stain all our politics, not just this current government. Concerns have been expressed from the Tory backbenches that voters will be turned away to Labour by the government’s plans to raise taxes. During the budget debate, a former minister Sir Edward Leigh compared the tax plans and Covid regulation policies to those of the wartime coalition government and called on Treasury minister Simon Clarke to “say no” to other ministers pleading for more cash. He added that the chancellor’s “hymn of praise to a low tax economy” had “brought a tear to the eye of a weary Thatcherite”. I know that we are facing one of the greatest challenges in our history with the pandemic but the truth is we are now taxing people higher than at any level since the Attlee government. As we pursue levelling up, are we going to bring in ration cards like the Attlee government on eggs and meat? What the chief secretary has got to do is every time his colleagues come up begging him for more money on this, more money on that, he has got to say no. Bear in mind what happened in 1945: we presided in the coalition government during the war over the highest-taxing government in history, the most regulating government in history – and we have regulated people’s private lives more than we have ever done in the last 70 years in the pandemic – what was the result? It was a Labour government. The government’s childcare announcements in the budget are inadequate to help reduce costs for parents and boost quality, the shadow education secretary, Kate Green, has said. She told the Commons: Don’t get me wrong, any investment into families with young children and support for new parents is very welcome. But the family hub project is a pale imitation of what the (government) benches inherited in 2010. Nonsense, says the minister. But let me tell him that when Labour left office there were 3,500 Sure Start centres delivering support to over 2.9 million children in every local authority in the country. One thousand children’s centres have closed since then and the secretary of state, I think, was promising a moment ago new family hubs only in half of local authorities. The chancellor has been criticised for a failure to incentivise greener forms of transport. The SNP MP Richard Thomson insisted that Rishi Sunak could have done something “really clever” if he had “incentivised the use of low-carbon forms of transport”. How on Earth in the week of Cop26 is this contributing to the government’s net-zero efforts? Sunak said that in the budget there was a “new ultra-long-haul ban introduced with a higher rate”, which according to an independent forecast “would actually reduce carbon emissions”. That comes alongside significant investment to incentive sustainable aviation fuel, £180m and billions more for electric transportation for consumers as well. Turning to energy costs, Reeves asked the chancellor: So who should the public blame for VAT on heating bills not being cut; the prime minister for not keeping his word or the chancellor for choosing to cut taxes for bankers instead? The typical family shop is likely to go up by £180 more next year and it’s not just food prices that are rising; gas and electricity bills already up by £139 and only going to go up more. The chancellor had the opportunity in the budget to help people with their gas and electricity bills, by reducing VAT to 0% through the winter months, it’s something that Labour has called for and that the prime minister backed when he was campaigning to leave the European Union. On a VAT cut on fuel, Sunak reeled off a list of “comments from independent commentators about what that would do”. Instead, we’ve provided half-a-billion pounds targeted at those who need our help ... the household support fund will be able to provide £150 to two to three million of the most vulnerable families in our country. Sunak pointed to the rise in the national living wage – the successor of the minimum wage, which campaigners say is still well below the level needed to meet the real cost of living in the UK – as evidence of government action. And he cited the newly announced universal vredit taper, though the policy only reduces the amount of benefit a worker loses for every pound they earn above their worker allowance to 55p in the pound from 63p currently. And people on universal credit who are not working will not benefit at all. The shadow chancellor, Rachel Reeves, has challenged Rishi Sunak to answer how much the average weekly family shop was expected to rise over the next year. Speaking in the Commons, she said: According to the Office for Budget Responsibility, the government’s supply chain chaos, woefully inadequate post-Brexit planning and a lack of HGV drivers have contributed to higher inflation. The cost of the weekly shop is already going up and up, as the chancellor would have heard from shoppers in Bury last week. So does the chancellor have any idea of how much the average weekly supermarket shop is expected to increase in the course of the next year for a typical family? Sunak replied: We are cognisant and aware that there is price inflation and last week’s budget addressed that and explained to the British people some of the global factors that are behind the rise in prices which are not unique to this country. But, as I said then, where this government can act, we will. So, whether it’s ... interventions for HGV drivers or indeed the half billion-pound household support fund or indeed freezing fuel duty, this government is doing what it can to help with the cost of living. Whately was similarly evasive when asked for a specific target against which the government’s performance on its so-called levelling-up agenda would be measured. The Wirral South MP, Labour’s Alison McGovern, said: [Whately] said that levelling up is the defining mission of this government, yet – if you look at the spending review priority outcomes and metrics – you will see that across the Department for Business, the Department for Levelling Up and the Treasury, there is just one metric to judge the government on: The economic performance of all functional economic areas relative to their trend growth rates. That is all we are being measured on. So will the minister be specific: by how much does she expect to close the economic gap by the end of this parliament? Whately said: I thank her for interest in our objective to level up across the whole of the United Kingdom, as she indeed repeated, the defining mission of this government. As she can see, the golden thread running through the spending review and the budget: steps taken, investment made across government to support levelling up across all our constituencies. A Treasury minister has declined to offer a guarantee that no Christmas presents will be stuck at ports rather than under trees this year because of a lack of HGV drivers this year. Helen Whately insisted action is being taken to boost driver numbers after being challenged by Labour. Speaking in the Commons, the shadow Treasury minister Bridget Phillipson said: The run-up to the festive period is a busy and crucial time for many businesses. They simply cannot afford delays in getting goods to warehouses from our ports. Yet that is exactly what the logistics industry is warning that the shortage of HGV drivers is causing. Can the minister guarantee that no presents will be missing from under the tree this Christmas because of her government’s complete failure to plan ahead? Whately replied: We are indeed taking steps to support the haulage sector where there is a long-running situation with vacancies for HGV drivers. The action we’ve taken includes making available 5,000 temporary visas for the short-term, increasing the number of tests available so there’s a greater capacity for new drivers to take tests, changing cabotage restrictions, funding improved facilities for drivers, and also we need to see in the longer-term both better pay and conditions for lorry drivers. The government has confirmed it is looking at the amount of money second home owners pay in council tax after warnings from the Liberal Democrats that rural areas are becoming “riddled with ghost towns” due to the high number of holiday homes. In the Commons, the former Lib Dem leader Tim Farron has said: The colossal economic inequality facing rural communities is something that I hope this government will take seriously. I wonder if the minister is aware of the collapse of local housing into the second housing and second home holiday let market in communities like mine and indeed the chancellor’s next door? Would he look at following the Welsh assembly government’s example of doubling council tax on second home properties so that communities like mine don’t become riddled with ghost towns losing their local population? The Treasury minister John Glen replied: The government is indeed looking at the tightening up of the rules around second homes and council tax and this is a matter that we would be very happy to engage with him on. We reported earlier that Westminster has stepped up measures to limit the spread of Covid, including cancelling non-parliamentary business activity such as tours, and banqueting activity at the Palace of Westminster (see 11.38). Now, the Commons speaker has warned has warned yet tougher restrictions could be imposed if cases continue to rise during a “very crucial two weeks”. Sir Lindsay Hoyle said cases have increased among MPs and staff, adding there is a “greater worry than we’ve had before” as transmission of the virus has been on the parliamentary estate. He urged MPs to follow the new measures, telling the Commons: If we can get through these two weeks, I believe we’re then through to next year. But it’s about this crucial two weeks, as numbers have been rising on both sides of the House and within staff. And, unusually, the transmission has been on the estate and that’s why it’s a greater worry than we’ve had before. I will always put the health and safety of this House first so please help me keep this House open by trying to get through a very crucial two weeks. After that, I think we’ll be in a much safer place. I think we’ll be in the right place and the measures have not been stringent, they could have been even more stringent and some we might have to [make more stringent]. So, please, let us just pull and work together because, in the end, I don’t want to have another Christmas like we’ve had previously. David Cameron’s shame after it emerged he acted as a paid lobbyist for Greensill Capital to get it access to the government’s coronavirus loan schemes should act as a “deterrent” to other politicians, the head of a review into the scandal has said. Nigel Boardman defended the investigation he led earlier this year, saying he had not been “soft” on ministers by finding Cameron had not broken lobbying rules nor acted unlawfully, and instead praising the current regulations as having “worked well”. Speaking to MPs on the public administration and constitutional affairs select committee on Tuesday, Boardman said there were constraints on what sanctions could be imposed on ministers who break lobbying rules or act unethically after they leave their post. Tory backbencher Jackie Doyle-Price challenged him, saying “once they’ve left, there isn’t really any sanction”. She said: We can all look at what David Cameron did in terms of his lobbying for Greensill. We all will have our own views about that. I don’t think it’s the behaviour I expect of a former prime minister, if I’m being brutally frank. But his answer to that would be well, it was well within the rules. Boardman suggested that, when ministers are appointed, they could sign a “deed of undertaking” which could have some contractual sanctions about their behaviour build in – like losing part of their pension, or an honour. Though he admitted that there are currently few such options available, and added: I would guess that seeing what has happened in relation to Cameron would be a deterrent to other people following down that same path. John McDonnell, the former shadow chancellor, also told Boardman: You don’t seem to have gone far enough on addressing that point about restoring confidence, not just in the operation of the bureaucracy, the civil service, but actually that issue about culpability at ministerial level, as well as after ministers have resigned as well. Fishers along France’s northern coast have described being granted access to British waters as a “matter of life and death” as talks to settle the row over fishing licences continue. Paris has accused UK authorities of failing to honour a post-Brexit deal to grant licences to French boats, though Paris held off threats to impose punitive action against British vessels that could have been implemented on Tuesday. Jeremy Lhomel, a fisher based in the coastal town of Boulogne-sur-Mer, has told the PA Media news agency the inability to access British waters was catastrophic for those earning a living from fishing in the Channel. This situation with the licences, we think there’s a lot of bad faith because we are small family boats, we have three, four people on board, we don’t empty the sea, we deal with very few fish, and for us the situation is catastrophic because we can no longer access these waters. For us, it’s vital to get these licences so that we can fish; it’s a matter of life or death. Lhomel said fishers working from the port of Boulogne who have not received licences have lost access to half of the Strait of Dover – the narrowest part of the Channel. “We can no longer fish properly.” Jersey’s minister for external relations called on France to remove all threats of retaliation. Senator Ian Gorst has told the PA Media news agency: Well, we’re pleased that the threats of retaliation that would have been imposed from midnight last night have been stayed, as it were, but we continue to believe that those threats are not compliant and those measures would not be compliant with the terms of the trade deal. But we agree that we should sit down and continue to look at the evidence but it would be far better, and we call upon the French, to remove those threats altogether and so that they wouldn’t implementing counter measures. Asked about Jersey’s fishermen, who have voiced worries about the threats to close their access to French ports, Gorst added: They of course are right to be concerned, which is why we welcome French administration’s stay of threatening to take unilateral measures and to close the ports. So, we sit here now on Tuesday morning we could without that engagement and those ongoing conversations have seen those ports close – they remain open. No 10 has also had to row back after an apparent gaffe by Eustice; the minister sent out to bat for the government this morning. He claimed the impounded Cornelis Gert Jan, which is at the centre of the diplomatic row, has now been released. I understand that vessel has now been released and I think there’s going to need to be some further discussions, clearly there was an administrative error at some point. We haven’t quite got to the bottom of that but that vessel I understand has been released. But the situation does not look quite so clear, with Downing Street now saying: The vessel concerned remains in port having been detained by the French authorities but given it’s an ongoing legal process I am restricted in anything I can say further. Downing Street has said it wants to find a consensus with France over the fishing licence row. The prime minister’s official spokesperson has told reporters: We welcome the fact that France has stepped back from threats they’ve made and we welcome France’s acknowledgement that in-depth discussions are needed to resolve a range of difficulties between the UK and EU relationship. We want to find consensual solutions together if we can and Lord Frost has accepted Clément Beaune’s invitation and looks forward to discussions in Paris on Thursday. They will be discussing issues including fisheries and the Northern Ireland protocol. Earlier, the environment secretary, George Eustice, had welcomed Paris’ decision not to impose restrictions last night, pending those talks this week. He told Sky News: We welcome the fact France has stepped back from the threats it was making last Wednesday. We’ve always said we want to de-escalate this and always said we have an ever-open door to discuss any further evidence France or the EU might have on any additional vessels they’d like to have licensed. France has clearly taken a decision not to implement some of the decisions they threatened last Wednesday, we very much welcome that but I think there’s going to be a very important meeting on Thursday between Lord frost and his opposite number, not just on fisheries but a wider range of issues as well. The chancellor has denied there are plans for a “£1.7bn stealth tax” on the self-employed through the budget. For Labour, the shadow Treasury minister Pat McFadden has told the Commons: As well as all the tax rises on income and business that the chancellor has announced in the past six months, buried in the budget red book is a plan for a stealth tax on the self-employed of £1.7bn over the next few years. After the past 18 months, when many self-employed people have had no help at all and when they’re already being hit with other tax rises he’s announced, why are the self-employed now being hit with this extra tax rise, which the chancellor didn’t even mention in his budget speech last week? Appearing for treasury questions, Rishi Sunak replied: There were no extra taxes for the self-employed in last week’s budget. (McFadden) may be referring to a timing difference that was reflected in the budget scorecard of previously announced policies. Sunak said the government had provided “almost £30bn of support to millions of self-employed” people during the pandemic. Westminster has stepped up measures to limit the spread of Covid as many MPs continue to shun masks in the Commons chamber. The UK Health Security Agency has determined the risk of transmission on the parliamentary estate has increased. New measures include the cancellation of non-parliamentary business activity such as tours, and banqueting activity at the Palace of Westminster. Face coverings are already compulsory for staff, contractors and journalists – though not MPs – and chairs of meetings will be urged to take a stronger role in ensuring compliance with the rule. A parliamentary spokesman has said: The House’s priority is to ensure that those on the estate are safe while business is facilitated. There have been recent increases in Covid-19 across the country and these are also being reflected in Parliament. The UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) has determined that the risk of transmission on the parliamentary estate is now greater. As a consequence, some further action is being taken to ensure that case numbers do not continue to rise. The measures will be reviewed in two weeks’ time. Last night, the French EU affairs minister Clément Beaune offered some more detail on how Paris sees the way forward on both the fisheries row and the broader question of how to manage the UK’s approach to Brexit. Translated into English: The talks on the granting of fishing licenses have continued today (Monday) between the European Commission, France and the UK. We have seen the first signs from the British authorities of speeding up the discussions and a response to the latest French proposals is expected by Wednesday. I have also conversed with David Frost, the UK minister responsible for relations with the EU. I have invited him to Paris on Thursday for an in-depth discussion about the problems in implementing the EU-UK agreements. In order to facilitate open discussions, the measures announced and prepared by France will not be put in place before this meeting and before the British responses on the issue of fishing licenses have been considered. The prime minister Boris Johnson has been “bluffing all along”, according to a French MP from the president Emmanuel Macron’s party. Bruno Bonnell spoke as tensions between the UK and France continued over post-Brexit fishing rights. Citing plans for further talks between representatives of the two sides this week, Paris stepped back from its plan to begin enforcing tough measures on British vessels last night. The UK government has claimed this morning that the French did so because they “looked more closely at the evidence”. Asked on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme if he thinks Johnson is “bluffing” over the whole affair, Bonnell said: “Of course he is, as usual, he’s been bluffing all along.” He said Johnson has been “continuously pretending that Brexit will have no impact, no effect, on the UK lifestyle”. Macron and Johnson are at the Cop26 summit in Glasgow and the former has said talks will need to continue today. “We’ll see where we are ... at the end of the day, to see if things have really changed,” he told reporters on the margins of the conference. If you’d like to follow our live coverage of the climate summit with my colleague Bibi van der Zee, you can do so here:Two councils in England represented by Tory ministers have received money under the government’s flagship “levelling-up” fund despite being among the least deprived fifth of local authorities nationwide. The health secretary Sajid Javid’s constituency of Bromsgrove got £14.5m in the first announced tranche of cash under the scheme. Central Bedfordshire, which received £26.7m in levelling-up funding for transport improvements and a community wellbeing hub, is partly represented by Nadine Dorries, the culture secretary. Lewes council, which is represented by the Conservative MP Maria Caulfield, received the ninth-largest per capita award despite being among the least deprived 40% of local authorities. Lewes received funding for local seafood industries and will also benefit from an East Sussex bid for a new road bridge in Seaford. A number of areas of high deprivation received large awards, including Burnley and Stoke-on-Trent, which got £19.9m and £56m respectively. Alex Cunningham, the Labour MP for Stockton North, which includes an area that missed out on funding, said: “The Tories like to talk a good game on levelling up, but this is yet more proof that it is an empty slogan and that pork barrel politics is the name of the game. “I think it’s high time that the prime minister, chancellor and levelling-up secretary come clean and explain to the people of Billingham, and other areas that have significant levels of deprivation but missed out on much needed funding, why they feel places like Yarm and Eaglescliffe in the Tees Valley, and Bromsgrove and Central Bedfordshire further afield, are more deserving of the levelling-up cash than they are.” The government’s levelling-up fund is designed to combat regional inequality by investing in infrastructure that “brings pride to a local area”, according to the scheme’s prospectus. Just under half of the 65 English local authorities that will benefit from funding announced in last week’s budget are among the country’s most deprived fifth. However, Bromsgrove, Central Bedfordshire and the Isles of Scilly – which is to receive funding for a ferry service – are among the country’s least deprived. Although more Labour councils than Conservative-controlled ones received funding in this first tranche, Tory councils did better per capita at £93 per head of population compared with £65 per head for Labour councils. Councils with no overall control received £102 per head while the two Liberal Democrat areas announced thus far, Eastbourne and Hinckley and Bosworth, are in line to receive £183 per capita. Where funding was originally allocated to a county council or city region, the Guardian analysis split the funding across the lower-tier councils that will benefit from a scheme. The announced funding is part of the Conservative party’s broader “levelling-up agenda”. Other announcements have already been made under the towns fund and the future high streets fund while a further pot, the £220m community renewal fund, is yet to be announced. The first tranche of the £4.8bn levelling-up fund announced last week included cultural regeneration funding for Liverpool’s waterfront and the reopening of the Whorlton Bridge over the River Tees. A spokesperson for the Department for Levelling Up, Housing and Communities said: “This analysis is nonsense. The selection process for the levelling-up fund is transparent, robust and fair, and we publish the criteria on gov.uk. “The first round of funding will help to ensure opportunity is spread more equally across the UK by empowering local leaders, improving public services and restoring pride in place.” This article was amended on 2 November 2021. A Beatles-inspired attraction in Liverpool will not be funded by the levelling-up fund as an earlier version stated.BBC Newsnight editor Esme Wren, who oversaw the programme’s infamous interview with Prince Andrew, has quit the broadcaster to become the new boss of Channel 4 News. Her departure leaves the BBC with yet another influential senior news position to fill at a time when such appointments are receiving enormous scrutiny from the government. The BBC is already interviewing for a new head of news, with cabinet ministers privately speculating about which candidates they would prefer for that role. The job of political editor could come up next year if Laura Kuenssberg steps down as expected. Wren spent three years running Newsnight, giving it an all-women lineup of Emily Maitlis, Kirsty Wark and Emma Barnett. The highlight was her team securing the notorious 2019 interview with Prince Andrew about his relationship with convicted paedophile Jeffrey Epstein. This hastened the royal’s departure from public life – but also led to Wren appearing on the front cover of the Radio Times, an honour rarely afforded to the editors of news programmes. She will now replace the outgoing Ben De Pear as boss of Channel 4 News. One of her first tasks will be to oversee the transition to a new lead presenter, who has yet to be recruited, as longstanding host Jon Snow is due to step down after 32 years in the job. Newsnight has remained well-resourced with its own dedicated editor and team of journalists at a time when many other BBC programmes have lost their own staff due to the ongoing centralisation of the broadcaster’s news teams. This has led to some jealousy from other BBC reporters who have been forced to move jobs, who point out Newsnight currently only attracts about 400,000 viewers a night on BBC Two. Channel 4 News also has a question mark over its long-term future due to the looming decision on whether to push ahead with the privatisation of the broadcaster. Ministers have suggested they would retain Channel 4’s news and current affairs output in any privatisation, while ITN has an ongoing deal to keep making the programme that would be expensive to break. However, Channel 4 News’ reputation as a thorn in the side of the government has attracted opprobrium from some ministers, and there are long-term fears about a new private owner finding ways to cut its budget. Wren said Channel 4 News has led “some of the most significant investigations of our time” and she wanted to find ways to speak “to young and underserved audiences”.A 52-year-old man was killed by a ricocheting police bullet when he refused to leave his room during an attempted arrest, an inquest has heard. Trevor Smith, a van driver who was suffering from mental health problems, was fatally shot when officers attempted to arrest him at his home in Lee Bank, Birmingham, in the early hours of 15 March 2019. Jurors heard how Smith had been reported to police by his former partner for threatening behaviour towards her. She alleged he once held a gun to her head, and sent her a WhatsApp message showing a gun on his sofa in which he threatened to “do her in”. She also said that after they broke up in January 2019, he sent “intimate” videos of her to friends and had received a number of greetings cards from Smith containing threats, one of which was a sympathy card with her photo on it saying: “RIP, you’re always in our thoughts – not.” Following her complaints, police secured a warrant to arrest Smith and search his property for the firearm. A black imitation firearm was discovered at the property. Summarising the circumstances of Smith’s death, the senior coroner Louise Hunt said that during the execution of the warrant, Smith remained in his bedroom where he sat on the end of the bed with a duvet held in front of him and one of his arms was not visible. A police dog was brought on the scene and started barking. Smith dropped the duvet and one of his limbs moved, and one of the police officers fired a weapon, with the bullet ricocheting off the bed frame and hitting Smith. Smith received CPR and an ambulance attended the property, but he was pronounced dead shortly afterwards. A postmortem confirmed he died from a single gunshot wound to the chest. Smith’s family described him as “a very bright, talented and creative individual”, a well-dressed “fashionista” and an avid football fan who was popular across Birmingham. “Trevor’s life mattered and he did not deserve to lose it in this way,” his sister Lorna Webley said. “One Friday morning, someone took my brother’s life in three seconds. At this moment, we cannot explain the proper reason for any good cause for his death.” She said Smith, a father of two, had “battled with mental health challenges for many years, often dismissed by others as bad behaviour” and that he was deeply affected by his father’s death in 2017. In the months before his death his mother noticed Smith seemed depressed and his usual smart dress had become unkempt. The inquest heard that in January 2019, Smith had overdosed in an attempt to take his own life and left three suicide notes, after which he was referred to Birmingham and Solihull mental health NHS foundation trust. Hunt said that over the course of the inquest, jurors would also hear about an “issue” with the defibrillator used during resuscitation attempts and “whether there was any delay in an ambulance attending because there was a mix-up in the address”. The inquest, being held at Edgbaston cricket ground because of the Covid pandemic, continues.When I retired from general practice six years ago aged 60, I was often asked when I had made this decision, and my answer was always: “The day I started work.” I believe 60 is a reasonable retirement age for any high-pressure job. The media and the government should stop blaming hard-working GPs for retiring “early” (Report, 29 October). In any case, working 50 to 60 hours a week for most of my career, I think I put in a pretty good shift! Dr Tony Hirst Darwen, Lancashire • Your feature on post-50 fitness (Second act sensations! Meet the people who reached peak fitness – after turning 50, 2 November) chimed perfectly with my own experience. I started running at 55, completed the London Marathon at 58 and learned to tap-dance at 63 during lockdown. There’s something about raging “against the dying of the light” that brings such confidence and joy. Alison Solemani St Leonards-on-Sea, East Sussex • To encourage others in their 70s, at the age of 73, I’m disappointed if I don’t cycle 30 miles or walk five miles a day. My motivation is that I weigh less than I did in my 20s. Sam White Lewes, East Sussex • The now-free Espírito Santo could link up at Manchester City with Jesus, should the latter’s interim “father”, Josep Guardiola, be at all trinitarianally inclined (Conte poised to take over as Tottenham manager after Nuno sacked, 1 November). Fr Alec Mitchell Holyhead, Anglesey • A land value tax owes more to the American economist Henry George (1839-97) than to Lloyd George (Letters, 1 November). Terry Carbro Sleights, North Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.I was surprised that Bob Dylan’s A Hard Rain’s a-Gonna Fall was not in your list of the best songs about the climate crisis (28 October). Although Dylan’s poetic tour de force channelled the fears of a generation living with the threat of nuclear war, the lyrics’ apocalyptic imagery vividly captures today’s concerns about environmental calamity. The song was actually adopted by the UN as its unofficial anthem for Cop15 in 2009. Mike Pender Cardiff • I was sorry that Cliff Richard’s 1971 Silvery Rain didn’t make the cut. Its atmospheric – almost Hitchcockian – production, especially the post-apocalyptic fade, still gives me the shivers. Peter Higginbotham Ilkley, West Yorkshire • I would have thought someone as catholic in his appreciation of music as Alexis Petridis might have been aware of Tom Paxton’s 1970 song Whose Garden Was This? It was chillingly prophetic of where we were headed if we did not take care of our environment. Danny Sullivan Basingstoke, Hampshire • John Mayall’s 1970 song Nature’s Disappearing was a masterly, atmospheric combination of potent climate warning and musicianship. Rob Hodgson Holmfirth, West Yorkshire • World leaders attending Cop26 should be played Louis Armstrong’s What a Wonderful World on a loop until they achieve total unanimity. Toby Wood Peterborough, Cambridgeshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Thank you for publishing James Lovelock’s article (Beware: Gaia may destroy humans before we destroy the Earth, 2 November). It explains the climate crisis so clearly that we feel it should be compulsory reading for all delegates to Cop26. We have an extra frisson of interest, as Lovelock’s 1975 New Scientist article, “The quest for Gaia”, was co-authored by Sidney Epton, our father. Dad, who died in 2007, would have been delighted to see that an article written almost 50 years ago is relevant today. Nicola Campbell and Robert Epton Macclesfield, Cheshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Last week, I visited my cousin in Wandsworth prison. James Brown, a businessman and Paralympian, was sentenced to a year’s imprisonment on 24 September for climbing on to a plane at City airport to highlight the climate emergency. His is the first custodial sentence given to anyone associated with Extinction Rebellion. The sentence, reported by the Guardian and most other national newspapers, was widely seen as a warning to future activists. Also last week, Rishi Sunak announced a new lower rate of air passenger duty from April 2023. This week, we host Cop26. Meanwhile, James is out of sight in Wandsworth prison. Except he’s not out of sight to many. Every night, like-minded supporters hold a vigil outside the prison, and every day he receives a stream of letters from well-wishers. But there is a silence from the newspapers. Why has no one reported on the huge level of support for this man? Why has there been no questioning in the mainstream press of such a harsh and disproportionate sentence? And why has there been no challenge in the press to the judge’s comment that James “cynically used” his disability? Christine Sanders London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.In his justifiably bleak piece (Capitalism is killing the planet – it’s time to stop buying into our own destruction, 30 October), George Monbiot claims that the existential crisis facing humanity has arisen in spite of our “greater intelligence” and “highly evolved consciousness”. In this aspect of his argument, he is wrong. Consciousness is an evolutionary process and, in terms of how far we have progressed, we are still in our infancy. As a result, we are not yet able to see the bigger picture and our place not only in the world but in the cosmos. We cannot think much beyond our next car, meal or overseas holiday – all of them contributors to systemic environmental collapse. This is especially true of our political leaders, who cannot think much beyond the next election. Until we, as a species, attain a much higher level of consciousness, politicians are unlikely to place the planet ahead of economic interests, as this largely determines whether or not they hold on to power. It would be misplaced, therefore, to expect a major breakthrough on climate change any time soon. Monbiot rather dismisses the small things that we, as individuals, can do because, he argues, in the absence of seismic change, reducing our use of coffee cups or plastic makes little difference. Having not eaten meat for 15 years I’ve resolved this week of Cop26 to stop eating dairy. This small gesture will of course make not one iota of difference to climate change, but at least I can feel a little better about myself as we hurtle towards the apocalypse. Quentin Macfarlane Auchmithie, Angus • George Monbiot criticises thinking about climate change that focuses on “the tiny issues such as plastic straws and coffee cups, rather than the huge structural forces driving us towards catastrophe. We are obsessed with plastic bags.” Meanwhile, on the Money pages of the print edition, an article asks how supermarkets rate in their response to the climate crisis. Four of the five subheadings in the article are about plastics or packaging, which, while worthy environmental issues in themselves, have little or no impact on climate change. The fifth is about cycle racks. Perhaps your Money journalists could read the Monbiot article and try again? Stephen Warde Cottenham, Cambridgeshire • Your article on supermarkets’ progress to achieving “net zero” was interesting. Unfortunately, the main focus was overwhelmingly to what supermarkets are doing to end single-use plastic. There was no mention of the critical role of supermarkets in ensuring the products of rainforest deforestation do not end up in our shopping baskets. I love my morning coffee, but only a fraction of the coffee products for sale in British supermarkets have any claim to be sustainably sourced. Until we can be confident the products we buy are free from deforestation, stopping use of plastic wrapped cucumbers is little more than a gesture. Debbie Martyr London • I am loth to criticise the Guardian on its climate coverage, but in an issue that contains George Monbiot’s excellent piece on trivial distraction from the existential threat, giving Abba’s return predominance on the cover rather makes the point. To paraphrase Adorno, to celebrate pop while the planet burns might be seen as barbaric. Tom Hardy London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Wet wipes which contain plastic are forming “islands” across the UK after being flushed, with rivers changing shape after the products pile up on their banks, MPs have heard as legislation aiming to ban their sale had its first reading in the House of Commons. Labour MP Fleur Anderson’s plastics (wet wipes) bill would prohibit the manufacture and sale of wet wipes containing plastic if it was to pass through parliament and receive royal assent. However, as a private member’s bill it is unlikely to become law without government support, although Downing Street has signalled it is committed to ending “the throwaway culture”. During the first reading, MPs were told the UK needs to ban wet wipes which contain plastic because the scale of the problem caused by flushing them “is so big, so damaging and increasing so fast”. They also heard that marine animals are dying, while Britons might be eating a “credit card’s worth of plastic” due to microplastic shards from the discarded hygiene products. “As a mother of four children I have used a lot of wet wipes and I completely understand the pressures that parents are under and how useful wet wipes are,” Anderson said. “I know that parents also want to do the right thing for the environment.” But she added that 90% of the 11bn wet wipes used in the UK each year contain some form of plastic which, when broken down, turn into microplastics which can be ingested by wildlife and enter the food chain and water supply. She added that the problem was growing, with the Great British Beach Clean reportedly seeing an increase from 1.7 wet wipes per average 100m of beach to 18 wet wipes between 2005 and 2020. Anderson told the Commons: “When these plastics enter our local marine environment and water systems in such large volumes the damage is absolutely devastating. Globally, 100 million animals die each year from plastic waste alone.” She also cited data from the World Wildlife Fund, which suggested people eat about five grams of plastic a week, which she described as “literally eating a credit card’s worth of plastic every week”, claiming wet wipes were a “huge cause of this”. The MP told of a recent visit to the Thames where huge piles of wet wipes on the riverbanks had changed how it flowed, and even described seeing a “wet wipe island” in the river. Brands such as Holland &amp; Barrett and the Body Shop had already committed to selling only plastic-free wipes, which are usually made with bamboo or other plant fibres, Anderson said. She said a “greater scale of production” of plastic-free wipes could be encouraged by the ban, making the alternative cheaper. “We need legislation because the scale of the problem is so big, so damaging and increasing so fast,” said Anderson. The bill will be considered again on Friday 19 November. A No 10 spokesperson said the 25-year environment plan sets out “a commitment to eliminate avoidable plastic waste”.The conference is over for today. So it’s goodbye from me for now. We’ll be back tomorrow morning, but here’s a roundup of what’s happened this afternoon: Boris Johnson has declared he is “cautiously optimistic” about a deal at Cop26 to keep global temperature rises below 1.5C as he urged China to commit to bringing emissions down by 2025. The US president, Joe Biden, has announced a pledge to cut global methane emissions by 30% by 2030. Reducing these emissions was touted as one of the most immediate opportunities to slow global heating ahead of the summit. A plan to coordinate the introduction of clean technologies in order to rapidly drive down their cost has been agreed at the Cop26 summit by world leaders, including the UK, US, India and China. The prime minister of Rwanda has told of how his country has witnessed the impact of climate change “first hand, including floods, draughts and landslides have cost livelihoods ... and cost many lives.” African countries are preparing to spend at least $6bn a year from their tax revenues on adapting to the impacts of the climate crisis and are calling on the rich world to provide $2.5bn a year for the next five years to enable them to meet their goals. Amazon’s founder, Jeff Bezos, has defended his trip to space telling delegates that it made him realise how “finite and fragile” the Earth is. And Police Scotland has apologised to women in Glasgow who had to walk home in darkness on Monday night after well-lit streets were blocked off due to Cop26 climate summit security concerns. Youth and Indigenous activists, and others most affected by climate change, staged an action marking the end of the World Leaders Summit just opposite the conference centre on Tuesday evening, calling on negotiators to “End Climate Betrayal” with concrete action over the next two weeks. Holding up huge illuminated letters, the action follows on from the open letter to world leaders sent by Greta Thunberg, Vanessa Nakate and Mitzi Tan to enact a 5-point plan for the climate, which has been signed by more than one million people globally. More reaction to the Biden methane pledge from earlier today. Raymond Pierrehumbert, professor of physics at the University of Oxford, says: “As things stand, methane is mostly just a distraction from the main job of ridding the world economy of fossil fuel burning and its associated carbon dioxide emissions.” Actions to control methane are only really useful if the planet is on track to achieve net zero carbon emissions in the next few decades. He said: “We are sadly not yet in that world, and until we are, methane is just a sideshow.” Professor Myles Allen, professor of Geosystem science at Oxford, said a 30% cut in global methane emissions would reduce global temperatures by around one-tenth of a degree. “Meanwhile, carbon dioxide emissions are driving temperatures up by over two-tenths of a degree per decade. Unless we get carbon dioxide on a path to net zero by mid-century, action on methane today won’t have much impact on peak warming,” he said. Johnson said companies and financial institutions have an important role in stopping deforestation and that consumer pressure is also key. Lastly, asked whether President Macron left early after falling out with the UK prime minister, Boris Johnson says: “We are working very closely with our French friends and partners on the things that matter most to the people of the world, which are climate change and reducing CO2.” Asked about India’s net zero target being for 2070, Johnson says: “I think the most important thing that they’ve said is that they want to decarbonise so much of their power system by 2030. That’s a massive commitment.” On China, he says it is engaging on the matter of climate change but that the world needs more progress from the Asian country. “I think we need China to make commitments, China has made a substantial commitment to move to net zero by the middle of the century, 2050 or before. Let’s see where we get to with China ... let’s see where that adds up to.” He adds that China has committed to stop financing overseas coal. Asked about President Xi Jinping of China’s lack of attendance at Cop26, Johnson says you have to respect his decision not to come to the summit “because of the pandemic”. He said Russian president Vladimir Putin is not attending for the same reason. More from Johnson: “If we don’t fix our climate, it will be an economic catastrophe. I also happen to think there is a great wisdom in the British people that think this is an issue that needs to be fixed.” He refers to a graph presented yesterday by Sir David Attenborough depicting the increase in CO2 emissions. “They can see that, they’re not dumb,” he says. He says the climate crisis will be tackled by creating high-wage, high-skilled jobs in green technologies. Asked by a Daily Express journalist whether there should be a public vote on net zero, he says: “As for your brilliant suggestion of a referendum, I think this country has had quite enough referendums to be getting on with.” Speaking about the impact of the climate crisis, Johnson says: “When it comes to helping countries to transition, there is a huge amount to do. We have the tools to do it. And we certainly have, in theory, the finance to do it. Mark Carney would say hundreds of trillions of dollars, others would say tens of trillions, that can be leveraged by the public sector and by our investment. But I’m not going to disagree with anyone that says the world has a lot more to do.” Boris Johnson tells the BBC’s Laura Kuenssburg that we are starting to see the plans behind the pledges made in Paris in 2015. He says: “I think what you are starting to see here is a sense of how actually you can deliver those cuts in CO2.” However, he admits there is still a lot of work to do to put plans into practice. “The world leaders may be leaving, but the eyes of the world are on our negotiators and we have your numbers,” says Johnson, who is due to fly back to London this evening. Johnson continues: “We’ve been asking for action on coal, cars, cash and trees and after just a couple of days we can certainly begin to tick three of those boxes – we are beginning to write the tick. “That’s all happened because we have been able to come together in Glasgow.” He goes on to say that the clock in the doomsday scenario is still ticking but says “we have a bomb disposal team on site and they are starting to snip some of the wires, some of the right wires I hope.” Johnson is reeling off what he perceives to be successes from the Cop26 summit so far. He says that 90% of the world’s economy is now working towards net zero, including “India keeping 1bn tonnes of carbon out of the atmosphere by switching half its power grid to renewable energy”. He added: “It’s not just that we are putting forward better or bigger targets but the world is putting forward the plans to reach those targets.” Johnson adds: “90% of the world has now signed up to net zero including India,” in reference to yesterday’s announcement from India. “We will keep working with world leaders to get to net zero sooner.” Johnson starting to speak: “We must take care to guard against false hope... still a very long way to go. I am cautiously optimistic... After two days of talks we’ve pulled back a goal or two from being 1-5 down.” As we wait for Boris Johnson’s press conference we can update you with some choice words that climate activist Greta Thunberg had for the world leaders inside the Cop26 conference in Glasgow. Joined by some of the many activists rallying around the climate change meeting, Thunberg decried inaction from politicians and big business, saying: “We are not going to let them get away with it anymore.” The Boris Johnson press conference is due to start at 5pm today. We will be covering Cop26 related updates here on this blog. For other non-Cop26 updates please follow my colleagues on the Guardian’s UK politics live blog. The prime minister of Rwanda has told of how his country has witnessed the impact of climate change “first hand”. Édouard Ngirente told the Cop26 summit: “We have fallen short of our duty to both people and the planet if we don’t urgently address climate change. In Rwanda, we have seen first hand the impact of climate change – floods, draughts and landslides have cost livelihoods ... and cost many lives.” He called on world leaders to “keep alive” the 1.5C warming target and said Rwanda “pledges its full support for inclusive and transparent negotiation and dialogue between partners around the world”. The EU has pledged €1bn to protect the world’s forests, after world leaders agreed a deal to halt and reverse global deforestation over the next decade. China, the US and Brazil are among the countries that have signed up to the Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on Forests and Land Use, which aims to protect vast areas of land, from tropical rainforests to Siberian taiga. The president of the European Commission, Ursula von der Leyen, announced the money on Tuesday and said forest protection was an integral part of the EU’s trade deals, such as with Japan. “Forests are the green lungs of the earth. We need to protect and restore them. I gladly announce that we are pledging €1 billion to protect world forests. This is a clear sign of the EU’s commitment to lead global change to protect our planet, in line with our EU Green Deal.” Of the EU’s €1bn, €250m will go to the Congo basin, home to the world’s second-largest rainforest. Von der Leyen also said the Commission would propose an EU regulation to prevent deforestation driven by EU consumption. Leaked versions of the draft law – due to be published the week after COP26 negotiations conclude – have already been criticised by scientists for incorrect use of data and by NGOs for failure to protect vulnerable grasslands and wetlands that are rich in biodiversity. In a major step forward for ocean conservation in the global south, four Pacific-facing Latin American nations have said they will create what is essentially a mega-MPA – a huge interconnected marine protection area in one of the world’s richest pockets of ocean biodiversity. Panama, Ecuador, Colombia and Costa Rica said the Eastern Tropical Pacific Marine Corridor (CMAR) would not only join but expand their protected territorial waters to create a fishing-free corridor of ocean. The area is one of the world’s most important migratory routes for sea turtles, whales, sharks and rays, but has been under threat from mostly foreign industrial fishing vessels, predominantly huge Chinese “distant fleets”, as well as illegal, underreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing by locals. Ecuador took the first step earlier today, by announcing it would expand the current area of the Galápagos marine reserve by about 60,000 sq km. Greenpeace has put out a statement responding to the earlier US and EU-led pledge to cut global methane emissions by 30% by 2030. Juan Pablo Osornio, head of the Greenpeace delegation at Cop26, has said: The IPCC says we need to cut all emissions in half by 2030 if we hope to keep global temperature rises within 1.5C. If we drastically slash fossil fuels we’d cut methane and carbon emissions at the same time, and have a much better chance of meeting that goal. And by not including meat reduction or pledges to change people’s diets in this commitment, governments are giving a free pass to big agriculture. All roads end up pointing to the need to eliminate fossil fuels from our energy system and phasing out industrial meat and dairy from our diets as soon as possible. This announcement dodges what’s needed.” If you wondered how optimistic climate scientists are about whether world leaders can tackle the climate crisis, the answer is, sadly, not very. An anonymous survey by Nature found many to be anxious or distressed, with six in ten of the respondents expecting the world to warm by at least 3C by the end of the century, compared with what conditions were like before the Industrial Revolution. The Irish premier, Micheál Martin, has said countries in the developed world have “an obligation” to support the nations most impacted by climate change. The taoiseach announced that Ireland would double its contribution to developing countries and would deliver at least €225m a year by 2025. He said: “If we act decisively now, we will offer humanity the most valuable prize of all, a liveable planet. We can achieve a cooler world. A biodiverse world. A world with healthier air for us to breathe, healthier soil for things to grow in. A world in which people can live more sustainable lives, handing a healing and enriched planet to future generations.” He added: “Those of us in the developed world, those who have, frankly, contributed most to the problems that confront us all have an obligation to support those who are most acutely challenged by their consequences. Ireland accepts that obligation.” The director and actor Fehinti Balogun has been at the conference this week talking about his show Can I live?, which uses hip-hop and spoken word to explore the ways people of colour have been excluded from environmental activism. Giving a speech last night, he said: I wanted to speak on behalf of the people this show represents: my mum, my cousins, my aunties, my uncles, my siblings, the people that look like me, that come from the places I come from. What would they want me to say? It is probably not about carbon credits or legislation. It’d be much simpler. I imagine it’d be a question: What are you gonna do? I mean ‘you’ because it’s hard to feel like ‘we’ when you often feel like them or other. It’s hard to say we when it is clear that we don’t have the same immediate power as you. The UK environment minister Zac Goldsmith has been speaking about the pledges by 114 world leaders to end deforestation and land degradation by the end of the decade, which has been coordinating behind the scenes ahead of Cop26. Although there has been great fanfare about the deal today, even backed by Xi Jinping and Jair Bolsonaro, it remains unclear about how commitments will be tracked and what ending deforestation actually means. “Clearly, monitoring is essential. There’s a lot of work going on at the moment to figure out exactly how different ecosystems in different parts of the world can be measured. But I am not convinced there is a single answer,” Lord Goldsmith said. “We’re talking about very significant sums of money. And of course, it’s public money. So the public will want to know that that money is being spent properly. That hasn’t always been the case in the past in relation to well intentioned investments to try and stop deforestation. “Countries making the Glasgow forest pledge will need to be able to demonstrate that money is being invested and it’s not being spent to subsidise failure.” Sauli Niinistö, the president of Finland, has reiterated the pledge for his country to become carbon-neutral by 2035. He said: “Ensuring adequate climate finance is crucial - Finland is doing its part by almost doubling its climate finance to developing countries.” He also told the Cop26 conference that as an Arctic country, Finland is “particularly concerned about the fast-warming Arctic region”. He said that as the most forested country in Europe, every year 150 million trees are planted in Finland, adding that “globally we need to strengthen efforts to halt forest loss... Now it is the time to deliver on our pledges and shoulder our human responsibilities,” he said. The US president, Joe Biden, has told the Cop26 summit that “our current technology alone won’t get us to where we need to be”. Speaking in Glasgow, the president insisted that setting ambitious climate targets was “only half the equation” and announced the launch of the First Movers Coalition. The coalition will bring together “more than two dozen of the world’s largest, most innovative companies” from eight sectors contributing emissions. He also said innovation should not be restricted to just the industrial sector but highlighted the “vital part to play” for the agricultural sector also. The US would lead by example and share innovations, he added. “There is virtually nothing we are unable to do, particularly if we do it together,” he said. The First Movers Coalition is part of the Breakthrough Agenda announced earlier this afternoon – a global plan to drive down the cost of clean technologies. My colleague Damian Carrington has a writeup of that story. Meanwhile, it seems Biden was given a very special welcome to Scotland this morning on his journey to Glasgow. Boris Johnson’s spokesman has sounded a more upbeat note about Cop26 today compared with the prime minister’s words at the weekend, warning about the risk of failure at Glasgow. The UK as hosts are understood to be pleased by progress on forests and the new 2030 commitment from India, but acknowledge that work on climate financing is proving very difficult. Asked whether Johnson’s weekend gloom had been expectation management, the spokesman said: “The PM felt very much at the G20 that limited progress was made but was by no means the significant boost that was needed. What we’ve seen so far is some early signs that we are starting to make some progress. Again, we are not complacent. This is not a done deal by any means. There is a huge amount of work left to do. “Currently we are at 2.7C and there is work to do to consider exactly what the commitments announced do to bring that down further, but we have absolutely not done enough to get us to 1.5 so the pressure will be kept up absolutely. It is just important to recognise when countries, when leaders do step up and make commitments that do require change, challenges and significant sums of investment.” Johnson has still not made a decision on whether to come back at the end of Cop26, and could make a statement from Downing Street on what is agreed rather than heading up to Glasgow again. Johnson is due to give a press conference at 5pm today before flying back to London. About 150 Extinction Rebellion activists have blocked Waterloo Street outside JP Morgan’s Glasgow offices. Protesters banged drums and chanted slogans highlighting the bank’s continued investment in fossil fuels as a sizeable police presence watched on. The protest, dubbed the “trillion-dollar bash”, then marched through busy streets and past Morgan Stanley’s offices before a wall of police blocked it from crossing the M8 motorway about 10 minutes from the SEC, where Cop26 is being held. A plan to coordinate the introduction of clean technologies in order to rapidly drive down their cost has been agreed at the Cop26 summit by world leaders, including the UK, US, India and China. A global transition to green energy and vehicles is vital in tackling the climate crisis and economies of scale mean that costs plummet as production ramps up, as already seen with solar panels and LED lightbulbs. Countries said they would align standards and coordinate investments to speed up production and bring forward the “tipping point” at which green technologies are more affordable and accessible than the fossil-fuelled alternatives. The first five breakthroughs being targeted are clean electricity, electric vehicles, green steel, hydrogen and sustainable farming, aiming to make these affordable and available to all nations by 2030 and potentially creating 20m new jobs. Boris Johnson said: By making clean technology the most affordable, accessible and attractive choice, the default go-to in what are currently the most polluting sectors, we can cut emissions right around the world Amazon’s founder, Jeff Bezos, has told delegates at Cop26 that his trip to space made him realise how “finite and fragile” the Earth is. Bezos said: “I was told that seeing the Earth from space changes the lens from which you view the world. But I was not prepared for just how much that would be true.” Prince William had criticised billionaires embroiled in a space tourism race, saying the world’s greatest minds needed to focus on fixing the Earth instead. Bezos also told delegates that Amazon aims to power all its operations by 100% renewable energy by 2025 and is working to convert its delivery fleet to electrical vehicles. The US president, Joe Biden, has just announced a pledge to cut global methane emissions by 30% by 2030. As my colleague Patrick Wintour reported this morning, the US is leading an alliance of 90 countries to set out new regulatory measures to limit global methane emissions by 30% from 2020 levels by the end of the decade. China, India and Russia have not joined the pact known as the Global Methane Pledge. Although methane breaks down relatively quickly in the atmosphere, it is a more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide. Reducing these emissions was touted as one of the most immediate opportunities to slow global heating ahead of the summit. This is what Durwood Zaelke, a lead reviewer for the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, said in August: Cutting methane is the biggest opportunity to slow warming between now and 2040. In response to today’s announcement to end deforestation by 2030, Yadvinder Malhi, a professor of ecosystem science at the University of Oxford, said it was a “Paris moment” for forests. “In Paris in 2016 the world’s leaders committed to recognise the concept of net zero, to draw a line in the sand around how much greenhouse gases can be allowed into the atmosphere,” he said. “Now in Glasgow they have committed to a similar aspiration for deforestation and land degradation, to stop and start reversing these by 2030.” More financial commitment would be needed, but it was striking to see such a significant declaration, especially one including big rainforest nations such as Brazil, Indonesia and DRC, Prof Malhi said. Police in Glasgow have apologised after it emerged that women walking home after dark on Monday were stopped from using well-lit streets near the Cop26 summit, and told to use badly-lit routes instead. Residents near the Scottish Exhibition Centre venue on the Clyde said police told them to walk long distances through Kelvingrove park and other side streets to get to their homes, because more direct routes were shut down for security reasons. One claimed she was followed by a male officer, despite asking him to leave her. Police Scotland, which recently unveiled an enhanced strategy to promote women’s safety, said those diversions were temporary and imposed at short notice due to “real-time changes to operational plans.” Assistant chief constable Gary Ritchie said the diversion would not be introduced, and the force would talk to Glasgow city council about improved lighting in Kelvingrove park. “While late changes and some level of disruption is inevitable when policing an event the size and scale of Cop26, we understand and apologise for the concern these changes caused and for the inconvenience to those diverted. “We do, in particular, recognise and acknowledge the commentary from some women who had to walk through the park on their own last night, we want to keep everyone safe and we know that the onus is on us to recognise when we could provide some more support and visibility to reassure people in our communities.” UPDATE: My colleague Nina Lakhani has said: This happened to me last night! I had to walk back through unlit Kelvingrove Park, took an extra 30 minutes and was damn dangerous with the wet leaves. I asked a cop how I was meant to get home, and he suggested I come back the following day! We’re expecting to hear more speeches from World leaders this afternoon, including major oil exporters Kuwait and Bahrain. Last week, Bahrain joined Saudi Arabia in pledging to reach net zero emissions by 2060. A leak of documents prior to the conference found the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (Opec) was lobbying the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to remove recommendations that the world needs to phase out fossil fuels. Tom Levitt here taking over the live blog throughout the rest of the afternoon. You can email me at tom.levitt.casual@theguardian.com, or send me a message on Twitter at @tom_levitt. • This post was amended on 2 November 2021 to remove an incorrect suggestion that Bahrain is a member of Opec. It’s been a busy morning, as world leaders continued to make their statements, a massive forestry deal was announced which aims to halt and reverse global deforestation over the next decade. The key events so far: African countries will spend $6bn on adapting to climate impacts, says our environment correspondent Fiona Harvey. African countries are preparing to spend at least $6bn a year from their tax revenues on adapting to the impacts of the climate crisis and are calling on the rich world to provide $2.5bn a year for the next five years to enable them to meet their goals. ‘You might as well bomb us’, Surangel Whipps Jr, the president of Palau, told world leaders, speaking of the pain of watching his country suffer “a slow and painful death”. Ecuador to massively expand protected reserve around Galápagos islands, Guillermo Lasso Mendoza, Ecuador’s president, announced. The country would add an additional 60,000 sq km of protected ocean to the 130,000 sq km that already exist around the islands. World leaders agree deal to end deforestation, as we reported this morning. Xi Jinping, Jair Bolsonaro and Joe Biden are among the leaders signing the Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on Forest and Land Use. And the US has rejoined the High Ambition Coalition, with the goal of achieving 1.5C goal at UN climate talks. It’s been a pleasure - my colleague Tom Levitt will now take over the blog for the rest of the afternoon. The Albanian prime minister, Edi Rama, has asked rich nations how long his country, a non-polluter, has to “continue to do the right thing alone”. He said: “How long do we have to pay the price, first for the contribution to climate change of the big guys, then for their failure to remedy its consequences?” He bemoans the fact that Albania is forced to buy energy in winter when prices sky-rocket and, because of dry weather, the nation’s hydropower plants cannot meet demand. He added his country is “100% renewable” but said it cannot afford to wait around for “markets to move in the right direction” and called for international financial support through “grants, not loans”. “It is a noble stance to refuse any mixing of fossil fuels with our 100% renewable energy production. Some of the guys here may be able to afford it but for us it is literally a daily struggle,” he said. At a packed event at the Scotland Pavilion, the Scottish first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, has made a statement calling for women and girls to be at the forefront of climate change discussions. The joint statement from the Scottish government and UN Women recognises that women and girls are commonly disproportionately affected by climate change. In a panel discussion with the prime minister of Bangladesh, Sheikh Hasina; the president of Tanzania, Samia Suluhu Hassan and the prime minister of Estonia, Kaja Kallas, Sturgeon noted that girls were more likely to be taken out of school and women less able to find alternative forms of work as a result of climate impacts. African countries are preparing to spend at least $6bn a year from their tax revenues on adapting to the impacts of the climate crisis and are calling on the rich world to provide $2.5bn a year for the next five years to enable them to meet their goals. Félix Tshisekedi, the president of the Democratic Republic of Congo and chair of the African Union, will today call on countries and philanthropist who have pledged help to Africa in the past to step forward. He has in mind countries such as the US, Canada and the EU bloc, and the tech mogul Bill Gates, who are expected to attend a meeting with the African Union later on Tuesday. The African adaptation Acceleration Plan was set out at the Paris summit in 2015 but remains largely unfunded as donors have been slow to come up with cash. Adaptation to the impacts of the climate crisis is a key issue at these talks. Africa is already facing serious impacts from climate breakdown in the form of long and deep droughts, flooding and storm surges in coastal areas, rising temperatures and heatwaves and damaging impacts on agriculture. But funding for adaptation has lagged well behind that for cutting greenhouse gas emissions. Norway will double its climate financing contribution, Jonas Gahr Støre, the prime minister of Norway, has told Cop26, reiterating his country’s commitment to reducing its emissions and helping others to reduce theirs. He said: “We come to Glasgow with three firm commitments. First, we will follow up on the invitation by the British hosts, we are ready to double our climate financing contribution to more than $1.6bn by 2026.” He said Norway would work with development partners to help with renewable energy transition and to “phase out coal”, as well as launching a new climate investment initiative to help fund renewable energy in developing countries. “Second ... to work with business, industry and social partners to help us all succeed towards a renewable, circular and sustainable future,” he said. Støre said the Scandinavian country would “develop an export technology that can be used beyond our borders”. Finally, the prime minister insisted that the financial sector “must play its part” and announced that the Norwegian public pension fund would take the lead in responsible investment, basing its work on an overall long-term goal of net zero emissions from the companies it invests in. He concluded: “We cannot allow the inaction of some to be an argument for failing to take action together by the rest of us. Now is the time to step up.” Happy news! The UK has actually won something. Okay, it’s not really an honour: every day at every Cop, Climate Action Network hands out the ‘Fossil of the day award’ and yesterday they gave it to the UK Cop hosts. “CAN asked for a Cop postponement as we feared people from the developing world wouldn’t be able to come and advocate for climate justice in the face of the global Covid-19 pandemic,” they said in a statement. “But the UK presidency insisted that Cop26 was going ahead and was prepared to welcome the global community to ‘the most inclusive Cop ever’. This spirit of inclusivity has showcased what the Brits do best – the art of queuing – for hours in some cases. “People who have invested time and resources to travel to Glasgow have waited patiently only to find there is ‘no room at the inn’ for civil society and told to ‘join events online’ – to then find they were offline.” Tuntiak Katan, a leader of Ecuador’s Indigenous Shuar people who serves as general coordinator of the Global Alliance of Territorial Communities, has said: “We’re here to tell world leaders across the planet that indigenous people are here to make a pact for life – there is no more time, don’t make political promises or financial announcements about the climate if you are not going to keep them. “The decisions we make today will make the difference between whether we’re going to live, or we’re all going to perish.” He cautiously welcomed the $1.7bn of funding led by the governments of the UK, US, Germany, Norway and the Netherlands, but emphasised that what happens next is crucial. “The UK is now at a crossroads: they can either use our presence as a photo op, or they can choose to become a global champion for indigenous peoples and local communities,” he told the Guardian. Other campaigners said the pledge was a “first step” in making indigenous rights central to the climate crisis. No show by the Brazil delegation today at a press conference, where they were scheduled to talk on the subject of “strong environmental defence”. Make of that what you will. It follows a somewhat frosty reception for Jair Bolsonaro at last weekend’s G20 summit and a decidedly lukewarm reaction to Brazil’s latest climate plan. “I do not think anyone in Nigeria needs persuading of the need for urgent action,” Muhammadu Buhari, the president of Nigeria, has told world leaders. “For Nigeria, climate change is not about the perils of tomorrow but about what is happening today. “In our lifetime nature has gone from a vast expanse of biodiversity to a shadow of itself.” He points out, however, that they want to find a way to make a clean transition. “Nigeria is not looking to make the same mistakes that have been repeated for decades by others – we are looking for innovation in technology and finance to make a cleaner transition.” He also references his government’s commitment to electrifying 5 million households using decentralised solar energy solutions. Pension funds in the Nordic countries and UK have announced they will invest $130bn in clean energy and climate projects by 2030. As part of this commitment, the funds will also report every year on the progress of their climate investments. “Green transition requires massive investments,” said Mette Frederiksen, the prime minister of Denmark. “Governments have to do their part but we also need private investors on board.” Peter Damgaard Jensen, a co-chair of the Climate Investment Coalition, said: “These critical steps ensure pensions take advantage of the enormous opportunities of the green transition, help spur immediate solutions to lower carbon emissions, while protecting our savings against the ravages of climate change.” Joe Biden has described Build Back Better World, a G7-launched project to help create sustainable infrastructure in lower-income countries, as a means to promote not just greener economies, but also democracy. Speaking at a Cop26 event alongside Boris Johnson and Ursula von der Leyen, the European Commission president, the US president set out a series of priorities for the scheme, known as B3W for short, including climate resilience and local partnerships. He also added: “We have to show – and I think we will show – that democracy is still the best way for delivering results.” This latter focus is notable given B3W has been seen in part as a riposte to China’s longer-running Belt and Road Initiative, a massive infrastructure plan for developing countries seen as a way for Beijing to increase its influence on such nations. In his input, Johnson gave a nod to the UK’s plans to create new green employment, calling B3W “a global mission for jobs and growth”. In another look to his domestic audience, Johnson called it “global levelling up”. Systemic shifts are needed in order to provide a positive future for humans and nature, Prince Charles has just told Cop26. “We simply must talk about the solutions and actions we can start making, and taking, today,” he said. He said the first action is to “reengineer the world economic system” and reward countries for protecting forests. He endorsed the 30x30 biodiversity target as “truly critical” to reach that objective, and said countries should receive natural capital investments for protecting ecosystems. He highlighted the importance of honouring the rights of indigenous people and communities, saying that the rest of us have lost that “vital sixth sense” which stops us damaging nature in the first place. He finished by talking about the importance of changing how we produce and consume goods, decoupling production and consumption and building a more resilient circular economy. “Frankly, we’ve all had enough talking, so we need to put our commitments into practice,” he said. He says he has done speeches like this for the past 40 years all over the world, but to no avail. He hopes this one will be different. The president of the Pacific island nation of Palau, Surangel Whipps Jr, told the Cop26 summit that parallels can be drawn between the climate crisis and the tradition Palau story of a boy who grew into a giant who “wouldn’t stop growing”. “Due to his unruly appetite, the whole island community was forced to feed him ... depleting all the natural resources.” The islanders ultimately set the boy on fire after he turned on them and tried to eat them. Whipps Jr said pointed out that the story was “eerily reminiscent” of today’s climate crisis. “Large emitters with insatiable appetites are continuing to abuse our environment, threatening our very survival. Cop26 must light the fire.” He added that “devastated” island nations such as Palau, demand that commitments of $100bn annually be increased to meet the $4tn the World Bank says is needed to tackle climate change. “We see the scorching sun is giving us intolerable heat, the warming sea is invading us and the winds are blowing us every which way, our resources are disappearing before our eyes and our future is being robbed from us,” he added. “Frankly speaking, there is no dignity to a slow and painful death - you might as well bomb our islands instead of making us suffer only to witness our slow and painful demise.” “Leaders of the G20, we are drowning and our only hope is the life-ring you are holding. You must act now, we must act together.” The Rainbow warrior is in Glasgow! Greenpeace sent their most famous ship up from Liverpool over the last couple of days: it sailed up the Clyde and docked yesterday. Onboard, alongside the Greenpeace team, are Bernard Ewekia, Jakapita Kandanga, Edwin Namakanga, Maria Reyes and Farzana Faruk Jhumu, who have travelled with the aim of speaking up for the sidelined citizens of the global south. In a comment piece on the Guardian today they say: In our home countries of Namibia, Bangladesh, Uganda, Mexico and Tuvalu in the South Pacific, we face many different challenges. But they are all exacerbated by the same injustices such as gender violence, forced migration and racial injustices, as well as the Covid-19 pandemic and the climate crisis. These are all symptoms of the same rotten system. We have friends who have dropped out of school because droughts have forced their families into poverty and famine. Others are forced to literally sell their children in order to meet their basic needs. Many people have lost land, homes and crops to floods and rising sea levels. More are being forced to flee their homes and communities. And even just accessing safe drinking water is a daily struggle for many. Thousands of people are dying right now because of the climate crisis: the world leaders at this summit have blood on their hands. Mette Frederiksen, the prime minister of Denmark, has addressed the main conference on behalf of Greenland, informing the conference that “dramatic climate change is already visible there ... Greenland has halted all new oil and gas exploration”. They believe that soon, 90% of the country’s electricity will be sustainably sourced. The Amazon founder, Jeff Bezos, has announced that $2bn from the Bezos Earth fund has been allocated to stopping the destruction of nature. This is part of the $10bn initiative he announced last year for conservation, and follows a $1bn donation he pledged to focus on the Congo Basin, the tropical Andes and the Pacific Ocean. “When people hanker for the good old days and glamourise the past, they are wrong. By almost all metrics, life is better ... There is a notable exception: the natural world is not better today than it was 500 years ago when we enjoyed unspoiled forest, clean rivers and the pristine air of the pre-industrial world,” he said. Just in case you were wondering, he mentioned his trip to space ... again. As the queue to get into the conference centre shows no sign of reducing or indeed moving, activists on the south side of the river are calling on world leaders to stop playing games with the climate. Dressed up as participants from the popular Netflix show Squid Game, these activists have assembled from across the globe under the banner Glasgow Actions to perform a series of eye-catching stunts during the early days of the summit. The Gabonese president, Ali Bongo, has just given a rousing speech at the forestry event in the Pen Y Fan room. The oil-rich nation is among the most forested countries in the world, with low rates of deforestation, and is home to the majority of the critically endangered African forest elephant. The world’s second-largest rainforest received £1.1bn in funding, including £200m from the UK, as part of the announcement on forests. “The Congo basin is the heart and lungs of the African continent. We cannot win the battle [on the climate] without the Congo rainforest. Our forests send rain to the Sahell and the Ethiopian highlands. They are critical to the African continent. Yet, the international community has consistently undervalued this critical ecosystem,” President Bongo says. “It is my hope that Glasgow will mark a turning point.” Ecuador has announced it will expand the protected marine reserve surrounding the Galápagos Islands, “the jewel of our biodiversity and a genuine living laboratory.” In a move long sought by local campaigners, Guillermo Lasso Mendoza, Ecuador’s president, said the country would add an additional 60,000 sq km of protected ocean to the 130,000 sq km that already exist around the islands. He noted that the Galápagos, famed for its crucial role in helping Charles Darwin develop the theory of natural selection, “is confronting serious threats due to global warming, plastic waste and other imbalances which are undermining our biodiversity, our food security and our economic and social development”. He added that the agreement was made via a “consensus between all of the involved sectors - fishing, tourism, conservation, and others”. The Guardian has reported extensively on how “distant fleet” fishing vessels, predominantly from China, have been decimating crucial fish stocks, including squid, on the very edge of the current Galápagos marine reserve. The new expansion “will not only strengthen the protection of the area’s biodiversity, but it will also bolster our combat against climate change”, Lasso said. The move should help fulfill Ecuador’s part of the UK-led 30 by 30 agreement, which commits to protecting at least 30% of the world’s oceans by 2030. In one note that may worry campaigners, Lasso also noted that the agreement would help achieve “growth in productivity for artisanal and industrial fishing”. The presidents of four Latin American countries, including Ecuador, are today expected to announce the merging of their marine protected areas into a “mega-MPA”. Klaus Werner Iohannis, the president of Romania, is speaking now. “There is no silver bullet against climate change. But a set of interconnected measures can help us deliver. “Romania has 40% of our electricity coming from renewable sources. We will expand this and fight climate change with nature-based solutions.” Meanwhile, at the forestry event, the US president has said that conserving the world’s forests and other critical systems is indispensable to meeting climate targets. He says forests provide clean water, host biodiversity and are home to indigenous communities. “Forests have the potential to reduce carbon globally by more than one third globally,” Biden tells the event, mentioning his decision to commit the US to protect 30% of land and sea by the end of the decade, including Tongass national forest in Alaska, the world’s largest temperate rainforest. Biden said he is launching a new plan to conserve forests in the US and around the world. He says he will make sure markets recognise the economic value of carbon sinks and create sustainable supply chains. “Let’s do this. It will have a generational impact,” he concludes. Insulate Britain protesters have blocked a major carriageway near Manchester Airport, in one of the climate group’s first protests outside of London. Footage from LBC on Twitter shows a small group of protestors in orange hi-vis jackets blocking the carriageway near the intersection of junction 6 of the M56 and the A538, as well as several police vans. The campaign group, which calls on the government to fund a national home insulation programme, said that it was the seventeenth time it had caused disruption on major roads, as it had also blocked roads in Birmingham and London. Greater Manchester Police (GMP) have asked travellers to avoid the area if possible and said they are “working at the scene to minimise disruption”. The airport said the protest had no impact on operations but warned those planning to travel to the airport that they should take the possible delays into account, in a statement reported by the Liverpool Echo. On behalf of Insulate Britain, Gabby, 27, a graphic designer from Norwich said: “We are taking our message to people outside of London because we want everyone to know that our government is killing our children. Britain should be leading the world with radical plans to decarbonise our society, instead our government is actively setting policies that will drive emissions higher. The public can close their eyes but this isn’t going away, no one is coming to save you. We are being betrayed. This government is colluding in genocide.” The mayor of Greater Manchester, Andy Burnham, condemned the group’s actions in a tweet: Jeff Bezos has just arrived at the Cop26 forestry session, disappearing backstage with a small entourage including his partner, Lauren Sanchez. It’s not clear who he might be wanting to talk to at this session, but as well as Boris Johnson, Joe Biden is speaking now. The White House continues to have a mixed summit. After the confusion between Edinburgh and Glasgow yesterday, it has emerged today that plans to fly US president Joe Biden to Glasgow by helicopter have hit a snag because there are fears that the military vehicle would sink into the ground. Guillermo Lasso Mendoza, the president of Ecuador, is announcing a historic enlargement of the protected reserves around the historic Galapagos islands. Boris Johnson, Iván Duque and the Indonesian president, Joko Widodo, have taken the stage. The UK begins by paying tribute to Sir David Attenborough, “a giant redwood of environmental campaigners”. “Climate change and biodiversity are two sides of the same coin,” Johnson says. “We can’t tackle climate change without tackling biodiversity loss ... We have to stop the devastating loss of our forests.” Johnson says if we want to keep 1.5C in sight under the Paris agreement, we must protect and restore the world’s forests. He says 110 leaders have now signed the declaration on halting and reversing forest loss and land degradation by the end of the decade. China, Russia and Brazil have all signed, he emphasises. He says a partnership between governments, the private sector, indigenous communities and philanthropists is key to addressing the drivers of deforestation. He says consumers will be able to enjoy “guilt-free chocolate” that is not linked to deforestation. He says he wants to mobilise global finance to protect nature. “Let’s work together to protect the forests but ensure the forests return,” he concludes. Boris Johnson has kicked off a Cop26 session on deforestation with a typically lyrical paean to the need to preserve woodlands. Speaking on a panel alongside the Indonesian president, Joko Widodo, and the Colombian president, Iván Duque, Johnson peppered his speech with descriptions of “our three million-pillared cathedrals” and - in a section likely to have been challenging for the translators - some words on the need for “carbon guilt-free chocolate”. There was fury and frustration when it emerged that Karine Elharrar, Israel’s energy and water resources minister, who has muscular dystrophy, had been forced to wait for two hours outside after organisers refused to let her enter the compound in the vehicle in which she had arrived, she said. Her office said she was eventually offered a shuttle transport to the summit area, but the shuttle was not wheelchair-accessible, forcing her to return to her hotel in Edinburgh. Elharrar wrote on Twitter: “I came to Cop26 to meet with my counterparts around the world and promote a common struggle in the climate crisis. It is sad that the UN, which promotes accessibility for people with disabilities, in 2021, does not provide accessibility to its events.” It does appear that there is provision for wheelchair-users at the centre. The UK environment secretary, George Eustice, said: “We deeply regret that incident.” He added there appeared to have been a miscommunication and organisers had not been aware of Elharrar’s requirements in advance and so had not made the right provisions at the particular entrance she was coming to. “I know that at most of the other entrances, wheelchair access is there. It was because she came to an entrance where they didn’t have that provision,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, adding that action should have been taken to resolve the issue. Our environment correspondent, Fiona Harvey, has just revealed that the US is to rejoin the High Ambition Coalition. This is really excellent news: the HAC is a group that was formed in the run-up to Paris by the chief negotiator for the Marshall Islands, Tony de Brum. It set the goal of holding temperatures to 1.5C. As Fiona writes: The goal of holding temperature rises to 1.5C rather than 2C is much harder to achieve, as it requires emissions cuts of at least 45% by 2030, compared with 2010 levels. But science shows it is much safer – beyond 1.5C, many of the impacts of climate breakdown, such as melting ice sheets, become irreversible, and many small islands would face inundation from rising sea levels and storm surges. So far the queues have been one of the most memorable things about Cop26. There were brief hopes that that problem had been dealt with this morning after the organisers put out cordons. Unfortunately a hour or so later the situation had deteriorated and the queues were back. Maybe it’s just the way we prefer to do things here. Good morning! Welcome to day two of Cop26, where today the US president Joe Biden will unveil a plan to control methane, regarded by the administration as the single most potent way to combat the climate crisis in the short term. Our colleague Patrick Wintour has written about it below. We’ll be covering all the main events of the day, including the second day of leaders’ speeches, and some key announcements around green technology. You can reach me on bibi.vanderzee@theguardian.com, or on twitter @bibivanderzee with your tips and suggestions.Another four energy suppliers have gone bust in a single day as historic gas market highs continue to rip through the UK’s energy market amid fresh fears that Russia may curb gas supplies to Europe. The energy regulator, Ofgem, said the collapse of four small energy suppliers on Tuesday would leave about 24,000 households in need of a new supplier, and bring the total number of bust energy companies to 17 since the start of September, affecting more than 2 million households. The flurry of failures follows rocketing global energy market prices due to a sudden surge in demand for gas as economies began to shrug off restrictions related to the Covid-19 pandemic. Gas markets have reached record highs in recent weeks, leading to one of the sharpest increases in home energy bills and fears of a cost-of-living crisis this winter. Out of the four UK casualties Zebra Power had the largest customer base, and supplied 14,800 households with energy. Omni Energy supplied about 6,000 domestic pre-payment customers, while AmpowerUK had about 600 UK customers and supplied a further 2,000 overseas households. MA Energy had about 300 overseas customers. Scores more energy suppliers are expected to collapse in the months ahead as gas markets remain at near-record highs, and suppliers are forced to shoulder the higher costs without raising their tariffs above the regulator’s energy price cap. Consumer charity Citizens Advice said struggling households would ultimately pay the price “with uncertainty, inconvenience and ultimately higher bills” as suppliers continue “to fall like dominoes”. Gillian Cooper, the head of energy at Citizens Advice, said: “Last week, Ofgem set out how it intends to ‘raise the bar’ for supplier standards and improve their resilience in the short term. This is a positive step, but it’s clear that existing rules and their enforcement, has not been enough.” Cooper added: “Longer-term, Ofgem will need to do more to make sure companies are financially sound and provide good customer service. This should include protecting people from the loyalty penalty, which prior to the cap allowed companies to profit from those who didn’t or couldn’t switch.” The energy regulator set out plans for “bold action” last week to fasttrack changes to its price cap, which protects around 15 million households from unfair energy bills, following growing calls from suppliers to make the cap more flexible so that market increases can be passed on to households sooner. The price cap overhaul has emerged amid deepening concerns that gas prices, which are more than three times higher than this time last year, may resume their upward climb as temperatures plunge across Europe and Russia squeezes gas exports to Europe. Gas flows from Russia’s state-owned gas giant Gazprom, which supplies about a third of Europe’s gas, dropped significantly over the weekend and on Tuesday the company declined to offer extra gas supplies to Europe from January, when demand is often at its highest for the winter. The slowdown in gas exports has reignited fears over the winter’s energy suppliers despite a direct order from the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, for Gazprom to focus on filling its European gas storage facilities from 8 November, when Russian domestic storage should be filled. Russia’s decision not to open its gas taps to allow extra supplies into Europe from January also defies calls from the global energy watchdog, the International Energy Agency, which said last month that Russia should help to ease market prices by boosting gas exports to Europe this winter. Moscow has denied it is withholding gas supplies from Europe via its pipelines through Ukraine and Poland to exert pressure on German regulators to approve gas shipments through the new Nord Stream 2 pipeline across the Baltic Sea to Germany. But its decision to send only contracted volumes despite the strong demand for extra gas supplies is likely to raise gas market prices across Europe, helping Russia to charge more for its hydrocarbon exports.The middle of the Cop26 climate conference was not an ideal moment to demonstrate that producing, refining and trading hydrocarbons remains a spectacularly lucrative business when the stars align. “We’re a cash machine at these types of prices,” declared the BP chief executive, Bernard Looney, cheerfully, referring to oil at $85 a barrel and gas still at multi-year highs. His description is accurate. The oddity of accounting rules around hedging policies meant BP showed a formal loss in the third quarter of this year, but the surer guide to the current financial bonanza was the underlying profit of $3.3bn (£2.2bn). Remember that BP barely broke even in the equivalent period last year. The vaccine-led recovery in the global economy has transformed the outlook. So time for BP to revisit its year-old targets for boosting investment in renewables? Use the current excess of cash to up the pace? Well, no, that is not on the agenda. Looney is sticking to what he promised: a doubling of investment in low-carbon projects this year to $2bn, mainly offshore wind and solar, with an increase to $5bn a year by 2030. The extra cash will instead go to shareholders. The share buyback pledges, it has to be said, are large. The cash machine has been programmed to buy a further $1.25bn of shares before next February. Then the buybacks will continue at rate of at least $1bn a quarter as long as oil prices stay above $60 a barrel. That’s on top of a dividend worth $4bn a year. In round terms, BP’s distributions to shareholders are back where they stood before the pandemic: the dividend has been roughly halved, but buybacks would make up the difference. Naturally, BP would argue – with some justification – that its investors would scream blue murder if they were denied their buyback spoils when oil and gas prices are high. The promise of extra distributions in good times was part of the same “financial framework” that plots BP’s intended path to net zero by 2050 – a framework that is meant to withstand any plunge in oil and gas prices. After a single lap of the track, there was no chance of Looney rejigging the arithmetic to accelerate renewables further. But it is the next question if oil is still at $85 this time next year. In the “transformation” business, which is what BP says it is doing, pace matters. It is not compulsory to throw every spare dollar at share buybacks. THG: caught between a BlackRock and a hard place BlackRock has been an investor in THG, or The Hut Group as it was, for about a decade, so well before the ecommerce retailer arrived on the stock market a year ago. The world’s largest fund manager even bought more stock in the IPO, or flotation, emerging as the second-largest holder after founder Matthew Moulding. The decision to flog almost half the stake – or 58m shares – therefore looks significant. There was some muttering about portfolio rebalancing, but none of it convincing. There’s only one way to read events when you’re a buyer at IPO at 500p and large seller at 195p a year later: you’ve changed your view of the long-term risks and rewards. Naturally, THG’s share price moved almost directly to the BlackRock’s disposal price, implying a fall on the day of 9%. January’s zany valuation of 800p feels a world away. Moulding, trying to fight the crisis by belatedly preaching a gospel of governance reform, needs to find a credible non-executive chairman sharpish. BlackRock has not made the task easier. Unfavourable results fuel poor results at Flutter Bookies always publicise the brief periods when the punters win. It’s good for business. So the £60m hit from “unfavourable sporting results” got star billing within Flutter’s update. Champions League football, international football, American football and Tyson Fury got the blame (or credit). It was enough for a downwards tweak to Flutter’s annual profits forecast, though £1.25bn-ish still sounds OK. All that has happened is a touch of mean reversion. The Paddy Power and Betfair group’s win margin had been a fraction better than normal earlier in the year. The share price, after its rip-roaring run on the back of prospects in the liberalising US market, fell 8%. But at least part of the drop can be explained by the lack of the fresh news on the idea of listing the US FanDuel business, the local number one in a sports betting market that could be enormous. Logic says it will happen because US market valuations for betting businesses are so much higher. The odd footie result is almost irrelevant by comparison. Having whetted appetites, Flutter can’t maintain the suspense indefinitely.The trial of Kyle Rittenhouse trial began on Tuesday in Kenosha, Wisconsin, where the 18-year-old is charged with killing two people and wounding one during unrest in the city last August. Prosecutors said that although “hundreds” of people were out on the street during protests over the shooting of a Black man by a white police officer, Rittenhouse was “the only person who killed anyone”. Rittenhouse is charged with two counts of homicide, one of attempted homicide and two of recklessly endangering safety for firing his weapon near others. He is also charged with possession of a dangerous weapon by a minor, as he was 17 at the time. He has pleaded not guilty. In August last year, Rittenhouse traveled from his home in Antioch, Illinois, armed with an AR-15-style rifle and in response to a Kenosha-based militia calling for protection for businesses against protesters supporting the Black Lives Matter movement. Rittenhouse is white, as were the two men who died and as is the one who was wounded. Nonetheless, the case has drawn attention from both sides of the political divide over policing and racial injustice. On Monday, 12 jurors and eight alternates were selected in an all-day session. The highly contentious trial, which is expected to last approximately two weeks, will determine whether Rittenhouse acted in self-defense or in an intentional act of vigilantism. The judge, Bruce Shroeder, said he would decide at the end of the trial which jurors were alternates and which would deliberate. “There is no magical way for you to evaluate the testimony,” he said on Tuesday. “Instead, you should use your common sense and your experiences in life.” Rittenhouse looked on, dressed in suit and tie and yawning repeatedly. Shroeder said the state must prove by evidence three elements of Rittenhouse’s homicide charges: that the defendant caused the death of another, that the defendant caused the death by criminally reckless conduct, and that the defendant’s conduct showed utter disregard for human life. “You cannot look into a person’s mind to determine intent, which must be found, if it is to be found at all,” Schroeder said, adding: “Intent should not be confused with motive.” In his opening statement, Kenosha county assistant district attorney Thomas Binger portrayed Rittenhouse as an antagonist who chose to exacerbate tensions. “Like moths to a flame, tourists from outside our community were drawn to the chaos here in Kenosha,” said Binger. “People from outside Kenosha came in and contributed to that chaos. “The evidence will show that hundreds of people were out on the street experiencing chaos and violence, and the only person who killed anyone was the defendant, Kyle Rittenhouse.” Binger added: “When we consider the reasonableness of the defendant’s actions, I ask you to keep that in mind. We’re not asking you to solve a mystery in this case.” Rittenhouse’s lead lawyer, Mark Richards, argued that Rittenhouse had close ties to Kenosha as his father lived in the city and he had worked as a lifeguard at a local YMCA. “Mr Binger makes a big thing out of Kyle Rittenhouse as the only person who shot somebody that evening,” Richards said. “True. Mr Rittenhouse was the only person who was chased by Joseph Rosenbaum that evening.” Rosenbaum was one of the men fatally shot by Rittenhouse, who he chased across a parking lot and at whom he threw a plastic bag. “The government can refer to [Rittenhouse] all they wish as an active shooter,” Richards said. “The only person he had shot was Joseph Rosenbuam, who had made threats to kill. “… Kyle Rittenhouse protected himself, protected his firearm so it couldn’t be taken and used against him or other people from Mr Rosenbaum, who made threats to kill.” Richards also said “other individuals who didn’t see that shooting attacked [Rittenhouse] in the street like an animal”. The trial continues.The foreign secretary, Liz Truss, has agreed to meet the family of the British-Iranian dual national Anoosheh Ashoori who is being held in Evin prison in Tehran. They are calling on the Foreign Office to give him the same diplomatic protection as that granted to Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe. The move comes as Nazanin’s husband, Richard Ratcliffe, enters the 11th day of a hunger strike outside the Foreign Office. He is pressing the UK government to pay the £400m debt it owes to Iran from a court case dating back to the 1970s. Iran has made it clear that although the debt is a standalone issue, its payment would help with the release of British-Iranian detainees. In an act of solidarity between the two campaigns, Ashoori’s son, Aryan, was due to join Ratcliffe outside the department. The two campaigns support each other, although there is some discomfort among Ashoori’s supporters that the media and some politicians have persistently given a higher profile to the Ratcliffe case. The Foreign Office had initially told Ashoori’s family that the Middle East minister, James Cleverly, could meet them and his lawyers who are working pro-bono. They insisted that as Ratcliffe met Truss last week they should also be entitled to see the foreign secretary. The meeting between Ratcliffe and Truss was largely unproductive, but it was acknowledged that the foreign secretary had shown her personal concern. In theory diplomatic protection elevates a case to state dispute, making it no longer a consular case. It is arguable how useful diplomatic protection, granted by a previous foreign secretary Jeremy Hunt, has proved for Zaghari-Ratcliffe. Ashooori was given a 10-year jail sentence for allegedly spying, and has had two brief furloughs before returning to jail. He has been on hunger strike in the past, and so far has served four years. Ashoori’s family are likely to ask Truss for her views on remarks by Hossein Amir-Abdollahian, the Iranian foreign minister, who claimed he confronted Truss as to why the UK had at the last minute backed out of a deal that would have seen a humanitarian exchange of prisoners including Ashoori and Zaghari-Ratcliffe. He alleged the US, 24 hours before the exchange, “suddenly announced to the British to wait and to make this exchange conditional on the nuclear talks … at the 90th minute, the Americans connect a completely humanitarian issue to the Vienna talks and the nuclear issue, and prevent this exchange. This is not at all acceptable and issues must be separated.” There is no independent verification of his account, but UK sources have admitted they were very close in June to a prisoner swap.The Las Vegas Raiders released wide receiver Henry Ruggs III just hours before he faced an initial court appearance on multiple felony charges after a car crash in the early hours of Tuesday morning that left a woman dead and Ruggs and his female passenger injured. Ruggs, 22, will be charged with DUI leading to death after the Chevrolet Corvette he was driving slammed at high speed into the rear of a Toyota Rav4 on a busy thoroughfare in a residential area several miles west of the Las Vegas Strip at about 3.40am on Tuesday. The Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department said: “[R]esponding officers located the Toyota on fire. Fire department personnel responded and located a deceased victim inside the Toyota. The preliminary investigation indicates the front of the Chevrolet collided with the rear of the Toyota.” Ruggs was hurt in the crash but police said his injuries did not appear to be life-threatening. “The driver of the Chevrolet, identified as 22-year-old Henry Rugs (sic) III, remained on scene and showed signs of impairment. He was transported to UMC hospital to be treated for non-life-threatening injuries. Ruggs will be charged with DUI resulting in death. This is an on-going investigation,” the department added in its statement. If convicted, Ruggs would face between two and 20 years in prison. The Raiders said in a statement that they were aware Ruggs had been involved in a crash. “We are devastated by the loss of life and our thoughts and prayers go out to the victim’s family. We are in the process of gathering information and will have no further comment at this time,” read the statement. NFL spokesman Brian McCarthy issued a statement saying: “Our hearts go out to the family and friends of the victim of this horrific tragedy. We will continue to gather facts and monitor the matter under our policies, but our thoughts at this time are with those impacted by this devastating incident.” Ruggs lost a close friend, Rod Scott, in a car crash in 2016. He often pays tribute to Scott by raising his fingers to the sky during games. The Raiders had a bye week on their schedule and did not play last weekend. Their next game is against the New York Giants on Sunday. Ruggs was a college star at Alabama, where he was known for his blazing speed. The Raiders selected him in the first round of the 2020 NFL draft and he signed a fully guaranteed four-year contract worth $16.67m. The Raiders have had a difficult year off the field. In January running back Josh Jacobs was arrested for DUI after a crash in the early hours following their final game of last season. Last month, their head coach Jon Gruden resigned after emails emerged in which he used racist, homophobic and misogynistic language.The government’s independent vaccine advisers recommended against Covid shots for healthy teenagers despite considering evidence that the jabs would reduce infections, hospitalisations and some deaths in the age group. Modelling reviewed by the Joint Committee on Vaccination and Immunisation (JCVI) in June showed that fully vaccinating 80% of 12- to 17-year-olds would lead to “large reductions” in infections and a “substantial reduction” in hospitalisations in the age group. The modelling from the University of Warwick was considered alongside calculations from Public Health England that found vaccinating healthy young people in an overlapping age group – those aged 15 to 19 – could reduce intensive care admissions and prevent two deaths per million in the teenagers receiving the shots. Details of the models, described in minutes from JCVI meetings held over the summer, have led some researchers to question why the committee did not approve mass vaccinations for healthy young teenagers, but instead passed the decision to the UK’s chief medical officers. “They had two models, one from Warwick and one from PHE, both showing significant benefits of vaccination,” said Prof Christina Pagel, the director of the clinical operational research unit at University College London (UCL) and a member of the Independent Sage group. But they appeared to have “dismissed it”, she said. The JCVI concluded that the benefits of vaccination were too marginal to justify in healthy 12- to 15-year-olds who rarely get severely ill with Covid. Explaining the decision, the committee cited uncertainties about a rare and typically mild side-effect called myocarditis, and concerns about the impact that a Covid vaccination programme could have on other school immunisations. The UK Health Security Agency said the modelling was “integral” to the committee’s decision. But Pagel believes the JCVI was more concerned than it should have been about the risks from the vaccine and underplayed the potential harm caused by the virus. “The JCVI consistently minimise the chance of bad outcomes of Covid in children as being very rare, but emphasise the rarer chance of developing myocarditis following vaccination,” she said. The UK’s chief medical officers later approved single shots of Covid vaccine for healthy 12- to 15-year-olds after considering the impact on children’s education. The delay in the decision meant that unlike those in some countries, secondary school children in the UK were largely unprotected when they returned to classes in the autumn term. At several points, the JCVI minutes state that natural infection might be better than vaccination for children. The criticisms of the JCVI came as members of Independent Sage and other researchers published work in the Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine suggesting that fully vaccinating healthy adolescents would reduce hospital admissions, deaths and cases of long Covid at the high case levels now seen in the UK. Ravi Gupta, a professor of clinical microbiology at the University of Cambridge and a co-opted member of the government’s New and Emerging Respiratory Virus Threats Advisory Group (Nervtag) said he shared some of the concerns raised about the JCVI. “Besides apparently ignoring the modelling, I’m worried about the lack of appreciation of the negative impacts of mass infection in children, such as long Covid and the risks of new variants emerging because of the low vaccine coverage in 12- to 15-year-olds. “Another issue from my point of view is the lack of internationally known and active researchers on the committee who know the virus. With better representation things would have been very different. The government needs to answer why this group was not radically modified for a Covid remit given the range of expertise available.” Danny Altmann, a professor of immunology at Imperial College London, said: “Among the numerous contributory factors to the currently high caseload and deaths in the UK relative to mainland Europe, a significant one is certainly the impact of having delayed vaccines in secondary schools such that children returned unprotected for the autumn term.” In October, the British Congenital Cardiac Association said that with case rates very high among under-18s in England and Wales, the “balance of benefits versus risks clearly weighs in favour of the Covid-19 vaccine.”Did the governor of the Bank of England, Andrew Bailey, err in exaggerating the prospects of an interest rate rise? It seems so. Mr Bailey’s intervention, along with his chief economist’s, suggested the base rate might rise this week. City traders are now betting that it will do so – with the Bank’s rate-setting monetary policy committee (MPC) due to pronounce on Thursday. The governor is now damned if rates rise – giving the impression that the central bank can be talked into a hike. And he is damned if they do not – because he signalled rises that did not arrive. There is no pressing reason for money to be made dearer. For many, employment is far more precarious than the official figures suggest. Business surveys report more pessimism than optimism about the UK’s prospects. The chancellor did not help by precipitately withdrawing the fiscal stimulus. The budget ended the furlough scheme, reduced benefits and raised taxes, leaving – as the Institute for Fiscal Studies revealed – wages stagnant for years to come. This, combined with higher interest rates and a bumpy path out of Covid, risks a recession, not a recovery. The economists David Blanchflower and Alex Bryson point out that, in the last MPC meeting in September, there was a 9-0 vote to keep rates at their current level of 0.1% as the “elevated global cost pressures will prove transitory”. Nothing has changed, say the academics, about that prudent judgment. One reason to raise rates would be to bring inflation to heel, but the economists say this is unnecessary. They compare Covid to a hurricane hitting an island. Once the storm recedes, everyone wants plumbers, roofers and electricians “whose wages rise dramatically for a while and inflation goes up temporarily. But eventually, after a few months, things get back to normal”. A rate hike would promote a needless deflationary shift of disposable income from poorer households that spend to richer ones that do not. In the past decade, the Bank has not used rates to cool asset (ie house) prices. There is little chance that it would now. There are reasons for a rate hike. One is to pay banks more to hold risk-free financial assets. A second is to put upward pressure on the currency, which would benefit City interests. A third is for the Bank to regain control of interest rates by tightening and then offering gilts to private investors rather than purchasing them itself. Raise rates for these reasons and the Bank might look captured by the financial interests that it is meant to oversee. Escaping the pandemic is proving more difficult than the easy getaway that was once imagined. Letting the Bank’s monetary policy – rather than Treasury spending – do the heavy lifting in these circumstances is far-fetched. The European Central Bank and the US Federal Reserve have blundered since 2010 by tightening too quickly out of a slowdown. Leaving rates unchanged seems the least bad option. Better to wait and see. The four external MPC members are unlikely to back a rate rise. The four undecided bank staff on the committee may do so to please the boss. Mr Bailey risks his credibility if this turns out to be a mistake that has to be reversed.Among the 120 or so world leaders gathered in Glasgow for the Cop26 climate crisis talks, there has been one very conspicuous absence: Xi Jinping, president of by far the world’s largest greenhouse gas emitter, responsible for more than a quarter of all emissions. Mr Xi’s decision to stay away is unsurprising; previously a frequent traveller, he has not left his country for 21 months, since the pandemic took hold. But the reduction of the Chinese leader’s contribution to a written statement, making no new commitments, has highlighted concern about Beijing’s recent decisions. The first is its announcement that it will build new coal-fired power plants, a response to extensive power cuts. Though experienced observers hope the medium-term impact will be less serious than it appears, it could imperil China’s pledge to peak carbon emissions in 2030. The second is its national plan on greenhouse gas emissions, revealed last Thursday. While better than the 2015 plan, it offers little progress on its already declared ambitions and falls well short of the action needed to ensure global heating does not exceed 1.5C. And in Glasgow, China has (like India and Russia) declined to sign up to the new 80-country pact to cut methane emissions, although it has joined the agreement to halt deforestation over the next decade. Its failings are, of course, far from unique. China’s carbon emissions per capita are still around half those of the US, and its historical emissions are far lower (though it is catching up fast). Even now, its emissions reflect its role as the world’s factory. Unlike some wealthy countries, it has taken consistent climate action. The US has seesawed, with Donald Trump pulling out of the Paris accord, but even with Joe Biden’s renewed commitment to the issue it has a very long way to go. China made its key pledges in advance of Cop26, promising to peak emissions by 2030 and to reach net zero by 2060, increasing total wind and solar power generation capacity to 1,200 gigawatts by 2030 to reach those goals. It has also pledged to end involvement in new coal-fired power stations overseas. Over recent years, it has gained a reputation (merited on renewables) for underpromising and overdelivering. And it has every reason to act. Devastating floods in Zhengzhou this summer will have added to long-term concerns about food security and the safety of prosperous, populous coastal cities. It has based its industrial strategy on the move to renewables, in terms of exports as well as a domestic shift. Its envoy Xie Zhenhua is a veteran of climate talks who has an established relationship with his US counterpart John Kerry and real clout at home – but not the authority to make new commitments without higher approval. China has also warned the US that cooperation cannot be separated from the wider environment of difficult bilateral relations. Its security concerns strengthen its desire to hang on to coal, which it produces domestically. The US and the EU are reportedly looking past China to save their climate strategy, to countries including South Africa and Indonesia. The real issue is less that China came to Glasgow without a new commitment, but that it is better at unilateral declarations than multilateral engagement. Doing it all on its own terms makes the global progress needed far harder to achieve. At Cop26, China could have positioned itself as a world leader. (Instead, India – the world’s third-largest carbon emitter – is getting the applause, with Narendra Modi, the prime minister, setting a net zero emissions target of 2070 and significant shorter-term commitments.) Meeting the 1.5C target is crucial. China can and must do more. It should seek to do it hand in hand with other nations.Boris Johnson has declared he is “cautiously optimistic” about a deal at Cop26 to keep global temperature rises below 1.5C as he urged China to commit to bringing emissions down by 2025. The prime minister had previously said if the climate emergency were a football match the world would be 5-1 down but he said on Monday that the score was now more like 5-2 or 5-3. He claimed there had been a turnaround since the G20 leaders’ summit at the weekend, arguing that a commitment from Brazil on halting deforestation, the Indian pledge on decarbonising power by 2030 and extra cash promised by Japan were good signs. However, he said there was still a “very long way to go” before a deal to keep 1.5C alive was achieved. Experts have said that reductions of 28 gigatonnes of emissions by 2030 are necessary to meet that target but pledges so far do not add up to anywhere near that amount. Johnson said talks with China, the world’s biggest emitter, were now focused on trying to persuade its negotiators to bring forward its pledge for its emissions to peak in 2030 by five years. “You bet we need more progress from China … and everyone here at this gathering,” he told a press conference in Glasgow. “The question is how much before [2030]. That’s the issue. There’s a world of difference between peaking in 2030 … and peaking in 2025. That’s where we’re keeping the pressure up.” Johnson said another area of pressure was asking developed countries to contribute more in climate finance for developing countries, saying they are going to “have to do more”. UK government sources have acknowledged this is the most difficult area of negotiation and where Cop is likely to fall short. The prime minister said commitments from countries would be “100% useless if the promises are not followed up with action”. Asked about concern among voters about the cost of net zero, Johnson said people had to realise that failing to tackle the climate crisis would be an “economic catastrophe”. “I happen to think that there’s a great wisdom in the British people and I think that they can see that this is an issue that needs to be fixed and they may not listen to me, but they certainly listen to Sir David Attenborough and they look at what’s actually happening around the world,” he said. “They look at the fires, they look at the floods, and they look at the hurricanes, and the increased incidence of all three, much-increased incidence, and they think something’s happening here.” “They’re not dumb and they can see that this is something that needs to be tackled,” he added, while ruling out a referendum on the push for net zero. Johnson’s demeanour was more upbeat than at the G20 summit, when he warned of a serious risk of failure in Glasgow. His official spokesperson dismissed the idea that the prime minister had deliberately lowered expectations to later declare his negotiations with other world leaders in Glasgow a success. Asked whether Johnson’s weekend gloom had been expectation management, the spokesperson said: “The PM felt very much at the G20 that limited progress was made but was by no means the significant boost that was needed. What we’ve seen so far is some early signs that we are starting to make some progress. Again, we are not complacent. This is not a done deal by any means. There is a huge amount of work left to do.” Johnson has still not made a decision on whether to come back at the end of Cop26, and could instead make a statement from Downing Street on what is agreed.World leaders agree deal to end deforestation, as we reported this morning. Xi Jinping, Jair Bolsonaro and Joe Biden are among the leaders signing the Glasgow Leaders’ Declaration on Forest and Land Use. Biden has announced a pledge to cut global methane emissions by 30% by 2030. Reducing these emissions was touted as one of the most immediate opportunities to slow global heating before the summit, and almost 100 nations have now set a target to cut methane emissions 30% by 2030. And the US has rejoined the High Ambition Coalition, with the aim of achieving the 1.5C goal at the UN climate talks. The Glasgow Breakthrough Agenda, a plan to coordinate the introduction of clean technologies, including clean electricity and electric vehicles in order to rapidly drive down their cost has been agreed at the Cop26 summit by world leaders, including the UK, US, India and China. African countries will spend $6bn on adapting to climate impacts, says our environment correspondent Fiona Harvey. African countries are preparing to spend at least $6bn a year from their tax revenues on adapting to the effects of the climate crisis and are calling on the rich world to provide $2.5bn a year for the next five years to enable them to meet their goals. ‘You might as well bomb us’, Surangel Whipps Jr, the president of Palau, told world leaders, speaking of the pain of watching his country suffer “a slow and painful death”. Ecuador is to massively expand protected reserve around Galápagos islands, Guillermo Lasso Mendoza, Ecuador’s president, announced. The country would add an additional 60,000 sq km of protected ocean to the 130,000 sq km that already exist around the islands. Amazon’s founder, Jeff Bezos, has defended his trip to space telling delegates that it made him realise how “finite and fragile” the Earth is. Meanwhile, the UK, EU, and US signed off on a new $8.5bn Just Energy Transition Partnership with South Africa to help reduce the country’s reliance on coal. Police Scotland has apologised to women in Glasgow who had to walk home in darkness on Monday night after well-lit streets were blocked off owing to Cop26 climate summit security concerns. And finally, the climate activist Greta Thunberg has been filmed singing some choice words for the world leaders inside the Cop26 conference in Glasgow.One of the largest shareholders in Darktrace is to sell a third of its shares in the British cybersecurity firm, in a move brokered at the end of a lock-up that prevents insiders selling their stakes in the recently floated company. Deep Defence, a subsidiary of private equity firm Vitruvian Partners, is to sell 11m shares in Darktrace worth about £70m at the company’s closing price on Tuesday. Shares in the Cambridge-based firm closed down a further 7% to 632.5p as investors concerned about a widespread sell-off of the company’s stock from Wednesday pushed its share price to a two-month low. Vitruvian controls 31.84m shares in Darktrace, about 7% of its 153.25m publicly traded free float. It appointed brokers Berenberg to handle the sale to “eligible investors”. The exact price of the share sale was set to be determined through a rapid sale process called an “accelerated bookbuild”. The move will raise further fears among investors of a significant sell-off among other top shareholders in Darktrace, which has seen about £2bn wiped off its market value in a little over a week. The company’s biggest stockholders at the time of Darktrace’s flotation were Summit Partners, the Autonomy founder, Mike Lynch and his wife, Angela Bacares, and KKR and EBT. Senior managers and directors at Darktrace hold about 5% of the company’s shares with Poppy Gustafsson, co-founder and chief executive, holding 2.77m shares, about 0.4%. Last month, KKR, Summit and Balderton Capital sold £187.5m worth of stock, 25m shares when Darktrace was trading at 759.5p, a combined 3.6% stake. The 180-day lock-up agreement put in place at the time of Darktrace’s flotation in April was waived, allowing the sales to proceed. The lock-up, which applies to those investors who were shareholders at the time of the IPO, expires on Wednesday. In August, the same trio of investors, along with Hoxton Ventures, sold 23m Darktrace shares at 620p valued at £143.5p. Darktrace, which had been a star performer which joined the FTSE 100 last week, has seen its market value crumble from nearly £7bn to £4.7bn in a matter of weeks. The company is still trading at well over double the 250p at which it debuted on the London Stock Exchange six months ago. Last Monday, two days before Darktrace replaced Morrisons in the FTSE 100 after the grocer’s takeover, an analyst note raising concerns over the business wiped a fifth of the company’s market capitalisation.Owen Paterson, the Conservative MP for North Shropshire and a former minister, is preparing to try to avoid a 30-day Commons suspension and possible byelection after the standards committee watchdog last week concluded he committed an “egregious” breach of lobbying rules. Ahead of a planned vote in parliament on Wednesday, here is a rundown of what he was accused of, the evidence and the potential repercussions: What rules did Paterson break? Paterson was a paid consultant to Randox and Lynn’s Country Foods and had made approaches to the Food Standards Agency (FSA) and Department for International Development ministers about the companies, the watchdog found. Three main wrongdoings were identified by the parliamentary standards commissioner, Kathryn Stone: First, breaching the part of the MPs’ code of conduct on paid advocacy. Paterson said he was acting as a whistleblower over milk safety but the commissioner said this was only true of the initial approach and first meeting. Thereafter, follow-up communications “were intended to benefit his clients rather than to raise a serious wrong”. Second, breaching the same code but the section that relates to using facilities and services funded by taxpayers. The commissioner found Paterson used his parliamentary office and meeting facilities in parliament 25 times for his work for paying clients, and that there were two letters sent on parliamentary paper. Third, Paterson failed to declare his interests in all communications with FSA staff. His “general approach” was to declare his interests, the commissioner said, but she added that under the rules an MP “must make a declaration in any communication when approaching a minister or official”. The combination of factors led to the commissioner saying Paterson’s breaches “were so serious and so numerous that they risked damaging public trust” in the House of Commons and in MPs generally. How are sanctions imposed on MPs when this happens? Usually, an investigation is launched by the standards commissioner, who investigates and then passes on their findings to the standards committee, which is made up of MPs – including four Conservatives – and other lay members. They scrutinise the evidence and initial findings and then make a final recommendation to parliament. The punishment is proposed as a government motion, and normally uncontested – MPs consent to the sanction “on the nod” without a formal division. However, Paterson has claimed the investigation was biased against him, was not consistent with “natural justice” and that it played a part in driving his wife, Rose Paterson, to kill herself last summer. Given there is no route of appeal, Paterson hopes to use the Commons – the final stage where the sanction can be stopped – as a forum to make his appeal. Why are the stakes so high? The Commons has never before reduced a suspension term, though it has increased them on very rare occasions since the second world war. MPs overruling the body set up to scrutinise their breach of the rules would risk undermining its independence, critics fear. Paterson feels strongly he has been denied a fair hearing because he had witnesses who wanted to give oral evidence but the standards commissioner said their written evidence sufficed. Paterson’s supporters feel he has little more to lose and is fighting to uphold his reputation and his seat in the House of Commons. This would be at risk if MPs vote to suspend him for more than 10 days, as it would trigger a recall petition. If 10% of his North Shropshire constituents were to sign it, there would be a byelection.Yorkshire are facing the wrath of senior political figures over their handling of Azeem Rafiq’s allegations of racism at Headingley, with the club’s chair set to be questioned by the digital, culture, media and sport committee and Sajid Javid, the health secretary, calling for “heads to roll”. Javid, the son of Pakistani immigrants, was among a group of MPs incensed by a report on Monday from ESPNCricinfo that revealed the club’s investigation into the issue – previously published only as a summary of findings in September – had concluded the repeated use of the word “Paki” by a senior player, who is still at the club, towards Rafiq was “in the spirit of friendly banter”. On Tuesday Javid tweeted: “‘Paki’ is not banter. Heads should roll at Yorkshire CCC. If [the England and Wales Cricket Board] doesn’t take action it’s not fit for purpose.” Sayeeda Warsi, the peer and former Conservative party co-chair who hails from the county, added: “‘Paki’ is not banter. Too many of us in too many walks of life have heard the ‘defence of banter’ for too long as an excuse for racism. For years my business &amp; others supported @YorkshireCCC – we need you to stop posturing &amp; prevaricating &amp; take responsibility for this.” Rafiq went public last year with allegations of the racism he experienced during two spells at the club between 2008 and 2018, with Yorkshire responding by launching an investigation headed by the law firm Squire Patton Boggs. A summary of the final report was released eight weeks ago, upholding seven of Rafiq’s 43 claims – including confirmation he was the “victim of racial harassment and bullying” – and led to an unreserved apology from the club. Among the findings came an admission from Yorkshire that it had failed to properly escalate Rafiq’s allegations when the former England Under-19s captain first raised them privately in 2018. But last week the club said it was “pleased” to announce that, after an internal review, no disciplinary action would be taken against any current player or staff member. After much prevarication, Yorkshire finally sent an unredacted copy of its report to the ECB last Thursday, with the governing body having now tasked its own regulatory and integrity teams with looking into the findings. On Tuesday, the ECB said: “We are conscious about the length of time that Azeem has waited for resolution and the toll that must be taking on his wellbeing and that of his family. We are sorry that, as a sport, this has not yet been resolved. “We will conduct a full regulatory process that is fair to all parties, but also ensure this happens as quickly as possible. To achieve this, we have secured the services of a QC, along with other external investigatory support to upweight resource around our process. The ECB Board has also reaffirmed its commitment to further additional resource, should the investigation require it.” As well as the ECB’s investigation, it was confirmed on Tuesday that Roger Hutton has been called to face questions from the DCMS committee, while senior management will also be invited to give evidence. Covered by parliamentary privilege, this could lead to more revelations entering the public domain. Julian Knight, MP for Solihull and the DCMS committee chair, said: “We are extremely concerned by recent reports about the lack of action against individuals following the findings. It’s clear that Yorkshire County Cricket Club has questions to answer. “We have monitored developments around the club’s handling of the serious allegations made by Azeem Rafiq. We want to see much greater transparency from YCCC – it is time for them to answer their critics. We intend to call the chair of the club before the DCMS committee to give a much fuller explanation than we have had so far.” Knight later tweeted: “Given the endemic racism at Yorkshire County Cricket Club, I struggle to think of any reason why the board should remain in post. This is one of the most repellent and disturbing episodes in modern cricket history.” Along with pressure from MPs and the ECB, Anchor butter, which had its logo on the first team’s shirt during this year’s Royal London Cup, confirmed the partnership would not be renewed. The company tweeted: “There is never a place or an excuse for racism. We have no further activity supporting YCCC.” Its logo was later removed from the YCCC website. The Emerald publishing group – one of Yorkshire’s primary sponsors, with naming rights at Headingley – has also said it will review the partnership following the conclusion of the ECB’s new investigation.No 10 is increasingly worried that hospitalisations and deaths among double-vaccinated people could rise due to waning immunity as an estimated 4.5 million people have failed to get their booster shots despite being eligible. Downing Street sources told the Guardian that the gap between those eligible and those jabbed was too wide, ranking it as their major concern ahead of the winter months. They acknowledged more needed to be done to encourage take-up as waning immunity meant more double jabbed people could get sick and were at greater risk of dying without the extra protection of the boosters. The UK reported 293 deaths with Covid on Tuesday – the highest level since February – although the figure included all NHS England deaths from Monday owing to reporting delays. There were 33,865 daily reported cases, a drop from more than 40,000 in recent days, and 9,538 people were in hospital with Covid on Monday compared with 6,467 a month ago. A record 1.6m boosters were delivered last week, with 7m in England since the programme started and hundreds of thousands of people booked in to receive jabs, according to NHS England. However, there are 11.5 million people eligible for their boosters, leaving a gap of 4.5 million. John Roberts, from the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries, told the BBC on Tuesday expressed worries that not all those in priority groups will have had their third jabs before Christmas. Multiple studies suggest waning immunity from vaccines. Data from Israel, where 78% of people aged 12 and older are fully vaccinated, showed a large rise in infection rates over the summer. The UK-based Zoe Covid Study app, where users can log their jabs, test results and symptoms, has suggested protection against infection after two shots of Pfizer/BioNTech decreased from 88% at one month to 74% at five to six months, while protection against infection after two Oxford/AstraZeneca jabs fell from 77% to 67% at four to five months. Prof Tim Spector, the lead scientist on the study, said in August: “In my opinion, a reasonable worst-case scenario could see protection below 50% for the elderly and healthcare workers by winter.” A Danish study suggested the under-65s had about 80% protection for at least six months, while the over-65s had only 47% protection. The government is pinning its hopes of avoiding further restrictions over the winter on people taking up booster jabs, which are currently offered to over-50s and those with clinical vulnerabilities who had their second jab at least six months ago. Hundreds of walk-in clinics have opened up as part of an NHS campaign. Boris Johnson spoke about the need for people to realise the risks of not having their boosters over the weekend, saying it would be “tragic” if vulnerable people got seriously ill because they were “overconfident about their level of immunity and didn’t get their booster when they needed it”. “I think people don’t quite realise that the first two jabs do start to wane,” he said. Roberts, from the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries, said that he was concerned that the first priority groups will not all have received their Covid booster jabs by Christmas, warning that this could start to filter through into hospitalisation and death numbers in the next few days. “My worry is that, at the current rate, we’re still not going to complete the first priority groups one to nine until mid-January,” he told BBC Radio 4. “And that’s going to mean that there’s going to be a lot of mixing over Christmas with festive behaviour before and then on the day of people who haven’t got that extra protection from the booster, which really does make a huge difference. The analysis that we’re getting from Israel is that it will probably reduce deaths by 80 or 90% even. So it’s important that we get on with it as quickly as possible.” An NHS spokesperson said: “It is vital people come forward as quickly as possible – there are appointments available across the country and people can book in through the national booking service or use one of the hundreds of walk-in vaccination sites.”Even a tactician as smart as Thomas Tuchel needs a bit of help sometimes. He does not have the solution to every structural issue and it helped that he was prepared to listen when his assistant, Arno Michels, laid out the plan that lifted a stuttering display from Chelsea, who were far more incisive after moving Hakim Ziyech to the left and sending Callum Hudson-Odoi to the right with instructions to break Malmo’s stubborn resistance by putting his speedy dribbling to good use. Michel’s ploy soon worked. The right-footed Hudson-Odoi had produced little on the left during the first half, slowing Chelsea’s momentum by cutting inside too much, but he was liberated after moving to the opposite flank. The winger was far too quick for Søren Rieks and Franz Brorsson on the left side of Malmö’s defence and he played a prominent role when the breakthrough arrived early in the second half, flying down the right wing and crossing for Ziyech to settle Chelsea’s nerves on a night when they were regularly pushed out of their comfort zone by limited but spirited opposition. “We got the job done,” Tuchel said. “I think maybe now we get judged by results, but who doesn’t? We needed the result, we expected the result, and we delivered. We had a lot of shots in the first half but it was not clinical enough. We wanted to increase the intensity level in the second half to force a goal. In the moment of the highest pressure we were able to use this moment with precision. It was a deserved win.” Ultimately one moment of class was enough for Chelsea, who remain hopeful of finishing top of Group H, although they will need to be sharper when they host Juventus later this month. This was a laboured performance from the European champions, who travelled to Sweden without N’Golo Kanté, Mateo Kovacic, Romelu Lukaku, Mason Mount and Timo Werner, and they were uncharacteristically slack at times. Malmö, beaten 4-0 at Stamford Bridge last month, put up a good fight. Chelsea, who have won their last seven games in all competitions, did not make life easy for themselves. They seemed surprised when Malmö pressed them during the early stages, a boisterous crowd roaring the Swedish champions forward, and Tuchel had reasons to be concerned as half-time approached. There was a carelessness to his team’s passing at times and there was even a chance for Malmö to go ahead after 11 minutes, a sloppy error from Ruben Loftus-Cheek forcing Andreas Christensen to mop up as Sebastian Nanasi threatened to break through on the left. Loftus-Cheek, who had not started in the Champions League since 2015, was not the only player in blue who erred during an absorbing opening period. Ziyech and Hudson-Odoi made a complete mess of a short corner routine on the left and Malmö grew bolder as the half wore on, Antonio Colak going close to shocking Chelsea when he met Sergio Peña’s pass with a volley inches wide. Nonetheless there was always a sense that Chelsea’s quality would make the difference. Loftus-Cheek offered some classy touches in midfield after getting that early error out of his system and Malmö were clinging on at times, their defending increasingly frantic as the visitors began to dominate. Chelsea, who were pleased to see Christian Pulisic come off the bench to make his first appearance since August after shaking off a persistent ankle injury, should have led at the break. César Azpilicueta threatened from the edge of the area, Ziyech had a shot smothered after bursting through on goal and Kai Havertz was wasteful after being played through by Loftus-Cheek, a heavy touch giving Johan Dahlin the chance to block. The goal eventually arrived. Tuchel had switched his wingers at the break, shifting Ziyech to the left and moving Hudson-Odoi to the right, and the change soon paid off. After 56 minutes Havertz dropped deep and slipped a clever pass through to Hudson-Odoi, who charged down the wing before producing a moment of decisiveness, whipping a bending cross to the far post for Ziyech to clip past Dahlin from close range. “All credit to my assistant,” Tuchel said. “He had the idea. We liked it. Malmö were defending in a low block. We lost some moments if Callum or Hakim had to switch back.” Malmö, rooted to the bottom of the group after losing their first four games, were unable to respond. Jon Dahl Tomasson’s side tired as the game wore on and the only disappointment for Tuchel was that Chelsea failed to extend their lead, Dahlin denying Havertz. It made no difference in the end. Chelsea were too strong. Their tactical intelligence continues to set them apart.Here’s Jacob Steinberg’s report from Malmö. It wasn’t easy, but mission accomplished. Chelsea look good for the next round. Juventus will go through if they take a point off Zenit later. It closes with Pulisic going clear and missing the target. He was offside in any case. And the whistle goes. Solid but unspectacular from Chelsea. Job done, and a job done by Thomas Tuchel’s half-time switch over of Callum Hudson-Odoi and Hakim Ziyech, with one setting up the other for the goal. 90+2 min: Mendy takes his time over a goal kick to home boos, and then his teammates keep the ball in front of him. Then a foul on Barkley eats up even more time. 90+1 min: A late flurry from the home team as three minutes are added on. Now or never. Chelsea have been made to work for this. 89 min: Rudiger does a Rudiger on Birmancevic and stops him in his tracks, and somehow escapes a booking. You really don’t want to run into him. Just ask Kevin De Bruyne 88 min: Olsson flicks the ball out with nobody around him. He looks shaky, the glory days under Steve Kean at Ewood Park looking long behind him. 86 min: Off goes Berget with his sore kipper, as does Rakip, and on comes Birmancevic, hoping to score a famous goal. 84 min: Chelsea still looking for that second, but also happy to play the ball around. No point in giving up a couple of points to a counterattacking goal. 81 min: Malmo’s Berget is down, having taken one to the chops from a teammate. There’s a long break in play, and that’s punctuated by some very loud singing from the home fans. 78 min: All Chelsea, and that second goal must surely come. Havertz is played through and is denied by Dahlin. Again, he could have been more decisive there. He’s...not a natural centre forward. 76 min: Pulisic back for the first time since August and injury sustained on USMNT duty. He starts off with a dart into the box, and does well to dig the ball out after falling to the floor. 74 min: Here come Barkley and Pulisic for goalscorer Ziyech and assist supplier Hudson-Odoi. And off goes the often dangerous Nanasi for Nalic for Malmo. 72 min: Ross Barkley coming on? Tuchel has a strong squad but does seem to use it well, keeping most players happy while doing that. He himself is not happy when Ziyech overplays rather than getting a shot away. 70 min: Paul Rhys get back in touch: “Ah, you chose to do Finnish instead? Classic Macclesfieldian.” The word you are looking for is Maxonian. 69 min: Thiago Silva is now booked for a tactical Fernandinho foul as Rakip had got away from him. 67 min: Credit to the Malmo fans, as they keep up the noise as their team retreats ever backwards. Havertz might have done better with Rudiger ball; would Lukaku have done better? Probably he would have been a bit braver. Meanwhile, Silva has a header cleared off the line. 64 min: Rakip has a shot for Malmo. I’m not sure of the geography of this stadium but it flies over and may well be heading for Denmark. He also goes down with an injury, having over-extended himself. 62 min: Loftus-Cheek almost gets on the end of an Azpilicueta pass; Chelsea interchanging positions now, and causing all sorts of trouble. 60 min: Chelsea ratcheted up the pressure, got their goal and will now chase another. Patient stuff from them tonight. 58 min: Two Malmo changes. On comes Martin Olsson, once of Norwich and Blackburn, plus Swansea. And Lewicki replaces Pena. That’s Ziyech’s goal drought over. Lovely curling pass from Hudson-Odoi and from the other wing, Ziyech strokes in. All hail Tactics Tom. 53 min: Meanwhile, Loftus-Cheek makes a fine save from Dahlin after some fine skill. Was it a good save? Actually, no. He seemed to flinch and it came off his chest and face. Chelsea knocking on the door here. 50 min: Pedantry corner: First: Ed Rostron. “Just a minor bit of pedantry here: Malmö’s stadium may be full for the first time in a while, if by a while you mean the ten days since their last home game; Sweden lifted attendance restrictions at the end of September and the biggest teams have been getting near full houses. That came from Thomas Tuchel himself, that gem of wrong info. Second, Paul Rhys: “Tut tut John, don’t you know your Swedish? You can’t say, “The Swedish Allsvenskan”. The “an” at the end is already the “the”. So you just said “The Swedish The All-Swedish”. Schoolboy error.” Ain’t you never heard of The MLS, and the El Clasico? It would only be a schoolboy error if I had learned Swedish at Kings School, Macclesfield. 49 min: Malmo are keeping up their level of energy and it’s getting scrappy in midfield. 47 min: Tactics from Tom? Hudson-Odoi out to the right, and Ziyech into the inside left. That would appear the more direct method of getting at Malmo. 46 min: We are back, and there appear to have been no half-time changes in Sweden. Now, will Malmo tire after their first-half efforts? That’s often the course of things. All Chelsea but little in the way of chances of any quality. Malmo have defended well, and shown the odd glimpse of attacking danger. Chelsea need to win here if they want to win the group, and changes could be imminent. 45 min: This half seems to be ebbing away. Thomas Tuchel has some tactics to sort out at the break. But what’s this? Malmo go close. Pena chips up and Rakip volleys wide. That was close, and actually as close anyone has come in a half that comes to its end. 43 min: Jorginho penalised for a very slight touch on Innocent, who doesn’t live up to his name in falling to the ground. 41 min: Malmo are really growing into this one, though how long can they keep it up? Chelsea are getting frustrated, and Loftus-Cheek is not happy when he can’t get on the end of a pass. 39 min: Chelsea pass the ball around to the soundtrack of a wall of noise. Azpilicueta, tonight’s flying wing-back on the right, has his shot blocked. They are queueing up for this one, and Alonso looks like he might nod in only for Berget to head away. 37 min: More Malmo attacking, roared on by all that noise. This hasn’t been easy for Chelsea. This cannot be an easy environment to play in. 35 min: Almost a goal for a flying Chelsea wing-back but Alonso ends up dragging his shot into Dahlin, who is a combination of scatty and solid, like a Swedish Jordan Pickford. 33 min: This is really loud from the home fans. Their team is holding firm for now. 31 min: Malmo are pushing forward and that may lead to more space for Chelsea, who are finding it hard so far...but here’s a shot from Christensen, and it almost spills to Alonso. 29 min: Havertz had the big chance, lovely pass from Jorginho is followed by a great pass from Loftus-Cheek but the German takes his time and is smothered by Dahlin. That’s fine goalkeeping. 27 min: Malmo penalty claim, as Nanasi falls to the floor. The German ref orders him to get back up. Rightly so. 26 min: More Chelsea pressure, and still the clearcut chance is waited for. And there’s even time for some Malmo passing, though Chelsea hold their shape. 24 min: Another Loftus-Cheek miss, this time of a corner he shoulders wide, and looks none too happy with himself. 23 min: A very loud version of Sloop John B is ringing out from the home fans. This is the best trip they’ve ever been on. 22 min: Ziyech gets two bites of the cherry off the right, the second a volley off the rebound as the ball bounces up. He hasn’t scored since the Super Cup lost to incoming Toon Army boss Unai Emery. 20 min: Loftus-Cheek is found in space from the edge of the box, and sees glory. His chip sails over. He had time and space to do far better than that. 18 min: All Chelsea now, but the big chance is yet to arrive. 16 min: Havertz slips down the right side and almost plays in Ziyech, who has been quiet so far. Good, proactive goalkeeping from Dahlin clears the danger. 14 min: Chelsea are playing rather too deliberately. They do miss the thrust of Mason Mount when he’s missing. 13 min: Havertz again holds up the ball, and the ball is slipped to Azpilicueta, whose shot is saved with ease. A patient buildup, but too slow a buildup? 10 min: Havertz sends Alonso off down the left wing but his cross from the byline is cleared. And Malmo break, with Loftus-Cheek letting a pass go awry. The attack is a tad hesitant and the danger is cleared as Nanasi can’t find a way through. That was lax from RLC. 8 min: Hudson-Odoi cuts in the from the left but his cross is cleared. Malmo looking more solid, and encouraged by their very loud fans. 6 min: A Malmo attack but not much doing. Nanasi has been highlighted as a danger man but hasn’t touched the ball until just now. 4 min: Penalty claim for Chelsea! Havertz drags the ball back and looks to have been up-ended, but the defender got there first and that will be no penalty. VAR, being done in Switzerland, waves it away too. 2 min: The Newcastle legend, Jon Dahl Tomasson, prowls the touchline in his role as Malmo manager. A beany-hatted Thomas Tuchel has taken a seat. 1 min: And away we go...and after some boos for the taking of the knee from some Malmo fans, or so we presume. Their players did not take the knee. The teams take to the field in the southern Swedish city, in a stadium that is filled for the first time in a while, and the home fans are giving it plenty as the Champions League anthem rings out. Thomas Tuchel speaks, on dropping Chilwell and James. Ruben Loftus-Cheek is making his first Champions League start for six years. It was a tough one as they have been playing so good and been so decisive. They have invested a lot, when it comes to their intensity. It was the moment to keep the intensity level high. [On Ruben Loftus-Cheek] He is the right type of player, he likes to drive the ball, the ball is very safe with him. We miss Mateo [Kovacic], so I didn’t know he hadn’t played UCL for such a long time. Hopefully it’s a good mix between Jorghino and him. Jon Dahl Tomasson, the Malmö coach, spoke to Uefa. I am extremely proud to see how the stadium transforms during evenings like the one we have in front of us. Malmö FF is a Champions League club, Malmö is a Champions League city and I think we all – supporters and the whole association – should feel involved in this journey we are making right now. We are all involved in this party that the Champions League is. And now that we are here, we want to show a good attitude. Whatever happened to Antonio Conte? Jacob Steinberg is our man in Malmo, and heard from Tactics Tom. Tuchel has even come to see Marcos Alonso, Ben Chilwell and James as midfielders rather than defenders and, in any case, it is hardly as if the European champions expected a large portion of their goals to come from the back after spending £97.5m on Romelu Lukaku in the summer.... If you want to reach the highest level in any competition you need consistent goalscoring threat from your strikers,” Tuchel said, speaking as he prepared for Chelsea’s visit to Malmö in the Champions League on Tuesday night. “We hope we can have our strikers at the end of the season on top of the list. What does that all mean? The big news is Captain America Christian Pulisic’s return to the squad, as Thomas Tuchel make three changes from the side that beat Newcastle 3-0 at the weekend. Cesar Azpilicueta replaces Reece James while Ruben Loftus-Cheek replaces N’Golo Kante in midfield. Marcos Alonso is recalled at left wing-back in place of Ben Chilwell, so that means both free-scoring wing-backs are absent, putting the scoring pressure on Ziyech, Hudson-Odoi and Havertz. Malmo FF: Dahlin, Ahmedhodzic, Nielsen, Brorsson, Berget, Pena, Innocent, Nanasi, Rieks, Rakip, Colak. Subs: Ellborg, Larsson, Moisander, Lewicki, Olsson, Malik, Birmancevic, Gwargis, Nalic, Eile, Diawara. Chelsea: Mendy, Christensen, Thiago Silva, Rudiger, Azpilicueta, Loftus-Cheek, Jorginho, Alonso, Ziyech, Hudson-Odoi, Havertz. Subs: Vale, Arrizabalaga, Pulisic, Bettinelli, Chalobah, Saul, Barkley, Chilwell, James, Sarr. Referee: Felix Brych (Germany) Let’s face it here, Chelsea are supposed to blast this Swedish outfit away and take one foot in the last 16. After all, they won 4-0 last time, but at some cost, namely the loss of Romelu Lukaku and Timo Werner to injury. Not that it has stopped them in the Premier League, where their lead over Liverpool was extended at the weekend. The lack of those forwards, plus the ill Mason Mount, gives others room to show off their skills, even if most of that has been done by free-scoring wing-backs Ben Chilwell and Reece James. Malmo have played three, scored none and conceded 11, and it looks as if beating Rangers in the qualifiers will be the sum total of their European adventures. Still, the money will flood the coffers for Jon Dahl Tomasson’s team, currently duking it out with Djurgårdens at the top of the Swedish Allsvenskan. A first goal in the group stage would be a start, but how many will Chelsea have scored by then? Kick-off is 5.45pm UK Time (GMT). Join me.Good morning. France is furious over the growing scandal of a leaked text message from the French president to Scott Morrison, and world leaders continue to make pledges to fight the climate crisis at Cop26. French officials have vented their fury at the leaking of a text message from Emmanuel Macron to Morrison, as the prime minister faces accusations he has put his personal political interests ahead of healing the rift. “Confidence has been completely shattered,” a close adviser to Macron said, calling the release of the text “a pretty crude and unconventional tactic”. “It is not the kind of thing that is likely to improve relations between France and Australia,” the adviser said. The message, in which the French president asked Morrison whether to expect good or bad news on the submarine project, was shared to reinforce Australia’s position that France wasn’t blindsided about the cancellation of the $90bn submarine deal, but France argued it showed that Macron “did not know what stage the discussions had got to”. At the Cop26 summit today, US president Joe Biden has announced a pledge to cut global methane emissions by 30% by 2030. Reducing these emissions was touted as one of the most immediate opportunities to slow global heating ahead of the summit. World leaders agreed to coordinate the introduction of clean technologies in order to rapidly drive down their cost. African countries are preparing to spend at least US$6bn a year from their tax revenues adapting to the impacts of the climate crisis and are calling on the rich world to provide US$2.5bn a year for the next five years to enable them to meet their goals. And Amazon’s founder, Jeff Bezos, has defended his trip to space, telling delegates that it made him realise how “finite and fragile” the Earth is. Australia has more than 100 fossil fuel developments in the pipeline that could result in the equivalent of about 5% of global industrial emissions if all were to go ahead, an analysis says. The Australian government lists 116 major coal and gas projects under development, and while not all will be built, a new report says it is an indication of the fossil fuel development that continues in Australia despite the Morrison government committing to net zero emissions by 2050. Australia Coalition MPs are split over the government’s revised religious discrimination bill, which is facing resistance over three issues, including the “Folau clause” that would give legal protection to someone expressing a statement of belief. The Royal Melbourne hospital is down 51 staff who are refusing to be vaccinated against Covid. These staff represented just 0.45% of the hospital’s workforce and included nurses, ward clerks and clinical positions – though none were doctors. Australia’s federal budget is set for a post-lockdown bounce before settling into deficits of $60bn a year, an independent analysis has warned. The analysis says the “ongoing shortfall” in future budgets could only be wiped out by raising GST to 17% or increasing marginal income tax by 5.5%. The world The international community’s chief representative in Bosnia has warned that the country is in imminent danger of breaking apart, and there is a “very real” prospect of a return to conflict. Ethiopia has declared a state of emergency after forces from the northern region of Tigray said they were gaining territory and considering marching on the capital Addis Ababa. A Canadian academic specialising in Indigenous health issues has been placed on administrative leave after an investigation challenged her claims of Indigenous ancestry. A Polish woman died from septic shock in her 22nd week of pregnancy, in what activists say is a result of a recent restriction of the country’s abortion law. According to a lawyer for the family, doctors did not perform an abortion, even though her foetus was lacking amniotic fluid. Recommended reads On Becoming a God in Central Florida hit the small screen in 2019, and sees Kirsten Dunst play the kitsch pyramid scheme queen in a show that upends the fantasy of the American dream. “There are few greater joys than watching a performer as skilled as Kirsten Dunst really go for it, whatever ‘it’ may be,” writes Tiia Kelly. Ramesh Mario Nithiyendran, a Sydney-based sculptor and ceramicist, is known for his vivid Technicolor creations. Nithiyendran has found keeping visual diaries essential to his practice. He rates those spiral bound diaries – which he fills in with texta sketches of potential sculptural works – as his most useful object. He tells us why those pages are so hard to part with, as well as the stories of a few other important personal belongings. Listen The Park hotel in Melbourne, which is being used as a place of detention for refugees and asylum seekers, is currently the site of a Covid outbreak. It follows months of warnings about the “high-risk environment” for transmission and calls for all people held there to be released. In today’s Full Story, Laura Murphy-Oates speaks to detained refugee Mustafa Salah and reporter Ben Doherty about life inside the hotel as this outbreak spreads. Full Story is Guardian Australia’s daily news podcast. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. When Gadia Zrihan’s family were forced to leave their dog behind, they left a part of themselves too – a part they feared they could never get back. Lifestyle editor Alyx Gorman recommends this story about a heartwarming in during uncertain times for today’s Australia Reads. Listen to the best of Guardian Australia’s journalism on Australia Reads podcast on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday. Subscribe for free on Apple Podcasts, Spotify or any other podcasting app. Sport Crowds at the Melbourne Cup are dwindling in size and fewer Australians are gambling on horse races – but those still having a punt are spending more. A study found more people “bloody hate gambling”, yet turnover keeps increasing, from $22.9bn in 2010-11 to $26.9bn in 2018-19. The modern pentathlon’s governing body has secretly voted to ditch horse riding and replace it with cycling, a decision hastened when a horse was punched at the Tokyo Olympics by a German coach. Media roundup NSW premier Dominic Perrottet has ordered a review of his government’s processes for awarding taxpayer-funded grants, after Gladys Berejiklian’s appearance at a corruption inquiry reignited controversy over pork-barrelling in marginal seats, reports the Sydney Morning Herald. Embattled Victorian Liberal MP Tim Smith is refusing to quit state parliament after crashing his car while driving more than 2½ times over the legal alcohol limit, reports the Age. Emails from the Royal Adelaide hospital concerning organ transplants are being rejected as spam by a Melbourne hospital, reports the Advertiser. Coming up French ambassador Jean-Pierre Thebault will address the National Press Club. Olivia Newton-John is receiving an honour from the Japanese government. Sign up If you would like to receive the Guardian Australia morning mail to your email inbox every weekday, sign up here. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com. Discover Australian Weekend Every Saturday at 6am, enjoy early access to the best journalism planned for the weekend in one elegant app, plus a curated selection of the week’s news and analysis from Australia and the world.Facebook will delete the “faceprints” of more than a billion people after announcing that it is shutting down its facial recognition system due to the “many concerns” about using the technology. The social media network has been under political, legal and regulatory pressure over its use of the software, which automatically identifies users in photos and videos – and let’s them know if a fellow user has posted a photo or video with them in it – if they have opted in to the feature. In a statement, Facebook’s parent company, Meta, said it would shut down facial recognition on the platform over the coming weeks and delete 1 billion facial recognition templates. Meta’s vice-president of artificial intelligence, Jerome Pesenti, said the technology had helped visually impaired and blind users identify their friends in images and can help prevent fraud and impersonation. But Pesenti said the advantages needed to be weighed against “growing concerns about the use of this technology as a whole”. “There are many concerns about the place of facial recognition technology in society, and regulators are still in the process of providing a clear set of rules governing its use,” he said. “Amid this ongoing uncertainty, we believe that limiting the use of facial recognition to a narrow set of use cases is appropriate.” If users have opted into the face recognition setting, the faceprint used to identify them will be deleted. If that face recognition setting is turned off, Meta said there is no faceprint to delete. Pesenti said Facebook will encourage users to tag posts manually. In 2020, Facebook’s parent company paid $650m (£477m) to settle a US class action lawsuit brought by users who claimed the firm had created and stored scans of their faces without permission. Complaints had also been filed with the US competition regulator and in 2012 a Facebook application to introduce facial recognition in the EU had to be withdrawn because no provision had been made to gain user consent. Pesenti added that the decision reflected a “company-wide” move away from facial recognition technology. Meta also owns the Instagram photo-sharing app and the WhatsApp messaging service, with 2.8 billion people using the company’s platforms, including 1.9 billion for Facebook. Last week the parent company rebranded itself from Facebook in recognition of a new focus on the metaverse, a concept where the physical and digital worlds combine to allow people to lead their professional and social lives virtually, via digital representation of themselves – or avatars. The rebranding and the facial recognition moves come as Meta has been rocked by a series of revelations from whistleblower Frances Haugen. The former employee has released tens of thousands of internal documents, and given testimonies to politicians in Westminster and Washington, which exposed Meta’s failure to keep some users safe and contain the spread of misinformation. In the wake of the Haugen revelations Meta has rowed back on one potential product launch by announcing that it has paused work on developing a version of Instagram for 10- to 12-year-olds. It has also stressed that it will develop its metaverse plans in close cooperation with regulators and legal experts. Pesenti said that if the company intended to use facial recognition technology in the future it would “continue to be public about intended use” and “how people can have control over these systems and their personal data.”Antonio Conte said he was determined to turn Tottenham back into contenders for trophies after being confirmed as the club’s new manager on a £15m-a-year contract to June 2023, with an option to extend. The Italian, who won the Premier League with Chelsea in 2017, replaces Nuno Espírito Santo, who was sacked on Monday. The Spurs chairman, Daniel Levy, felt that he had to act after Saturday’s 3-0 home loss to Manchester United and he rekindled his interest in Conte, who he had tried to hire in June as the permanent successor to José Mourinho. Conte has been a promised a degree of control over transfer business, alongside Fabio Paratici, the managing director of football, with whom he had a successful spell at Juventus from 2011-14. Levy has assured Conte that he will always back him for the right player. Sales will, however, remain vital to the size of the budget. “I am extremely happy to return to coaching, and to do so at a Premier League club that has the ambition to be a protagonist again,” said Conte, who won Serie A with Internazionale last season. “Tottenham Hotspur has state-of-the-art facilities and one of the best stadiums in the world. “I can’t wait to start working to convey to the team and the fans the passion, mentality and determination that have always distinguished me, as a player and as a coach. “Last summer our union did not happen because the end of my relationship with Inter was still too recent and emotionally too involved with the end of the season, so I felt that it wasn’t yet the right time to return to coaching. But the contagious enthusiasm and determination of Daniel Levy in wanting to entrust me with this task had already hit the mark. Now that the opportunity has returned, I have chosen to take it with great conviction.” Conte met the players and observed training on Tuesday afternoon in preparation for Thursday’s Europa Conference League game at home to Vitesse. The club fully expect his work permit to have come through in time for him to take the team at that match. On Sunday Spurs travel to Everton in the Premier League, in which they are ninth after five defeats in their opening 10 games. Paratici said: “We are delighted to welcome Antonio to the club. His track record speaks for itself, with vast experience and trophies in both Italy and England. I know first-hand the qualities Antonio can bring to us, having worked with him at Juventus, and look forward to seeing his work with our talented group of players.”Time to wrap up.. Another four energy suppliers have gone bust in a single day as historic gas market highs continue to rip through the UK’s energy market amid fresh fears that Russia may curb gas supplies to Europe. The energy regulator, Ofgem, said the collapse of four small energy suppliers on Tuesday would leave about 24,000 households in need of a new supplier, and bring the total number of bust energy companies to 17 since the start of September, affecting more than 2 million households. Zebra Power had the largest customer base, and supplied 14,800 households with energy. Omni Energy supplied about 6,000 domestic pre-payment customers, while AmpowerUK had about 600 UK customers and supplied a further 2,000 overseas households. MA Energy. The flurry of failures follows rocketing global energy market prices due to a sudden surge in demand for gas as economies began to shrug off restrictions related to the Covid-19 pandemic. Gas markets have reached record highs in recent weeks, leading to one of the sharpest increases in home energy bills and fears of a cost-of-living crisis this winter. Here’s the full story: Those surging oil and gas price helped BP to post an 18% jump in underlying profits in the last quarter., beating forecasts. BP’s CEO Bernard Looney, predicted that gas prices would stay high in the coming months. He told the Guardian: “All things being equal, of course that’s a big if, we would expect gas prices to return to normal probably by the summer of next year.” The energy giant is also planning to reward shareholders with a new $1.25bn buyback programme... although that capital could be used to fund a faster transformation to green energy instead.... Russia added to concerns about the energy crisis, with supplier Gazprom declining to buy extra capacity on pipelines to Europe through Ukraine and Poland for next year. The move could intensify pressure on regulators to sign off its controversial Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which bypasses Ukraine. In other news.... Pharmaceutical giant Pfizer faced fresh criticism from groups such as Amnesty International, after lifting its sales forecast for its Covid vaccine again and reporting a surge in sales and profits. The campaign group Global Justice Now accused Pfizer of “making a killing” out of “the most lucrative medicine ever produced,” while “most of the world has been locked out of this vaccine”. Shipping giant Maersk has warned there’s no end in sight to the supply chain crisis, as its ships continue to be held up by delays at ports. Those problems are also hitting Europe’s manufacturers - output growth at eurozone factories has slowed to its lowest rate in 16 month. Standard Chartered predicted the recovery would be uneven, helping to send its shares down almost 8% today. Yahoo is quitting China, due to Beijing’s crackdown on tech companies. Shares in Tesla have dipped away from its record highs, after Elon Musk cast some doubt over its deal to sell 100,000 cars to Hertz. But Car rental group Avis have doubled in value, after it pledged to play a bigger role in lifting the adoption of electric cars in the U.S. Meal kit supplier Hello Fresh also rallied, after lifting its sales targets after strong growth this summer. But gambling firm Flutter revealed that a run of winning results for favourites last month have knocked £60m off its profits. Shares in the Hut Group hit an all-time low on Tuesday after it emerged that BlackRock was halving its stake in the online retailer after a rocky month for the company. A report by climate finance campaigners showed that Barclays has financed more in fossil fuel projects than any of the UK’s largest banks in the months leading up to the Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow. And the Bank of England is facing criticism over the way it is conducting its first climate stress tests, with politicians and campaigners warning that a lack of penalties for dirty assets will give banks little incentive to clean up their act. Goodnight. GW Over on Wall Street, stocks have closed at fresh record highs as the market rally continues. This year’s surge in oil and gas prices means BP will hand an extra $1.25bn to investors in the current quarter, through share buybacks. That’s part of its commitment to return cash to shareholders if oil remains over $60 per barrel. But as our financial editor Nils Pratley points out -- some of that money could have been used to fund a faster transformation to green energy.... The middle of the Cop26 climate conference was not an ideal moment to demonstrate that producing, refining and trading hydrocarbons remains a spectacularly lucrative business when the stars align. “We’re a cash machine at these types of prices,” declared the BP chief executive, Bernard Looney, cheerfully, referring to oil at $85 a barrel and gas still at multi-year highs. His description is accurate. The oddity of accounting rules around hedging policies meant BP showed a formal loss in the third quarter of this year, but the surer guide to the current financial bonanza was the underlying profit of $3.3bn (£2.2bn). Remember that BP barely broke even in the equivalent period last year. The vaccine-led recovery in the global economy has transformed the outlook. So time for BP to revisit its year-old targets for boosting investment in renewables? Use the current excess of cash to up the pace? Well, no, that is not on the agenda. Looney is sticking to what he promised: a doubling of investment in low-carbon projects this year to $2bn, mainly offshore wind and solar, with an increase to $5bn a year by 2030. The extra cash will instead go to shareholders.... More here: The gas price crunch is just one part of the wider squeeze on the global economy, which continues to suffer disruption from the pandemic. And today Maersk, the world’s largest container shipping group, warned said there was no end in sight to the global supply chain crisis, as it posted a surge in revenues and profits. With supply chains struggling, hundreds of Maersk’s ships are laying idle outside ports around the world. They can’t unload their goods due to warehouse congestion, a shortage of dockers to unload goods, and a dearth of lorry divers to transport goods on. Sky News explains: The Danish group, which reported record quarterly revenues despite the disruption as its freight rates increased sharply, said current conditions were expected to continue at least until the first quarter of next year. A lack of lorry drivers is preventing ships from offloading goods at ports around the world, with 300 container vessels currently laying idle, chief executive Soren Skou said. “The whole system has become one gigantic bottleneck,” Mr Skou added. He said the biggest problem preventing containers from leaving ports is a lack of labour, particularly drivers of HGV vehicles in the US and Britain despite salaries having been raised “significantly”. BP chief executive, Bernard Looney, has predicted that gas prices would stay high in the coming months. He told the Guardian today: “All things being equal, of course that’s a big if, we would expect gas prices to return to normal probably by the summer of next year,” Reminder: he was speaking after BP reported a jump in underlying profits this morning, thanks to the jump in oil and gas prices. The company also predicted that gas markets “will remain tight during the period of peak winter demand”. Looney has told the Financial Times that soaring global commodity prices have made BP a “cash machine”, saying: “When the market is strong, when oil prices are strong and when gas prices are strong, this is literally a cash machine.” Justina Miltienyte, energy policy expert at Uswitch.com, says affected customers should wait until Ofgem moves them to a new energy provider: Although customer numbers are small at 6,000, Omni primarily focused on consumers with prepayment meters, who are more likely to be vulnerable and at risk of fuel poverty. “Unfortunately, we may not have seen the end of this situation, but concerned consumers can be reassured that their energy supply will continue as normal and credit balances will be protected. “If you are affected by your supplier leaving the market, don’t do anything until you are moved to a new provider appointed by Ofgem. Wait for the dust to settle on the current situation before seeing whether there are any better deals available elsewhere. “Customers should note their meter readings now, and again when contacted by their new supplier, to ensure their bills are accurate.” Here’s Gillian Cooper, Head of Energy Policy for Citizens Advice, on the latest energy company failures: “Suppliers continue to fall like dominoes. It’s customers who are paying the price, with uncertainty, inconvenience and ultimately higher bills. “Last week, Ofgem set out how it intends to ‘raise the bar’ for supplier standards and improve their resilience in the short-term. This is a positive step, but it’s clear that existing rules and their enforcement, has not been enough. “Longer-term, Ofgem will need to do more to make sure companies are financially sound and provide good customer service. This should include protecting people from the loyalty penalty, which prior to the cap allowed companies to profit from those who didn’t or couldn’t switch.” The energy crunch has claimed another four, small UK suppliers. Omni Energy Limited, MA Energy Limited, Zebra Power Limited, and Ampoweruk Ltd have all announced they are ceasing to trade, regulator Ofgem says. This will affect over 23,400 customers, who will now be moved to a new supplier by Ofgem. It means that 19 energy suppliers have collapsed since the start of August, due to the surge in wholesale gas prices that have hammered the sector -- with BP predicting the market will remain ‘tight’ this winter. Neil Lawrence, director of retail at Ofgem, said: “Ofgem’s number one priority is to protect customers. We know this is a worrying time for many people and news of a supplier going out of business can be unsettling. “I want to reassure affected customers that they do not need to worry: under our safety net we’ll make sure your energy supplies continue. If you have credit on your account the funds you have paid in are protected and you will not lose the money that is owed to you. “Ofgem will choose a new supplier for you and while we are doing this our advice is to wait until we appoint a new supplier and do not switch in the meantime. You can rely on your energy supply as normal. We will update you when we have chosen a new supplier, who will then get in touch about your tariff. “Any customer concerned about paying their energy bill should contact their supplier to access the range of support that is available.” Omni Energy supplies around 6,000 domestic pre-payment customers, MA Energy supplies around 300 non-domestic customers, Zebra Power Limited supplies around 14,800 domestic customers, and Ampoweruk Ltd supplies around 600 domestic customers, and around 2000 non-domestic customers. Car rental firm Avis Budget Group is having QUITE the day on Wall Street. Shares in Avis surged by 200% (!) in early trading, in frenzied trading after the company said it would play a bigger role in lifting the adoption of electric cars in the U.S. Chief Executive Officer Joe Ferraro told analysts on a call today that: You’ll see us going forward be much more active in electric scenarios as the situation develops over time.” Last night, Avis reported that its revenues almost doubled year-on-year in the third quarter, as it posted its best adjusted EBITDA earnings ($1.057bn). This has prompted a surge in trading reminiscent of previous memestock rallies -- triggering a number of trading halts for volatility. At one stage, Avis briefly became the largest component of the Russell 2000 Index. It’s now slipped back a little, but still up 91% today.... Shares in Tesla have been on a rollicking run recently - up over 40% in October alone But they’re under some pressure today, down 2.5% today, after CEO Elon Musk cast some uncertainty over its deal with car rental firm Hertz, which drove Tesla’s value over $1trn. Musk tweeted last night that ‘no contract has been signed yet’ with Hertz, who announced a 100,000 vehicle order last week. Hertz, though, says it is ‘on plan’ to offer 100,000 Tesla electric vehicles by the end of 2022, saying: As we announced last week, Hertz has made an initial order of 100,000 Tesla electric vehicles and is investing in new EV charging infrastructure across the company’s global operations,” Deliveries of the Teslas already have started. We are seeing very strong early demand for Teslas in our rental fleet, which reflects market demand for Tesla vehicles. Separately, Tesla has also ‘recalled’ almost 12,000 cars to fix a software problem that caused false forward-collision warning or the unexpected activation of the emergency brakes. The problem, fixed with an ‘over-the-air’ software update, related to vehicles running the latest version of Tesla’s limited early access Full-Self Driving (Beta), which automates some driving tasks. The carmaker rolled back the latest update, shortly after it was released last month, after users complained of false collision warnings and other issues. Incidentally, Russia said this morning it is committed to sending more gas to Europe, once its own tanks have been refilled. Reuters explains: Russia remains committed to start pumping additional gas to Europe once domestic storage is replenished, in line with an order given to Gazprom last week by President Vladimir Putin, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov told reporters. Asked why Russia’s Yamal-Europe gas pipeline to Germany has been working in reverse-flow mode since Saturday, Peskov said Russia was fulfilling or even exceeding its obligations. Gazprom insisted over the weekend that it was filling its European orders, even though natural gas was moving away from Germany on Saturday and back toward the east (the New York Times covered it well here) Here’s Bloomberg’s Helen Robertson on Gazprom’s decision not to book more gas transit to Europe: Russia’s Gazprom has declined to book extra pipeline capacity to send gas to Europe next year through Ukraine and Poland. Gazprom decided against booking additional gas transit capacity for January-September 2022 at auctions today. That indicates it doesn’t intend to supply more than contractual volumes through those routes, despite signs that Moscow was preparing to increase exports to the region. The move will keep Europe’s energy markets on edge, as colder temperatures will drive up demand for gas for heating in the coming months. It could also indicate that Russia is preparing to ship gas through its new Nord Stream 2 pipeline, or trying to put pressure on German regulators to approve it. Bloomberg has the details: While President Vladimir Putin has said his country is ready to deliver all of the gas that Europe needs, especially when demand peaks, Gazprom didn’t reserve any extra capacity to send fuel to Europe in the first quarter next year via Ukraine and Poland, according to the results of several capacity auctions on Tuesday. It can still book those capacities at forthcoming monthly sales, although allocations and actual flows have been limited since September in what is seen as a contributing factor in Europe’s gas supply squeeze. That prompted accusations from some in Europe that the country is using the region’s energy crunch to advance approval for the contentious Nord Stream 2 pipeline to Germany. The first quarter, when gas consumption typically increases, will be key for Russia as it seeks to start Nord Stream 2 and re-direct at least some transit flows to the link. Gas for next-day UK delivery are now up almost 8% at 167p per therm - roughly three times higher than in January. They fell to a near two-month low of 139p/therm last Friday, after Russian president Vladimir Putin told Gazprom officials to pump more supplies into the EU, after it fills its domestic depots by November 8th. Nord Stream 2, which runs on the bed of the Baltic Sea from Russia to Germany, is awaiting certification from Germany. Critics, such as the US, fear regulatory approval will only reinforce Europe’s dependence on Russia and undermine Ukraine by making its pipelines redundant. Dmitry Marinchenko, senior director at Fitch ratings agency, says (via Reuters): “Gazprom is presumably betting on Nord Stream 2 coming online fairly soon – and does not want to assume additional obligations as of now as the Ukraine transit route and the Yamal-Europe pipeline are likely to be used as balancing routes once Nord Stream 2 is up and running,” Yahoo Inc. is pulling out of China, citing an “increasingly challenging business and legal environment” after Beijing imposed tighter controls. Yahoo ceased offering its services in China on Monday, and users in China now see a message saying its sites are no longer accessible. In a statement, it says: “Yahoo remains committed to the rights of our users and a free and open internet. We thank our users for their support.” This makes Yahoo the second well-known US technology firm to curb its China operations recently, after Microsoft’s LinkedIn last month. Associated Press has more details: Chinese authorities maintain a firm grip on internet censorship in the country and require companies operating in China to censor content and keywords deemed politically sensitive or inappropriate. “In recognition of the increasingly challenging business and legal environment in China, Yahoo’s suite of services will no longer be accessible from mainland China as of November 1,” the company said in a statement. It said it “remains committed to the rights of our users and a free and open internet.” The company’s withdrawal coincided with the implementation of China’s Personal Information Protection Law, which limits what information companies can gather and sets standards for how it must be stored. Chinese laws also stipulate that companies operating in the country must hand over data if requested by authorities, making it difficult for Western firms to operate in China as they may also face pressure back home over giving in to China’s demands. Although Yahoo isn’t the major player it once was, it still runs a range of news sites, an email service, and website such as TechCrunch, Autoblog and Engadget. This move highlights the pressures on tech firms as Beijing demands tighter control on customer data and privacy. Liza Lin, the Wall Street Journal’s China correspondent, tweets that it “illustrates the trade off foreign companies face” if they want to operate in China. Pharmaceuticals giant Pfizer has lifted its full-year sales forecast for its Covid-19 jab by 7.5%, after seeing revenues and profit soar at its vaccine division. Pfizer’s revenues more than doubled year-on-year in the July-September quarter, up 130% to $24.1bn. Most of that was due to Comirnaty, its Covid-19 vaccine -- if you exclude it, revenues were up 7% to $11.1bn. Adjusted income was up 133% year-on-year, at almost $7.7bn for the quarter. Pfizer now expects to bring in $36bn of revenue from the vaccine this year, after recently signing deals to roll out booster doses, and receiving clearances for children to receive it in some countries. The company said it is also on track to deliver 2.3 billion doses of the vaccine. My colleague Julia Kollewe explains: The Covid jab, called Comirnaty and developed with Germany’s BioNTech, contributed $13bn of revenues in the three months to 30 September. That was more than half of Pfizer’s total revenues of $24bn in the quarter, which rose 134% from a year earlier. In the first six months of the year, Corminaty revenues were $11.3bn. Pfizer raised its 2021 forecast for Corminaty sales from $33.5bn in July, as it expects to deliver 2.3bn doses this year. Together with BioNTech, it continues to expect to manufacture 3bn doses by the end of December, although not all of them will be delivered by then. More here: Pfizer has also lifted its full-year revenue forecasts to $81bn–$82bn, from $78bn to $80bn, and raised its earnings guidance to $4.13 to $4.18 per share, up from $3.95 to $4.05. Dr. Albert Bourla, chairman and chief executive officer of Pfizer, said: “While we are proud of our third quarter financial performance, we are even more proud of what these financial results represent in terms of the positive impact we are having on human lives around the world. For example, more than 75% of the revenues we have recorded up through third-quarter 2021 for Comirnaty have come from supplying countries outside the U.S., and we remain on track to achieve our goal of delivering at least two billion doses to low- and middle-income countries by the end of 2022 -- at least one billion to be delivered this year and one billion next year, with the possibility to increase those deliveries if more orders are placed by these countries for 2022. One billion of these doses will be supplied to the U.S. government at a not-for-profit price to be donated to the world’s poorest nations at no charge to those countries. However, a report last month showed that wealthy countries had only distributed a small number of the vaccines promised to the developing world so far. Sterling has slipped to a three-week low against the US dollar, as traders ponder whether the Bank of England will raise interest rates on Thursday. Hawkish comments from some BoE policymakers (such as Michael Saunders), and rising inflationary pressures, lifted the chances of a rate hike. But with other Monetary Policy Committee members (Catherine Mann and Silvana Tenreyro) urging a cautious approach, a rise isn’t nailed on. Martin Beck, senior economic advisor to the EY ITEM Club, predicts the committee will be split, but a majority will vote to leave borrowing costs unchanged. They’ll want to wait for more information on the impact of ending the furlough scheme this autumn, he explains. Plus, higher interest rates don’t tackle some of the factors driving up inflation (such as supply chain problems and shortages). In its last meeting in September, the MPC judged that it would be desirable to assess the impact of the end of the furlough scheme before changing policy. But data to make that assessment are still lacking. And given the growing cost of living pressures faced by households from higher inflation, rising energy bills and forthcoming tax rises, raising interest rates now could exacerbate pressures and risk knocking confidence – and the recovery – off course. The risks of continuing a ‘wait-and see’ approach for a few more months are comparably low. The global forces pushing inflation up are largely beyond the ability of monetary policy to influence, and there is little evidence of inflation expectations among the public breaking out. Meanwhile, tightening policy when other major central banks are still in loosening mode would seem incongruous, particularly when the UK economy was more affected by the pandemic than the US and the eurozone. The pound has slipped by 0.4 of a cent to $1.363. UK government bond yields have also dipped this morning. Shares in meal kit supplier HelloFresh have surged 15%, after it raised its full year sales forecast. HelloFresh, which sends pre-portioned ingredients to customers each week, reported year-on-year revenue growth of 45% in the third quarter of 2021, with a 39% jump in customers. The Berlin-based company has now hiked its full-year sales forecast to between 57% and 62%, up from 45% to 55% previously. The pandemic drove interest in meal kits, as lockdowns forced restaurants to shut down. And with demand still strong, HelloFresh says it will invest ‘hundreds of millions’ in automation technology over the next couple of years, as it looks to expand and speed up its delivery services. Chief executive Dominik Richter told a media call (via Reuters) that: “Automation technology is definitely a big part of our future strategy.” But, he did not think HelloFresh’s business model allowed rapid or same-day deliveries (typically customers choose their meals from a menu several days before the ingredients arrive). Output growth at factories across the eurozone has slowed to its lowest rate in 16 months, as supply chain issues continue to disrupt manufacturing. Output and new order growth both lost momentum again in October, while delays receiving supplies lengthened drastically, according to the latest survey of purchasing managers at eurozone manufacturers. Companies blamed low availability of shipping containers, widespread shortages of components and raw materials, and problems with transportation -- a time when there are delays at ports and shortages of lorry drivers. Firms also hiked their own prices at a record pace, after seeing unprecedented jumps in input costs. Backlogs of work rose, as firms struggled to get hold of the parts and materials they needed. But new orders, and export orders, both grew at the slowest rate since the start of the year, and business confidence slid to a one-year low. So, IHS Markit’s eurozone manufacturing PMI fell to an eight-month low of 58.3, from 58.6 in September, showing slower growth. Production growth was the weakest since June 2020, dropping to 53.3 from September’s 55.6 (50 shows stagnation), and shrank in France: Chris Williamson, chief business economist at IHS Markit says the supply chain woes are hurting growth, and pushing up prices. “Eurozone manufacturers reported a worsening of the supply chain situation in October, which curbed production growth sharply during the month. Average delivery times for raw materials lengthened at a rate exceeded only twice in almost a quarter of a century of survey data as companies reported demand once again running ahead of supply for a wide variety of inputs and components. Production constraints at suppliers were reported alongside a growing list of logistical issues. These include a lack of shipping containers and inadequate freight capacity, port congestion, driver shortages and broader transport delays linked mainly to the pandemic. These shortages have led to the weakest rise in factory output since the recovery began in July of last year, and also pushed inflationary pressures to new survey highs, raising further questions about just how transitory the recent spike in inflation will be. Back on BP... the energy giant has stated that global oil demand has bounced back above the key level of 100 million barrels a day which was last seen before the Covid-19 pandemic. BP chief financial officer Murray Auchincloss told a conference call this morning that “Somewhere next year we will above pre-Covid levels.”, adding: “OPEC+ is doing a good job managing the balance, so we remain constructive on oil prices.” But, this rebound in demand could intensify the pressure on Opec+ to pump more oil. It is only gradually increasing output by 400,000 barrels each month, despite calls from the White House to speed up. Auchincloss also forecast that the global gas shortage that help lift BP’s profits in the last quarter will probably persist into next year, saying (via Montel). “We expect gas markets will remain tight during the period of peak winter demand. Standard Chartered Bank are the top FTSE 100 faller, down 8%, after the emerging markets-focused lender warned that the economic recovery from the pandemic remains uneven. Standard Chartered reported a 44% jump in underlying pre-tax profits in the last quarter, to $1.1bn, with credit impairment costs falling. Statutory profits before tax jumped 129% to $996m, ahead of forecasts. The bank flagged that supply chain disruption is also hitting the recovery, and stuck with its prediction of flat earnings growth in 2021. And while it is encouraged by “robust levels of export growth’ across many of its markets in Asia, it anticipates that the recovery will remain uneven. While credit risk remains elevated, we have seen improvements in a number of metrics with high-risk assets lower for the fifth successive quarter, and the overall portfolio remains stable and resilient. The Group is well-positioned to support our clients as economies recover but continues to remain vigilant to the continued impact of COVID-19 including vaccination progress and the likelihood of uneven economic recovery across markets and industries. Here’s Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor: Gambling group Flutter has fallen towards the bottom of the FTSE 100 leaderboard, after punters enjoyed a run of good sporting results against the bookies. Flutter reported today that some ‘unfavourable sports results in the first 24 days of October’ had knocked £60m off its earnings. Gamblers tend to get the upper hand over the bookies when favourites do well, and last month saw some profitable betting. The company, which owns Paddy Power and Betfair, says this includes some international football results, Champions League games and boxing bouts - such as Tyson Fury’s win of Deontay Wilder - along with Australian horse racing and American football games. As chief executive Peter Jackson told reporters: “It’s what happens, occasionally you have a run of bad luck and it’s not unhelpful for our punters that they get to see a winning streak.” Flutter has also temporarily closed its Dutch operations on 1 October, which is likely to cost £10m this year, and approximately £40m in 2022. Flutter also grew its average monthly customers by 13% year-on-year in Q3, with revenues up 9%. However, online revenues in the UK and Ireland fell 5% in Q3, while revenues at its retail sites were down 6% year-on-year. Russ Mould, investment director of AJ Bell says: On a group basis if you dig deeper into Flutter’s numbers, it is clear from the figures that life is not a breeze. UK revenue has dipped, partially because last year’s comparative period saw a lot of big games condensed into the quarter, but also that punters now have more options with how to spend their money in a post-lockdown world. “Regulatory and political pressure remains intense on the gambling sector and in a world where ESG (environmental, social and governance) factors are now on the boardroom agenda, gambling companies need to do even more to stop vulnerable people getting into financial trouble through betting. Shares in Flutter are down 6.4% at £131.65 this morning (updated). Shares in online retailer THG have fallen over 6% to a new low as its second largest shareholder offloads nearly half its stake. According to Reuters, BlackRock is selling 58m shares in THG at 195p each, out of its previous stake of 123.5m shares. That’s 10% below last night’s close. This news knocked THG, formerly known as The Hut Group, down to 204p at present - extending its recent slump to a fresh record low. THG shares tumbled last month after a capital markets day which was meant to reassure investors about its e-commerce technology platform Ingenuity. It offers logistics and technology to help major companies around the world sell online without having to build their own systems. But as my colleague Sarah Butler explained: Interest has focused on Ingenuity Commerce, a division that provides online retail services, from web hosting all the way to delivery, to brands such as Homebase, Unilever and Danone. There was particular excitement around the signing of international group Nestlé as the group said it had more than doubled its number of clients to 140 this year. Yet Ingenuity Commerce achieved net revenues of just £18.3m in the six months to the end of June, or just over 1% of THG’s total turnover. Scant detail about signings of new partners for this division or progress with major clients such as Nestlé has sparked a concern that SoftBank may be unlikely to take up its rather expensive investment option, pulling the rug away from market valuations for the company reliant on that deal. Meanwhile, analysts have begun to question whether supplying e-commerce for Toblerone or Vimto can really pull in big bucks. The Manchester-based firm has also faced corporate governance concerns, leading founder and CEO Matt Moulding to give up his “golden” share of the company. And last week, THG flagged that profit margins would be squeezed by currency changes. Today’s losses mean THG has shed two-thirds (!) of its value since September, having floated at 500p just over a year ago. In other energy news.... Barclays has financed more in fossil fuel projects than any of the UK’s largest banks in the months leading up to the Cop26 climate talks in Glasgow. That’s according to a report by climate finance campaigners. The bank financed $5.6bn (£4.1bn) for new fossil fuel projects from January 2021 to the eve of the UN climate summit, Market Forces found, despite growing international warnings that any new fossil developments would destroy any chance of avoiding a catastrophic climate breakdown. Barclays’ multibillion pound support for fossil fuel projects was ranked ahead of that of HSBC, which financed $5.3bn this year, and Standard Chartered, which made $4.3bn available. Here’s the full story: In the City, the FTSE 100 has dropped 0.5% in early trading. The index of blue-chip shares has fallen 36 points to 7252 points, having hit its highest level since February 2020 on Monday. Mining companies are among the fallers, such as Anglo American (-3.6%), BHP Group (-3.5%) and Glencore (-2.9%), following a plunge in the iron ore price today. Iron ore futures slumped again, as China intensified its crackdown on steel production, with more restrictions to curb pollution ahead of the Winter Olympics early next year. Research group Mysteel report that daily crude steel output in the last 11 days of October dropped to the lowest since March 2020, as local governments forced some steel mills to trim their production, and softening steel prices and lacklustre demand hit output. undefined Shares in BP have fallen in early trading, despite the company reporting forecast-beating profits and announcing further share buybacks. They’re down 1.7% at 350p, away from the 16-month highs of 366p seen in October. Michael Hewson of CMC Markets says BP has made progress on its balance sheet, such as cutting its net debt below $32bn from over $40bn a year ago. But investors may remain unconvinced that CEO Bernard Looney can achieve his planned 40% reduction in oil and gas production by 2030. Hewson writes: To give an idea of how much of a good thing the rise in oil and gas prices is for BP is that almost all of BP’s profit comes from its oil and gas operations and productions businesses, which is great news while prices remain high. This quarter, and probably the rest of this year is likely to be a decent one for the likes of BP, when it comes to the current level of oil and natural gas prices, a fact acknowledged in their Q4 outlook, with the gas regions expected to contribute strongly on higher demand and as output in the Gulf of Mexico ramps up after the disruption caused by Hurricane Ida. Demand is likely to hold up into the winter months, however management needs to have a plan other than returning cash to shareholders. The company can talk about “Performing while Transforming” all it likes but it needs to prove to shareholders and the markets as a whole that it can transition to renewables in a way that doesn’t hammer its margins, and the jury is likely to remain out on that. At the moment, with energy prices where they are the company is in a sweet spot for cashflow and profit potential. It needs to use that time well. The surge in energy prices this year means BP is ‘gushing cash’, says Richard Hunter, Head of Markets at interactive investor: “The cash tills are ringing at BP given the oil price headwind, but an accounting adjustment has driven a loss for the quarter. The adjustment relates to a hedge on higher gas prices which would unwind in the event of falling prices or the delivery of cargoes. Stripping this adjustment out, the underlying replacement cost profit for the quarter was $3.3 billion, comfortably ahead of expectations, and comparing with a profit of $2.8 billion in the previous quarter and $86 million in the corresponding period last year. BP’s prodigious cash generating ability has not only enabled the announcement of a further planned share buyback of $1.25 billion, but also a remarkable 20% reduction in net debt over the last 12 months, from $40 billion to $32 billion. Meanwhile, the dividend is being maintained, with the current yield of 4.3% a clear enticement to income-seeking investors. Production has also increased marginally year-on-year, with the company expecting previous production declines to ease as the year wears on. There are expected bumps in the road to come given the volatility of energy prices, higher expected seasonal maintenance activity and some lessening of demand, while the effects of Hurricane Ida are still being felt. Hunter adds: The current price of Brent oil of around $85 per barrel compares favourably with BP’s own projections which are based on a price of $60, let alone the “cash balance point” of $42 which the company previously identified. BP has also announced it will spend another $1.25bn on share buybacks. The move will funnel some of its profits back to shareholders, at a time when some investors are shunning fossil fuel producers due to the climate crisis. BP says it has completed the $1.4bn share buyback announced at its second-quarter results, and plans to execute an additional $1.25bn share repurchase over the next three months. Buybacks boost a company’s earnings-per-share, so are a boost for investors. But critics point out that companies could use this capital to invest in new projects -- such as the green energy projects needed to hit net zero and reduce the reliance on oil and gas. As Bloomberg puts it: The last of the western world’s supermajors to report third-quarter earnings, BP followed very much in its peers’ footsteps by reporting a big increase in profit from a year earlier. After years of poor returns, the industry is funneling most of this extra cash into repurchasing shares and paying dividends. That’s pleasing shareholders who are increasingly concerned about climate change, but lack of investment in new production has contributed to the current global energy crunch. BP spent $2.9bn on capital expenditure in the last quarter, and is aiming for $13bn this year. In the last quarter it finished its Matapal offshore gas project off the cost of Trinidad and Tobago, and the Thunder Horse South Expansion Phase 2 in the Gulf of Mexico. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. BP has predicted that gas markets will remain tight this winter, after rising oil and gas prices lifted the energy giant’s earnings. BP beat City forecasts this morning by posting underlying profits of over $3.3bn for the last quarter, due to higher oil and gas prices and refining margins and strong trading results. And with the global economy facing an energy crunch, BP says: Gas markets were very strong in the quarter and we expect they will remain tight during the period of peak winter demand. BP also predicts that oil prices will be boosted by this dash for gas, with Brent crude already at a three-year high around $85 per barrel. Oil prices have continued to increase, and inventories have reduced back towards pre-pandemic levels. We expect oil prices to be supported by continued inventory draw-down, with the potential for additional demand from gas to oil switching. OPEC+ decision making on production levels continues to be a key factor in oil prices and market rebalancing. Rising energy prices lifted BP’s underlying replacement cost profit (its preferred measure of earnings) to $3.322bn for the third quarter of the year. That’s 18% up from $2.798bn in Q2, and ahead of forecasts of around $3.06bn. That’s sharply higher than the $86m profit a year earlier, in July-September 2020 when BP was recovering from the economic shock of the pandemic. BP’s chief executive, Bernard Looney, says: This has been another good quarter for bp - our businesses are generating strong underlying earnings and cash flow while maintaining their focus on safe and reliable operations. Rising commodity prices certainly helped, but I am most pleased that quarter by quarter, we’re doing what we said we would - delivering significant cash to strengthen our finances, grow distributions to shareholders and invest in our strategic transformation. This is what we mean by performing while transforming. On a statutory basis, BP actually made a loss of $2.5bn -- which it says is due to the way that hedges used to risk-manage its liquified natural gas contracts are accounted for..... Wholesale gas prices soared this year during the energy price crunch. The cost of next-day UK delivery surged from 60p per therm in January to over 300p/therm last month, although it’s now dropped back to 155p/therm last night. Those wholesale prices have forced a swathe of suppliers under -- yesterday Bluegreen Energy Services, which had just 5,900 customers, ceased trading. Bluegreen Energy said the crisis had left it in an “unsustainable situation” and it had been “regrettably... forced to make the difficult decision to cease trading”. Also coming up today European stock markets are set for a subdued start, after hitting record highs yesterday. Wall Street also reached fresh records last night, ahead of the US Federal Reserve’s two-day policy meeting which begins today, where officials could decide to taper its bond-buying stimulus programme: Ipek Ozkardeskaya, senior analyst at Swissquote, explains: Nothing gets in the way of the equity bulls: not chip shortages, nor labour shortages, or the energy crisis, or the pandemic, not even the fact that the Federal Reserve (Fed) is just about to announce scaling back its massive bond purchases program in order to contain the rising inflation. The bulls continue pushing the equity rally to fresh records. The S&amp;P500 and Nasdaq both renewed record on Monday’s session, whereas the major headline on Bloomberg this morning was that ‘the supply chain crisis risks taking the global economy down with it’. Still, investors prefer seeing the glass half full: we have a strong earnings season, 80% of the S&amp;P500 companies that announced earnings so far, beat expectations. The agenda 9am GMT: Eurozone manufacturing PM survey for October 2pm GMT: IBD/TIPP index of US economic optimismA senior member of the UK government’s pandemic advisory body has left the group, saying that the picture in the UK is “concerning”. Sir Jeremy Farrar, who has been a part of the Scientific Advisory Group for Emergencies (Sage) since the start of the pandemic left the group at the end of October, Sky News has reported. The director of the charitable Wellcome Trust had pushed for more mask wearing, use of ventilation and greater Covid testing to try to tackle rising cases, in a plan which has been termed “vaccine plus”. However the government has stuck to its current strategy of trying to encourage people to get vaccinated and for those eligible to take up booster jabs. Farrar revealed in a book published earlier this year, Spike: The Virus v The People, that he almost resigned in September 2020 when cases were rising and the government had just finished its “eat out to help out” scheme to try to drive people back into hospitality venues. He had also been among those to call for a lockdown in mid-March 2020, as Covid infections increased and other countries like Italy and France saw large numbers of people in hospital with the virus In a statement, he said Sage had come under huge pressure during the pandemic, and that he was leaving to devote more time to the Wellcome Trust. He said: “The Covid-19 crisis is a long way from over, with the global situation deeply troubling. “The high levels of transmission seen in the UK remain concerning, but I stepped down as a participant of Sage knowing ministers had been provided with most of the key science advice needed over the winter months. “Throughout this crisis Sage has provided vital evidence, and independent, expert, transparent advice to support the UK response, often under huge pressure.” He added: “My focus now must be on our work at Wellcome. This includes supporting the international research effort to end the pandemic, ensuring the world is better prepared for inevitable future infectious disease threats, and making the case so the full potential of science is realised to inform and drive change against all the urgent health threats we face globally.” The government updated public documents detailing Sage’s membership on Tuesday, but Sir Jeremy’s name remained on it. A government spokesperson said: “Throughout the pandemic we have been guided by scientific and medical experts and thanks to our collective national effort we have saved lives, vaccinated tens of millions of people and protected our NHS. “We knew the coming months would be challenging – this is exactly why we set out our Covid plan for autumn and winter. We are monitoring all the data closely, and the prime minister has been clear that it does not yet show that Plan B [such as compulsory face masks in some settings, asking people to work from home and introducing vaccine passports] is necessary. But it is ready should we need to act to avoid a rise in hospitalisations which would put unsustainable pressure on the NHS. “Our focus remains on our booster campaign, vaccinating 12- to 15-year-olds, and encouraging those who haven’t yet come forward to have their jab.”A talented artist was the “Joseph Goebbels” of the violent neo-Nazi group National Action and continued to be a leading light in the organisation after it was banned by the UK government, a jury has been told. Ben Raymond, 32, from Swindon in Wiltshire, was one of the founders of NA, whose members hoarded machetes, swords, ice picks, firearms and even a crossbow powerful enough to bring down an elephant, Bristol crown court was told. Raymond allegedly acted as a “roving ambassador” for the group, which is said to have had links with far-right groups in eastern Europe, Norway and the US and was formed with the aim of beginning a race war. He was also allegedly a close associate of an NA member who planned to kill the Labour MP Rosie Cooper and was in close contact with a man called Zack Davies shortly before he attacked an Asian dentist in a supermarket in north Wales with a machete. Barnaby Jameson QC, prosecuting, said Raymond was a “public face” of NA and was careful not to stockpile weapons himself or carry out physical attacks. “His jihad was fought with words and images,” said Jameson. “He was, like Joseph Goebbels of the original cabal of Nazis, the natural head of propaganda. “He gave media interviews, setting out the group’s virulent ethnic cleansing agenda to the media with sometimes transcendental calm.” Founded in 2013 when Raymond was a student, NA was, Jameson said, “racist, antisemitic and aggressive”, a “white jihadist” group the like of which had not been seen in the UK since the British Union of Fascists, which was banned in 1940. The group was small, secretive and paranoid, the jury was told, communicating using cryptic messaging systems, some of which self-destructed, and organised paramilitary training such as mixed martial arts and fighting with knives. NA was banned in December 2016, the court heard, the first far-right group to be proscribed since the second world war, joining organisations such as the IRA and al-Qaida. But Jameson said Raymond and others flouted the ban with NA “morphing” into cells that continued to operate underground. After the ban another leader emailed fellow members: “We are shedding one skin for another … These are exciting times.” Groups that emerged after the ban included the TripleK Mafia, which was based in the Midlands, one in the north-west called Revenge, and Scottish Dawn, the court was told. Raymond used his artistic skills to create the TripleK logos, it is claimed. Raymond denies being a member of a proscribed organisation and possessing material likely to be useful for a person committing or preparing an act of terrorism, including information on the making of molotov cocktails. The trial continues.The team behind the musical Into the Woods says the show will go on despite a production at the Old Vic in London being cancelled after staff unrest at director Terry Gilliam’s involvement. The Old Vic is yet to give an explicit reason for the cancellation of Stephen Sondheim’s 1986 play, but it is understood staff at the theatre were unhappy about previous remarks made by Gilliam about the #MeToo movement, diversity and trans rights. Former artistic director of the English National Opera John Berry, whose production company Scenario Two is co-producing the show, said: “We are focusing on finding a new home for this show … These things happen, it’s not the first change of plan for a West End show, or the last, and current times everywhere are unpredictable.” Scenario Two, Berry added, retains the rights for Into The Woods with Gilliam directing. Last week, the Old Vic posted a brief statement on its website announcing that it and Scenario Two had “mutually agreed” that Into the Woods would no longer take place at the Old Vic. “The Old Vic wishes the show well for its future life,” the statement said, adding that ticket holders would be contacted directly. Although it was a surprise last-minute cancellation of a show scheduled for spring 2022, a report by the Stage – independently confirmed by the Guardian – revealed it followed a protracted row that began when the production was announced last May. At an all-staff meeting at the time, Old Vic executive director Kate Varah allegedly addressed concerns raised by staff who felt Gilliam’s previous comments were at odds with the Old Vic’s culture and values. This included members of the Old Vic 12, the organisation’s artistic development scheme made up of young writers, producers and directors. It is understood that Varah also met with Gilliam and co-director Leah Hausman to discuss these values. The Old Vic has not confirmed this meeting to the Guardian, but in a statement to the Stage it said: “Ahead of any season announcement, senior management at the Old Vic would meet with the directors who are programmed to work in the season as a matter of course to discuss our culture and values. This happened with the co-directors of Into the Woods, Terry Gilliam and Leah Hausman.” The organisation’s decision to part ways with Into the Woods came soon after Gilliam posted in support of Dave Chappelle’s new comedy show on Netflix, which has been criticised as transphobic. “I’m encouraging all of you to watch Dave Chappelle’s new show … To me, he’s the greatest standup comedian alive today: incredibly intelligent, socially aware, dangerously provocative, and gut-wrenchingly funny,” he wrote. The former Monty Python star has previously courted controversy by describing the #MeToo movement as a “witch-hunt”. In the same interview, he said he was “tired of white men being blamed for everything wrong with the world,” adding: “When I announce that I’m a black lesbian in transition, people take offence at that. Why?” In 2017 the Old Vic received 20 allegations of inappropriate behaviour by staff members against the theatre’s former artistic director Kevin Spacey. Into the Woods, which has played on Broadway and the West End, is inspired by the fairy tales of the Brothers Grimm. The Stage reported that Sondheim, the composer, approved the new production because he was impressed with Gilliam’s treatment for the show. While critics said Gilliam had been unfairly “cancelled”, others – including some members of the Old Vic 12 – welcomed the move. “This should have been scrapped over a year ago, but it’s taken them this long to do something right for ONCE,” Nassy Konan wrote on Twitter. Penny Babakhani tweeted: “It should have been cancelled over a year ago. And the leadership at the Old Vic who owe many of us an apology for the awful, awful way this was handled.” The Old Vic did not respond to an approach for comment. Gilliam has not yet responded.Eddie Jones has mounting injury headaches before England’s opening autumn international against Tonga on Saturday with Marcus Smith a doubt to face the Pacific Islanders, potentially disrupting the head coach’s plans to unleash a new-look 10-12 axis. Compounding matters for Jones is a report that the scrum-half Harry Randall, who has been ruled out of the entire autumn series, was injured during a paddleboarding session as part of a team-bonding exercise in Jersey last week. In addition, Max Malins, Louis Lynagh and Raffi Quirke will all miss the match at Twickenham with injuries sustained before coming into camp. Smith has been severely restricted in training this week due to a lower leg injury and faces a race against time to prove his fitness before Jones names his starting XV to face Tonga on Thursday. Jones remains “cautiously optimistic” Smith will be fit to play some part in the match but having already revealed his intention to pair the in-form fly-half with his captain, Owen Farrell, in a revamped midfield, the head coach could be forced into a rethink. Jones also has problems at full-back with doubts lingering over Freddie Steward, who also has a lower leg injury, and as a result George Furbank has been retained in Jones’s truncated squad. Scrum-half is a problem position, too. The RFU has insisted that Randall was cleared to train after the paddleboarding session and his hip injury was diagnosed after a subsequent rugby session but his absence, and that of Quirke, leaves Jones light in that department. If Smith is ruled out, meanwhile, Farrell would switch to fly-half with Manu Tuilagi and Henry Slade the likely centre pairing, though the uncapped Mark Atkinson has also been retained. “[Marcus] hasn’t done much this week, just a bit of ball handling,” Jones said. “We’re being conservative with him but we’re cautiously optimistic that he’ll be right to play. The last call we make is 48 hours before the game. “We are keen for [Marcus] to be involved in the game. It’s not frustrating, it’s part and parcel of preparing a team, players pick up small knocks, and he’ll recover well. If we don’t get to see him this week we will get to see him next week.” Malins and Quirke were named in the 28-man squad on Tuesday night but neither is in contention to face Tonga, meaning Northampton’s scrum-half Alex Mitchell is set for the matchday 23 with Randall also absent. There was no place, however, for Sam Simmonds, who waits for another England cap having last appeared under Jones in 2018. The Saracens hooker Jamie George has been kept on, having been initially left out of the squad, while Alex Dombrandt, Adam Radwan and Jamie Blamire are all set to add to the caps they won over the summer. Meanwhile, Alun Wyn Jones has been ruled out for the rest of the autumn after Wales confirmed he requires surgery on the shoulder injury sustained in the defeat against the All Blacks on Saturday. Jones, who was winning his record 149th cap for Wales, went down clutching his left shoulder midway through the first half, evoking memories of the injury from which he battled back to lead the British &amp; Irish Lions in South Africa. Wales have confirmed the 36-year-old now faces a number of months out of action.Last week’s budget included a stealth cut to funding for youth services worth more than £400m over the next three years, Labour has claimed. In his budget speech last Wednesday, Rishi Sunak said: “as we level up public services, we’re also levelling up communities – restoring the pride people feel in the places they call home. “To do that, we’re providing £560m for youth services, enough to fund up to 300 youth clubs across the country.” However, the Conservatives had already promised a £500m Youth Investment Fund in 2019; and the National Citizen Service, which provides young people with volunteering opportunities, has received an average of £178m over the past three years, according to Labour analysis. If the NCS continued to be funded at that level, and the £500m Youth Investment Fund was additional money, that would total more than £1bn over the next three years – almost twice Sunak’s announced figure. Separately, analysis by the House of Commons library carried out for Labour shows that public spending on services for young people in England has been cut by two-thirds in real terms over the past 10 years. Shadow minister for young people, Cat Smith, said: “with Conservative cuts year on year, it is no surprise we’ve seen a rise of anti-social behaviour alongside the huge challenge of violent crime and county lines. Youth services prevent serious youth violence that costs taxpayers and ruins young people’s lives.” “Given how much has been stripped away from youth services over the last decade by the Conservatives, this disguised cut from the government is likely to force many grassroots youth organisations to close.” As MPs continued to debate the budget in the House of Commons on Wednesday, Labour MPs accused Sunak of failing to make up for more than a decade of austerity – comparing his promise of new “family hubs,” to the more than 500 Sure Start centres scrapped since 2010, for example. A spokesperson for the Department for Digital, Culture, Media and Sport conceded that the £560m promised by Sunak would include the cost of running the pre-existing NCS, which was set up by David Cameron. “We are determined to give every child the best start in life and level up opportunity across the country,” they said. “Last week we announced plans to invest £560m to make sure youth services get the support they need. This includes funding the construction or refurbishment of up to 300 youth facilities in the most deprived areas of the country, and supporting the running of the NCS over the next three years.” The spokesperson also pointed to almost £5bn set aside for helping school pupils catch up with lost learning in the wake of the pandemic – though that is significantly less than was recommended by the government’s own adviser on the issue, , who quit in protest. Sunak’s third budget included a slew of spending promises, as the Conservatives seek to live up to their promise to “level up” neglected parts of the UK; but he also held out the prospect of tax cuts in the run-up to the next election.• A feature said: “Early in the pandemic, scientists were telling us that masks were a good idea.” The scientific community was actually split about the benefits of the practice (Why are so many giving up on masks?, 26 October, G2, page 8). • An editorial column condensed history when it said: “Two decades have now elapsed since the collapse of the Soviet Union.” The Soviet Union dissolved in December 1991, three decades ago (Energy, 29 October, Journal, page 2). • Other recently amended articles include: Bosnia is in danger of breaking up, warns top international official Forced retreat: one New Zealand town’s fate highlights coming fight over climate adaptation India sets target of net zero by 2070 at Cop26 – live Nearly two-thirds of those who died young in 2019 were male, research finds Kane, midfield and recruitment: key challenges facing Tottenham Does Salisbury train crash point to wider problems on the network?Virginians on Tuesday headed to the polls to elect a new governor, in a closely contested race between the Democrat Terry McAuliffe and Republican Glenn Youngkin widely seen as a referendum on Joe Biden’s presidency. They did so as a leading Virginia polling expert warned that Youngkin may be riding a wave of “white backlash” all the way to the governor’s mansion, having successfully focused on controversy over the place of race in education. In the final hours of the campaign, the candidates offered starkly different closing arguments, making their cases to voters whose odd-year gubernatorial elections have long reflected the national political mood a year into any new administration. Saddled by Biden’s sagging poll numbers and intra-party wrangling that has gridlocked the president’s domestic spending agenda, McAuliffe has attempted to tether his opponent to Donald Trump, a polarizing figure in voter-rich northern suburbs. Youngkin has mostly avoided the subject of Trump while embracing many of his tactics, a strategy many Republican strategists believe could be a model for the midterm elections next year. Polls showed an unexpectedly close race in a state that has trended Democratic since the election of Barack Obama in 2008. A loss in Virginia, which Biden won by nearly 10 points in 2020, would be deeply alarming for a party already bracing for a difficult challenge next year. Hours before polls closed in the commonwealth, Biden expressed confidence that Democrats would win the gubernatorial race in Virginia, and hold the governor’s mansion in New Jersey, where the incumbent, Phil Murphy, is seeking re-election in the Garden state. “We’re gonna win,” Biden said, leaning into the microphone for emphasis, during a press conference in Glasgow, Scotland. He acknowledged that the contest in Virginia was “tight”, saying the outcome would reflect “who shows up, who turns out”. But he waved off attempts to read the race as a barometer of his presidency, insisting that McAuliffe’s fortunes in the state were not tied to his poll numbers or his domestic agenda. “Even if we had passed my agenda, I wouldn’t claim we won because Biden’s agenda passed,” he told reporters. The president predicted that Americans would know the result by the time Air Force One touches down in Washington at roughly 1am local time, though some analysts have warned that it could take longer. Changes to Virginia law mean mail-in and early ballots will be tabulated more quickly than in 2020. As such, Democrats may appear to be ahead early in the night, before the localities more favorable to Republicans start counting election day ballots. On Monday, the last day of dueling events, McAuliffe continued to hammer Youngkin over his connections to Trump, warning darkly that a Republican win in Virginia could help pave the way for a Trump comeback in 2024. But then he went further. “Guess how Glenn Youngkin is finishing his campaign?” the former governor, 64, told a crowd in Fairfax. “He is doing an event with Donald Trump here in Virginia.” That was a lie. Trump was not in Virginia, though he did boost the Republican candidate with a tele-rally. Youngkin did not participate. Youngkin, 54, a former private equity executive and political newcomer, closed his campaign with a final attempt to harness parents’ anger over school closures, mask mandates and what their children are learning, and turn it into an election night upset. Asked why education had become a central factor in Youngkin’s stronger-than-expected showing, Larry Sabato of the Center for Politics at the University of Virginia said: “One of the candidates decided it was his ticket to the governor’s mansion and he may well be right.” Speaking to MSNBC, Sabato pointed to the core of Youngkin’s appeal on education: a promise to ban critical race theory in schools. Critical race theory, or CRT, is an academic discipline that examines the ways in which racism operates in US laws and society. It is not taught in Virginia schools, regardless of Youngkin’s promise to ban it. “The operative word is not critical,” Sabato said. “And it’s not theory. It’s race. What a shock, huh? Race. That is what matters. And that’s why it’s sticks. “There’s a lot of, we can call it white backlash, white resistance, whatever you want to call it. It has to do with race. And so we live in a post-factual era … It doesn’t matter that [CRT] isn’t taught in Virginia schools. It’s this generalised attitude that whites are being put upon and we’ve got to do something about it. We being white voters.” Cultural issues have dominated the race, Youngkin also promising to give parents more control over how public schools handle gender and Covid-19, McAuliffe vowing to protect voting rights and abortion access. McAuliffe, a Clinton ally who was governor of Virginia from 2014 to 2018 – the state does not allow consecutive terms – has seen his lead evaporate. Polls have shown Youngkin succeeding by appealing to independents turned off by Trump without alienating his ardent supporters. Youngkin campaigned as an advocate for parents who want more say in their children’s education, capitalising on anger among conservatives who believe schools are overreaching in the name of diversity. Speaking in Richmond on Monday, he promised he would usher in “a Virginia where our government stops telling us what to do all the time”. McAuliffe also handed Youngkin a political gift when he said in a debate in September: “I don’t think parents should be telling schools what they should teach.” He has attacked Youngkin for hesitating to say whether Biden won the presidency legitimately. Youngkin acknowledged Biden’s victory but also called for an audit of Virginia voting machines, prompting Democrats to accuse him of validating Trump’s baseless election conspiracy theories. Both Biden and Barack Obama campaigned for McAuliffe. Trump has not visited the state. In his tele-rally on Monday, the former president told voters Youngkin would protect suburbs and did not repeat his lies about voter fraud. McAuliffe responded on Twitter, saying Trump was “pulling out all the stops to win this race because he knows Glenn will advance his Maga agenda here in Virginia. Tomorrow, Virginia will choose a better way.” In their final word on the campaign, Sabato’s team at UVA moved their prediction from “leans Democratic” to “leans Republican”. “Our sense is that the race has been moving toward Youngkin,” Kyle Kondik and J Miles Coleman wrote, “in large part because of the political environment. McAuliffe’s Trump-centric campaign also just doesn’t seem as potent in a non-federal race with the former president no longer in the White House.”In the run-up to the Glasgow summit, Prince Charles generated headlines when he urged Scott Morrison to attend Cop26. The Prince of Wales argued that the conference could be the last chance to save the planet. At that time, Australia’s prime minister was yet to land his net zero deal with the Nationals, and was equivocating about whether or not he would fly to Glasgow. In a televised interview, the Prince of Wales warned of a “catastrophic” impact if leaders didn’t turn up and ambitious commitments weren’t landed. When a BBC interviewer told the prince Morrison had not officially confirmed his attendance, Australia’s future monarch said he was aware he would be accused of meddling but action was needed immediately. “You gently try to suggest there may be other ways of doing things, in my case,” he said. Otherwise, you lot accuse me of interfering and meddling, don’t you?” When asked why it was important a world leader like Morrison attend, he said: “Well, that’s what I’m trying to say all the time, and the point being that this is a last-chance saloon, literally. “Because if we don’t really take the decisions that are vital now, it’s going to be almost impossible to catch up.” Given that preamble, there was considerable interest in how things might go when the prime minister met the Prince of Wales at the summit. When the prince was ushered into the room on Tuesday, Morrison introduced him to George Brandis – the Australian high commissioner in London. For context, Morrison noted that he had known Brandis when they served together in the cabinet; the high commissioner was the attorney general in his past parliamentary life. Charles seemed intrigued. While small talk is generally the established protocol for these royal photo opportunities, Morrison was clearly anxious to get down to business. He spoke like a man on the clock. The prime minister is the marketing guy, and there was a pitch to deliver. “But now we are committed to net zero by 2050,” he told the prince, with no segue apparent between Brandis’s past lawmaking and carbon neutrality. “Australia has done that here at Cop26, doubled our climate finance commitments, and we are working very closely with our Pacific family.” The words got faster. Morrison noted Prince Charles had always given “great attention” to the Pacific. The prime minister’s body language suggested the Australian was hoping for approval. The prince was polite but didn’t gush. At one point, he looked at official photographers, or perhaps an adviser, with an expression best characterised as bemusement. He murmured assent about his well-established Pacific watching, scratched his nose absently, and waved Morrison in the direction of a chair. The show was over. The observers were ushered out.Two struggling councils have been warned they face government intervention unless they selloff publicly-owned assets, including town halls, public toilets, leisure centres and libraries, and push ahead with further cuts to services. The threat by local government minister, Kemi Badenoch, followed publication of reviews into the two councils’ finances which concluded both ran the risk of failing to balance their budget – effectively going bankrupt – without urgent action. Badenoch told Peterborough city council, which is run by the Conservatives in alliance with independents, and Wirral council – run by a minority Labour administration – they must set out plans within 30 days to balance the books or face possible intervention. “Any faltering in this area would be of considerable concern and could lead to a reconsideration as to whether a different approach might be appropriate to secure the improvements that are necessary,” she wrote. The National Audit Office said this year that at least 25 councils in England were on the edge of bankruptcy after years of cuts, and amid soaring cost pressures. The pandemic has added more issues and both Slough and Croydon councils have declared effective bankruptcy in recent months. Peterborough – whose leader warned that “difficult choices” lay ahead – was told by Badenoch it had still not “fully grasped” the scale of its financial challenges, while in a separate letter she told Wirral it “had not fully acknowledged or perhaps even understood the severity” of its position. Both councils have made tens of millions of pounds of cuts in recent years, despite rising demand for services, particularly in adult social care and children’s services. Both have applied to government for financial support in recent months after concerns they would not be able to balance their budgets. The review of Peterborough’s finances said it had lost nearly £100m in government funding over the past decade. The council told reviewers services were now at “dangerously low levels” after repeated cuts in recent years and had in some cases reached a basic legal minimum service. However, the reviews insisted both councils had scope to make further cuts to services and should embark on a sale of assets. In Peterborough’s case this should include the sale of 3,000 acres of farmland, which currently bring in rent of £400,000 a year, the council town hall, and several office blocks. The review of Wirral’s finances concluded that it should sell off a raft of council-owned assets including golf courses, youth clubs, libraries, leisure centres, community centres, public toilets and office buildings to raise cash to balance its budget. The review criticised Wirral council’s apparent reluctance to make cuts or sack staff, saying it had a culture of avoiding “difficult financial decisions”. It said: “Until members and officers face up to the need to have to make difficult decisions … its financial sustainability remains uncertain.” Wayne Fitzgerald, the leader of Peterborough council, said: “The report acknowledges the very significant challenges we have faced in the past but also recognises that Peterborough’s services perform well and are low cost.” He added: “It is clear though that I as leader, including all other members, regardless of political party, must take on board the seriousness of these reports and set about implementing some of the recommendations which will mean that very difficult choices are ahead. “Going forward I want to invest more in services for residents and see the city continue to prosper and grow, but we will need the finances to do so.” Paul Satoor, chief executive of Wirral council, said: “We will take time to fully digest the findings and recommendations made in these reviews.”