More than a million vulnerable children in England are growing up emotionally damaged and with reduced life chances as a result of billions of pounds of austerity cuts to family support and youth services, according to a cross-party House of Lords inquiry. The Lords Public Services Committee said the pandemic had accelerated a pre-existing “crisis of child vulnerability” in which increasing number of youngsters and parents were unable to access help before their problems spun out of control. Too many children in deprived areas were taken into care, excluded from school, suffered from poor health, struggled in the job market or ended up in prison because of the lack of services able to intervene early with at-risk youngsters, it said. It called for early years spending to be “levelled up” after revealing £1.7bn a year funding cuts to Sure Start, youth and other family support services over the past decade had disproportionately affected children in the most deprived communities. For example, while Walsall had seen early intervention services reduced by 81%, Manchester by 75% and Liverpool by 65%, relatively affluent Surrey had seen cuts of just 10% and a handful of councils such as leafy Buckinghamshire had even increased early years spending. Lady Armstrong, the chair of the committee, called on ministers to urgently restore early intervention funding to 2010 levels and publish a national strategy to help vulnerable children. “Too many children fall through the gaps, go into care, are excluded from school or end up in prison – all of which costs the public purse more in the long run,” she said. Although the committee welcomed the government’s promise to invest £500m in early years services over the next three years, partly through the expansion of so-called “family hubs”, the committee said this fell short of what was needed after a decade of massive underinvestment. Vulnerable children were defined by the committee as aged 0-19 whose lives were not in immediate danger but who without targeted support were at risk of significant harm and diminished life chances. They included children with mental health problems or whose parents were mentally ill, or victims of domestic violence. While the pandemic had made it impossible to produce formal statistical estimates of the numbers of vulnerable children in 2021, the committee concluded there had been a big increase on the 829,000 vulnerable and “invisible” children identified in 2019 as not in receipt of support from services. The collapse of council-funded early intervention services between 2010-11 and 2019-20, when spending in England fell by an average of 48%, was linked to a 34% increase in spending over the same period on costlier late interventions such as youth justice, looked-after children’s services and safeguarding. The Local Government Association said the crisis meant many councils were overspending children’s budgets by millions of pounds a year. Councillor Anntoinette Bramble, the chair of the Local Government Association’s Children and Young People Board, said the report was “a stark reminder of the challenges councils face supporting and protecting vulnerable children”. A government spokesperson said: “We’re prioritising the wellbeing and safety of children, which is why we announced significant additional investment in services for families at the spending review. “We’re also providing the largest mental health funding in NHS history, alongside our Mental Health Recovery Plan, and support to improve mental health in schools. In addition, we have provided more than £28m to domestic abuse organisations to keep helplines and vital services running.”1) Chelsea favourites for latest Leicester meeting This will be the fourth meeting between Leicester and Chelsea this calendar year, clubs of differing resources whose fortunes nonetheless seem tangled together. Leicester went top after beating Chelsea 2-0 at home in January, James Maddison scoring the second goal before cheerfully claiming: “We knew they switched off at set pieces,” an observation that felt terminal to Frank Lampard’s employment. Having played some part in Thomas Tuchel’s arrival, Leicester won the FA Cup final against him in May, before league defeat at Stamford Bridge three days later helped to ensure the Foxes would narrowly miss out on the Champions League yet again. Chelsea are now European champions and Premier League leaders, but did not look at full power before the international break. Tuchel will demand a statement performance after the 1-1 draw against Burnley. Leicester are a long way off the title race now and while Brendan Rodgers would dearly love to upset Chelsea again, the absence of the injured midfielder Youri Tielemans means the odds are against them. LM Leicester v Chelsea, Saturday 12.30pm (all times GMT) 2) A tricky opener for Gerrard at Villa Steven Gerrard is back in the Premier League! It is going to be fascinating to see what he can achieve besides giving Aston Villa a touch more glamour on the sideline. For his first match – against Brighton on Saturday – his presence alone may be enough to stoke players who have seemed curiously short of confidence.The new manager will also have to devise a clear plan as the club continue to adapt to life after Jack Grealish. How will Gerrard use summer signings such as Emi Buendía and Leon Bailey, both of whom need to show more quality than they have so far? How can he make Villa stronger in central midfield? Should he play with a back three or four? Will Villa press aggressively or stand off? Will other players who have underperformed this season – Matt Targett, Emi Martínez, John McGinn, Tyrone Mings – regain their form? Brighton are a team who know what they are doing, so Villa will need to be all on song. PD Aston Villa v Brighton, Saturday 3pm 3) Solskjær must take chance to be positive After being shellacked by Liverpool and Manchester City in their recent outings at Old Trafford, United have a new proposition of playing an opponent who should allow them to dominate the ball. Ole Gunnar Solskjær has earned a reputation for negativity at Manchester United, regularly utilising two holding midfielders regardless of the quality of the opposition. The Norwegian needs to find some points pretty quickly to lift the pressure off his shoulders, and a liberating display against a porous Watford defence could help turn the tide. The Hornets have conceded 19 goals in 11 matches, swapping managers, defensive partnerships, formations and goalkeepers in the process. They are not a settled side and United should have far too much for them going forward, if the likes of Mason Greenwood and Jadon Sancho are given some freedom to drive at the defence. WU Watford v Manchester United, Saturday 3pm 4) Arsenal head to Anfield with confidence If titles were won on attacking flair alone then Liverpool would be favourites: their front three of Mohamed Salah, Roberto Firmino and Sadio Mané continue to wreak the usual havoc among opposition defences. Combinations in defence and midfield have proved more problematic for Jürgen Klopp, though, and as a result Arsenal will approach this match with quiet confidence. Emile Smith Rowe’s ascent to the England squad has lifted the player and the collective group, with Bukayo Saka, Alexandre Lacazette and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang combining to great effect in recent wins against Watford, Leicester and Aston Villa. Solidity at the back has also been a big reason for the Gunners’ uptick in form, with the central defensive partnership of Ben White and Gabriel quickly growing in stature. Liverpool have conceded 10 goals in six Premier League matches and Arsenal will seek to test Alisson, who produced a couple of costly errors in the defeat by West Ham. LM Liverpool v Arsenal, Saturday 5.30pm 5) De Bruyne needs rest to peak at right time There is no doubting the outstanding array of talent at Pep Guardiola’s disposal but there is still one man who stands above the rest: Kevin De Bruyne. The Belgian has, by his own extremely high standards, had a poor start to the season. De Bruyne has struggled to find his passing range and can boast of only two league goals, something he will be desperate to improve. Being forced off with an injury in the Champions League final and then recovering in time for the Euros will have taken a lot out of him, while the failure to land a trophy either in Porto or with Belgium will have affected a man looking to win the prizes not currently on his mantelpiece. De Bruyne will miss games against Everton and PSG after a positive Covid-19 test, and Guardiola will hope that a period of rest may coax the best back out of his star playmaker. Playing his way back into form might not be a possibility – instead, De Bruyne should be carefully managed throughout the season to ensure he peaks when it matters. WU Manchester City v Everton, Sunday 2pm 6) Howe looks a good fit for Newcastle However things eventually pan out for Eddie Howe at Newcastle, he appears to be a better fit for the job than Unai Emery would have been. Howe may appear to be a less glamorous option than the Spaniard but his Premier League credentials are well established and at 43, the former Bournemouth manager has the hunger and ambition to oversee what promises to be an exciting era for the club. Word from the training ground is that the intensity and enjoyment have significantly increased since Howe began work. That bodes well for the visit of injury-depleted Brentford, who have lost four league games in a row and handed Burnley and Norwich their first wins of the season. Even with Howe absent due to a Covid-19 positive test, the raucous home crowd and Howe’s efforts on the training pitch should help Newcastle finally get a league victory on the board. LM Newcastle v Brentford, Saturday 3pm 7) New start for Kane after England exploits Harry Kane returns to Spurs after scoring seven goals in 108 minutes for England, six more than he has netted in the Premier League all season. Admittedly, thrashing Albania and San Marino might not equate to being back in form, as it is the equivalent of your friend who once played three games for Rochdale turning up for five-a-side to show he’s still got it. Still, it should provide a necessary boost to a player obviously lacking form and confidence. It comes at the right time, too, just two games into Antonio Conte’s reign, adding to the feeling that it is a new start for a striker who had a tough summer trying to leave Spurs after Euros heartbreak. Conte will be keen to move Kane further up the pitch, something that predecessor Nuno Espírito Santo failed to do as Spurs struggled to play anything close to progressive football. WU Tottenham v Leeds, Sunday 4.30pm 8) West Ham look equipped to fight on all fronts Will the wheels finally come off the David Moyes roadshow at Wolves? It looks highly unlikely, even if West Ham had plenty of players busy during the international break. The increasingly accomplished Hammers are now unbeaten in 11 matches on the road in all competitions, a run that stretches back to 17 April. The rousing 3-2 home win against Liverpool, a fourth league victory in a row, also remains fresh in the mind while Michail Antonio continued his scoring exploits for Jamaica in recent days, and in spectacular fashion, too. West Ham’s hard running, disciplined defending and danger from dead balls – they have scored 32 set-piece goals since Moyes returned in 2019 – should present plenty of problems for Bruno Lage’s side. West Ham’s Europa League campaign means this is a busier than average season, but they appear to have the tools to keep fighting and winning on several fronts. LM Wolves v West Ham, Saturday 3pm 9) Smith begins uphill task at Carrow Road Dean Smith has often said the thing that motivates him most is the determination to prove people wrong. Saving Norwich this season would be a heck of an in-your-face feat. Firstly, to the people who said joining Norwich was a rash move, a decision made on the rebound while still sore at being jilted by Aston Villa. Secondly, to the people who say Norwich are beyond help, that no manager could keep this team afloat. And thirdly to the people at Villa Park who decided he would have been unable to achieve the more simple task of turning Villa around if given more time. If Smith is to succeed, he probably needs Norwich to win at least a third of their remaining matches, starting with Southampton at home this Saturday. Looking for three teams who could possibly be overtaken by Norwich, one has to conclude that the side most likely to be pulled down is another of Smith’s old clubs, Brentford. PD Norwich v Southampton, Saturday 3pm 10) Clarets can’t lose momentum at crucial time Burnley’s season in effect started when they beat Brentford, securing their first league win 10 games into the season. They followed it up with a draw at Chelsea and now they have the chance to build on that against another London club. Crystal Palace arguably pose a similar attacking threat as Brentford and, considering the limited number of international call-ups in the Clarets squad, they will have been well drilled over the last two weeks. It was against Palace that Burnley won their first game last season, at the eighth time of asking. They went on to pick up 11 points from six games to begin their move up the table and this run could provide the same comfort blanket for a team who often start slowly. When a team has such a simple style as Burnley operate with, momentum and morale are key. WU Burnley v Crystal Palace, Saturday 3pmCricket’s bruising week took yet another hit on Thursday night when the former England batsman Alex Hales admitted painting his face black for a New Year’s Eve party in 2009. Hales, who this week denied he had named his black dog Kevin after a racial slur allegedly used at Yorkshire by Gary Ballance, was forced to explain why he attended the party with a black face. Hales told the Sun: “In 2009, I attended a New Year’s Eve musical tribute fancy dress party. I dressed in tribute to my musical hero, Tupac Shakur, someone who I’ve admired from childhood and, at the time, did not realise the offensive nature of this. I echo my statement from earlier in the week and stress how much I deplore racism and discrimination in all its forms.” It was the latest development on a day where the Yorkshire whistleblower Azeem Rafiq had to himself apologise for sending antisemitic messages to a fellow cricketer more than a decade ago while the government warned of further action if the sport did not get its house in order. The sports minister, Nigel Huddleston, sent out the threat after finding Rafiq’s testimony to MPs on Tuesday “harrowing” and “alarming”. Speaking to the same digital, culture, media and sport select committee as Rafiq had earlier in the week, he revealed he had met the England and Wales Cricket Board’s chief executive, Tom Harrison, and had been given “assurances that he will do whatever it takes in order to correct the wrongs”. But Huddleston also put the sport on notice and said that if it did not start making demonstrable changes within weeks and months, the government was prepared to step in. “The secretary of state, Nadine Dorries, has been very clear to me that if we don’t see sufficient action being taken then we as a government will intervene in whatever way is necessary,” Huddleston said, before suggesting the “nuclear option” would be to establish an independent regulator and look into the financial flows of public money into the sport. Huddleston reminded cricket that the fan-led review in football, which is expected to recommend an independent regulator when it reports this month, had come about because of the sport’s failure to get its act together. “With cricket, I’d say the clock’s ticking on this, we might well go down that route as well.” However, he said the government needed to be very careful about cutting investment because a lot of Sport England’s funding of cricket supported schemes promoting diversity. “What we all want is for cricket to get its house in order and get its act together and sort this problem out,” he said. Huddleston also agreed with MPs that Yorkshire’s treatment of Rafiq demonstrated they were institutionally racist. “I think it is, to the extent that racist language was normalised and seen as acceptable and that some people didn’t seem to realise or recognise that what they were doing and saying was racist, and I think that’s probably the definition of institutional racism,” he said. But, as Huddleston made clear, it was not just Yorkshire where there was a problem. As far back as 2014, the academic Thomas Fletcher had conducted two reports, first for the ECB and then for Yorkshire a year later, that had studied how British Asians were being treated in the game. Yet both had been sat on. “The speed with which Yorkshire seems to have responded to Azeem Rafiq’s concerns seems to have been extraordinarily slow, and therefore that raises questions about how seriously the sport takes the issues that were raised,” Huddleston said. “The Fletcher report was 2014. Azeem Rafiq’s case began formally in 2017. So we’ve seen the fact that this has been clearly kicked into the long grass for years. That’s not appropriate. So I think we need a little bit of time for the ECB and Lord Patel [Yorkshire’s new chairman], who’s conducting his review, to think about what actions may be taken but I think we’re all impatient here, including myself.” Harrison, meanwhile, is likely to come under pressure from some quarters when the 41 ECB members, including all 18 first-class counties, the national counties and the MCC, meet on Friday afternoon. However, Huddleston appeared to suggest the sport’s governing body should be given time when asked whether he believed its executives had the talent and skills required to turn cricket around. “I would like to believe that they do,” said Huddleston. “And certainly we’re hearing positive noises. Tom has given his absolute sincere commitment that he understands the issues and he wants to fix them.” He added: “I’m not saying that I have absolute confidence at the moment. I’ve heard positive noises, but we will judge them by their deeds and their actions. The ECB does have quite significant and substantial resources. Cricket is not one of the poorer sports.” As the fallout from Rafiq’s testimony continues, Somerset have officially reprimanded Jack Brooks for past use of racist language. The seamer was investigated for offensive tweets dating back to 2012, the year he left Northamptonshire for Yorkshire, as well as his use of the name Steve for his former White Rose teammate Cheteshwar Pujara. Brooks’s habit of refusing to use Pujara’s given name against the India batter’s wishes was discussed by Rafiq at the select committee. A Somerset statement said: “The club has decided to reprimand Jack, remind him of his responsibilities and require him to participate in extensive training on equality, diversity and inclusivity. “The club have spoken with Jack at length about the nature and content of his comments. There is no doubt that these comments are unacceptable. Jack … is embarrassed and devastated that his comments offended people and he has acknowledged that, whilst they were made nearly a decade ago when he was less mature, the content of the posts was wrong. Jack has engaged honestly and openly throughout the investigation and unreservedly apologised for his past errors.”I’ll now be closing off our live coverage of the coronavirus outbreak. Thanks for joining us and here is a quick rundown of all the headlines you may have missed. You can also keep up to date by following along here. Covid origins: The first known Covid case originated with a vendor at a Wuhan wet market, a leading virus expert has claimed in a report published on Thursday. France will not impose Covid lockdowns on unvaccinated people because of the success of its health pass in curbing the virus’s spread, president Emmanuel Macron said. Germany will limit large parts of public life in areas where hospitals are becoming dangerously full of coronavirus patients to those who have either been vaccinated or have recovered from the illness, Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Thursday. Saxony, the German region hardest hit by the country’s fourth wave of coronavirus, is considering a partial lockdown. Austria may impose a full Covid lockdown as infections are still rising despite the current lockdown for the unvaccinated. Greece expands restrictions for the unvaccinated, prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis warned during a televised address urging citizens to get vaccinated against Covid-19. The UK reported another 46,807 Covid cases and a further 199 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. Hungary will make a booster shot mandatory for all healthcare workers and will require protective mask wearing in most enclosed places from Saturday, Viktor Orbán’s chief of staff said. Slovakia will impose stricter measures for people who have not been vaccinated against coronavirus amid a surge in infections and hospital admissions, prime minister Eduard Heger said. Brazil has recorded 12,301 new cases of coronavirus reported in the past 24 hours, and 293 deaths from Covid, the health ministry said on Thursday. The US state of Florida has banned schools and businesses from requiring vaccination against Covid. Republican governor Ron DeSantis signed the new laws. Canada will announce on Friday it is authorising the use of Pfizer’s Covid vaccine in children aged between 5 and 11, a government source said on Thursday. India has approved the export of 20m doses of the Novavax Covid vaccine made by the Serum Institute of India (SII) to Indonesia, according to a government document seen by Reuters and a government source. Cathay Pacific Airways has sacked three cargo pilots for becoming infected with Covid-19 during a layover in Frankfurt, citing an unspecified “serious breach” of crew rules while overseas. “The individuals concerned are no longer employed by Cathay Pacific,” the company said in a statement issued on Thursday. The pilots were suspected of leaving their hotel rooms in Germany, according to the South China Morning Post. The discovery of the infections led to more than 150 other Cathay employees, including pilots and flight attendants, as well as many household members and community contacts, being sent to a government quarantine facility for three weeks. Read the full story here. Researchers say one of the symptoms of long-term Covid-19 is the chronic loss of smell, otherwise known as olfactory dysfunction (COD), and has been described by researchers as an “emerging public health concern”. The research published in JAMA Otolaryngology-Head &amp; Neck Surgery estimated that between 700,000 and 1.6 million people in the US who had Covid-19 have lost or had a change in their sense of smell that has lasted for more than 6 months. The loss of smell has been associated with “decreased general quality of life, impaired food intake, inability to detect harmful gas and smoke, enhanced worries about personal hygiene, diminished social well-being, and the initiation of depressive symptoms” researchers with the Washington University School of Medicine in St. Louis said. The first known patient to become ill with Covid-19 was a vendor in a Wuhan animal market, a scientist has claimed in a report published on Thursday. Dr Michael Worobey, a leading expert in tracing the evolution of viruses at the University of Arizona, believes the World Health Organization inquiry was incorrect in its early chronology of the pandemic. Worobey came upon timeline discrepancies by combing through what had already been made public in medical journals, as well as video interviews in a Chinese news outlet with people believed to have the first two documented infections, the New York Times reports. He argues that the vendor’s ties to the Huanan Seafood Wholesale Market, as well as a new analysis of the earliest hospitalised patients’ connections to the market, strongly suggest that the pandemic began there and not with an accountant who lived many miles away. The report has been published in the prestigious journal Science. A woman with Covid-19 in Portland, Oregon, in the US, has woken up after weeks on a ventilator on the day she was due to be taken off life support. Bettina Lerman had been in a coma at Maine Medical Center in Portland since contracting the virus in September. Her family made the difficult decision to take her off of life support, making funeral arrangements and picking out her casket and headstone as they prepared to say goodbye, her son Andrew Lerman told CNN. Lerman started showing Covid-19 symptoms in early September, was diagnosed when she went into the hospital September 12 and went on the ventilator on the 21st, her son told the outlet. He described speaking with the doctor: “He’s like, ‘Well, I need you to come here right away.’ I was like, ‘OK, what’s wrong?’” Lerman said. “He goes, ‘Well, there’s nothing wrong. Your mother woke up.’” Hello from a drizzly morning over here in Sydney, Australia. I’m Samantha Lock and I’ll be taking over from my colleague Tom Ambrose to bring you all the latest Covid headlines. First up, some numbers out of Australia for you. The nation’s most populous state of NSW has recorded 216 new Covid-19 cases in the latest reporting period. Sadly three people infected with Covid-19 have died. The state of Victoria is once again in excess of 1,000 daily cases with 1,273 new infections recorded overnight. Sadly eight people with Covid-19 have died in the latest reporting period. In other news, most remaining Covid restrictions in Victoria have now been removed for those who are fully vaccinated, with the state about to hit its 90% vaccinated target. Brazil has recorded 12,301 new cases of coronavirus reported in the past 24 hours, and 293 deaths from Covid, the health ministry said on Thursday. The South American country has now registered 21,989,962 cases since the pandemic began, while the official death toll has risen to 612,144, according to ministry data, in the world’s third worst outbreak outside the United States and India and its second-deadliest. As vaccination advances, the rolling 14-day average of Covid deaths has fallen to 258, compared with the toll of almost 3,000 a day at the peak of the pandemic in April. Florida has banned schools and businesses from requiring vaccination against Covid. Governor Ron DeSantis, a rightwing Republican widely believed to be planning a run for the US presidency, signed the new laws. “We’re making sure that people have a right to earn a living, people have a right to have protections at their place of employment and that parents have protections to be able to direct the upbringing of their kids,” said DeSantis. In a later announcement of the bills’ signing on Twitter, DeSantis referred to “the free state of Florida”. Echoing anti-vaccine rhetoric, DeSantis repeated a misleading claim that vaccines do not protect against coronavirus infections, and said “natural immunities” should qualify people to return to in-person work. France will not follow those European neighbours imposing Covid lockdowns on unvaccinated people because of the success of its health pass in curbing the virus’s spread, President Emmanuel Macron said. Europe has again become the centre of the pandemic, prompting some countries including Germany and Austria to reintroduce restrictions in the run-up to Christmas and causing debate over whether vaccines alone are enough to tame Covid. “Those countries locking down the non-vaccinated are those which have not put in place the [health] pass. Therefore this step is not necessary in France,” Macron told La Voix du Nord newspaper in an interview published on Thursday. Canada will announce on Friday it is authorising the use of Pfizer’s Covid vaccine in children aged between 5 and 11, a government source said on Thursday. The announcement will be made at 10am Eastern time (3pm GMT), said the source, who requested anonymity because of the sensitivity of the situation, Reuters reported. India has approved the export of 20m doses of the Novavax Covid vaccine made by the Serum Institute of India (SII) to Indonesia, according to a government document seen by Reuters and a government source. The government has also decided to allow the export of 10m doses of a licensed version of the AstraZeneca shot made by SII, which it calls Covishield, to the global vaccine-sharing programme Covax, two sources said. The shipment is likely to happen towards the end of next month, one of the sources said. Good evening, I’m Tom Ambrose and will be bringing you all the latest Covid news over the next couple of hours. We start with the news that Germany will limit large parts of public life in areas where hospitals are becoming dangerously full of coronavirus patients to those who have either been vaccinated or have recovered from the illness, Chancellor Angela Merkel said on Thursday. The move is necessary to tackle a very worrying fourth wave of the pandemic that is overburdening hospitals, she said. “Many of the measures that are now needed would not have been needed if more people were vaccinated. And it isn’t too late to get vaccinated now,” Merkel said. In places where hospitalisation rates exceed a certain threshold, access to public, cultural and sports events and to restaurants will be restricted to those who have been vaccinated or who have recovered, Reuters reported. Merkel said the federal government would also consider a request by regional governments for legislation allowing them to require that care and hospital workers be vaccinated. Here is a quick recap of some of the main developments from today so far: The Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, made a televised address urging citizens to get vaccinated against Covid-19, as he warned restrictions for the unvaccinated would be expanded. As of Monday, in addition to restaurants, curbs will also go into effect in other “enclosed spaces” including cinemas, theatres, museums and gyms. The government had decided to also limit Covid passes to seven months for those aged over 60 to encourage people to get a third dose, he said, vowing that inspections would also intensify. In the coming days, Greek hospitals now under intolerable pressure will also be reinforced with private sector doctors being mobilised to assist the national health system. “Greece is mourning unnecessary deaths because very simply it does not have the vaccination percentages of other European countries,” Mitsotakis said. AstraZeneca’s antibody cocktail offered 83% protection against Covid over six months, the pharmaceutical firm said. Evusheld has shown promise in preventing severe disease when given early as a treatment to those infected with Covid-19. Explainer here. The UK reported another 46,807 Covid cases and a further 199 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. Hungary will make a booster shot mandatory for all healthcare workers and will require protective mask wearing in most enclosed places from Saturday, Viktor Orbán’s chief of staff said. Gergely Gulyás also told a government briefing that only vaccines can provide protection against coronavirus as case numbers are rising. Hungary has hardly any restrictions in place and the vaccination rate is below the EU average. The steady rise in new Covid infections prompted the Hungarian Medical Chamber on Wednesday to call for strict measures. The chamber called for a ban on mass events and mandatory mask-wearing in enclosed spaces and said that entry to restaurants, theatres and cinemas should be conditional on a Covid immunity certificate. Slovakia will impose stricter measures for people who have not been vaccinated against coronavirus amid a surge in infections and hospital admissions that is stretching the health system, the prime minister, Eduard Heger, said. “It is a lockdown for the unvaccinated,” Heger told a news conference shown live on television. Slovakia has one of the EU’s lowest vaccination rates at 45%. Under the new rules, taking effect from Monday and foreseen for three weeks, only people who have been vaccinated or who have had Covid in the past six months will be allowed to enter restaurants, shopping malls, shops with non-essential goods, sports activities and public events. Some services will face further restrictions in most-affected regions even for those vaccinated, with restaurants only being able to serve takeaway. The new rules include the requirement to test unvaccinated people in workplaces in all but the least-affected regions. Heger said vaccinated people would be the first to benefit from an ease in restrictions. Saxony, the German region hardest hit by the country’s fourth wave of coronavirus, is considering a partial lockdown. The eastern region, which has Germany’s lowest vaccination rate and highest infection rate, is considering measures such as closing theatres, concerts and soccer games to the public and shutting bars and discos, local media reported. Pressure on Austria’s government to impose a full Covid lockdown is growing as its hardest-hit provinces said they would adopt the measure for themselves as infections are still rising despite the current lockdown for the unvaccinated. “If no national lockdown is ordered tomorrow, there will definitely have to be a lockdown of several weeks in Upper Austria together with our neighbouring province Salzburg as of next week,” the governor of Upper Austria, Thomas Stelzer, told the province’s parliament. The conservative-led provincial government of Salzburg confirmed in a statement that it is planning a joint lockdown with Upper Austria. Austria’s governors are holding a meeting on Friday with the conservative chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, and the health minister, Wolfgang Mückstein. The Greek prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, has made a televised address urging unvaccinated citizens to get the jab against Covid-19. He said the Mediterranean nation lagged behind other European countries in inoculation rates and was suffering unwarranted deaths as a result. Although seven million Greeks – three out of four – have received the shot, there was a sizeable number who had not, he said, pointing out that nine out of 10 patients in ICU wards were unvaccinated. “575,000 citizens above the age of 60 remain unprotected. One and a half million of the same age group have completed six months since their vaccination. Older people should get the first dose and those who have been vaccinated the third dose,” he told the nation. “Greece is mourning unnecessary deaths because very simply it does not have the vaccination percentages of other European countries.” As of Monday he warned, restrictions for those who remained unprotected would be expanded. In addition to restaurants, curbs will also go into effect in other “enclosed spaces”, including cinemas, theatres, museums and gyms. The government had decided to also limit Covid passes to seven months for those aged over 60 to encourage people to get a third dose, he said, vowing that inspections would also intensify. In the coming days, Greek hospitals now under intolerable pressure will also be reinforced with private-sector doctors being mobilised to assist the national health system. Calling on Greeks to turn their backs on fear and charlatans preying on ignorance, he implored: “Get vaccinated, get vaccinated, get vaccinated.” Responding to the 46,807 new Covid cases in the UK reported on Thursday, Prof Christina Pagel, director of UCL’s Clinical Operational Research Unit and a member of the Independent Sage group of experts said cases are rising fastest in five- to nine-year-olds – a group not yet eligible for vaccinations. The only age group without a rise in the most recent week of data, she added, is the over-65s, most likely reflecting the impact of boosters. Pagel added the lack of vaccination in younger children, together with many of their parents unlikely to be eligible for a booster until Christmas or later, means cases may be expected to rise for a few weeks yet. “Following on from that will be new hospital admissions and cases of long Covid in both children and adults,” she said. Pagel suggested the UK appears to be out of step with other countries. “Many countries in Europe with similar vaccination rates to ours are acting to reduce rising cases. So far, England has chosen to live with high cases instead even though modest measures such as indoor mask wearing, working from home where possible and investing in CO2 monitors and hepa filters in schools could be enough to bring cases down again,” she said. “With most adults now several months out from their second dose, I believe the decision to exempt doubly vaccinated adults from self-isolation if a household member tests positive should be urgently revisited.” Dr Michael Head, senior research fellow in global health at the University of Southampton agreed. “The highest case rates are seen in school-age children and adults in their 40s, many of whom will be parents of school children,” he said, adding there are numerous school outbreaks. Head added the lower rates in older populations are good news. “Given the success of the booster campaign, it is also likely we may see further policy revisions to include all eligible adults. This would help to create that ‘wall of immunity, and drive transmission and burden of disease much lower. In the longer-term it’s entirely possible that the vaccine schedule will move from 2 doses plus a booster, to a three-dose schedule,” he said. Europe must “close the gap” on vaccinations to stop its Covid-19 surge, with the un-vaccinated driving a rise in hospitalisations, the EU’s drug watchdog said Thursday. AFP reports that the warning from the European Medicines Agency (EMA) comes as the continent battles a fresh wave of the pandemic with record cases in several countries. “We are seeing an excessive number of cases of Covid – including severe Covid and hospitalisation or admission in the intensive care unit – particularly in the unvaccinated,” the EMA’s vaccine strategy chief, Marco Cavaleri, told a news conference. Some European countries still had “unacceptably low” vaccination rates with a large part of the population unprotected, including at-risk over-50s, he said. “We should not forget that we should close this gap and make sure that as many people as possible will get vaccinated.” But the EMA official warned it was “well known that there is no vaccine that is 100% effective” so countries should take other measures to stop the virus circulating during the risky winter season. Several EU countries have taken or are considering steps to target the unvaccinated, with Austria imposing a lockdown on those who have not received a Covid jab. But efforts are also underway to boost vaccine uptake, and to look for new treatments. With cases among children surging, the EMA said it expected to decide as early as next week on whether to approve the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine for the five to 11 age group. The regulator will also start looking at Pfizer’s new anti-Covid pill from Friday “in view of the critical situation in many member states”, Cavaleri said. That would allow it to give scientific advice to countries to use it before formal approval. A full review for approval of the drug, which could take months, is expected to start next week. “This medicine is showing some promising preliminary results,” Cavaleri said. The pharma giant MSD’s rival pill, meanwhile, could get approval by the end of the year. Covid pills are seen as potentially groundbreaking because they can be easily and relatively cheaply given to protect at-risk people, such as the elderly or those with immune system problems. Meanwhile, the drugmaker GlaxoSmithKline had on Thursday sought approval for its monoclonal antibody treatment, an intravenous treatment also for those at risk of severe Covid. It would be the third such drug after two new treatments using the lab-made antibodies were approved last week. Further to my last post, my colleague Melissa Davey has written this explainer on AstraZeneca’s new Covid treatment, outlining what it is, how it works and who it will benefit: Australia’s drugs regulator, the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA), has granted “provisional determination” to the long-acting antibody cocktail which has shown promise in preventing Covid-19 in adults. Provisional determination is an early step in the drugs approval process and means AstraZeneca can now submit further data to the TGA from human trials about how the treatment works and its safety. Once the TGA has scrutinised the data, and if it is satisfied, it may grant Evusheld “provisional approval” for use in Australia in limited circumstances. Further data must be collected and given to the TGA even if this occurs. AstraZeneca has cemented its lead in bringing a preventative Covid shot to market, saying its antibody cocktail offered 83% protection over six months, providing another possible weapon in the fight against the pandemic, Reuters reports. The therapy, called AZD7442 or Evusheld, had previously been shown to confer 77% protection against symptomatic illness after three months, in an earlier readout of the late-stage Provent trial in August. The data gives hope of additional protection for people who do not respond well to vaccines, such as cancer patients. The Anglo-Swedish company also said a separate study in patients with mild-to-moderate Covid showed a higher dose of AZD7442 cut the risk of symptoms worsening by 88% when given within three days of the first symptoms. The antibody treatment, enhanced to remain intact in the body for months, is given in one go, as two sequential shots in the arm. The latest results from the longer-term follow-ups potentially position AstraZeneca, like its rival Pfizer as a future supplier of both Covid vaccines and treatments, with AstraZeneca having said the therapy’s “real advantage” was as a preventative shot. The full results will be submitted for publication in a peer-reviewed medical journal. Pfizer has presented promising efficacy data on its oral Covid treatment candidate, which can be more easily distributed than injections, and is also a leading vaccine supplier with partner BioNTech. “These new data add to the growing body of evidence supporting AZD7442’s potential ... We are progressing regulatory filings around the world and look forward to providing an important new option against Sars-CoV-2 as quickly as possible,” AstraZeneca’s executive vice-president Mene Pangalos said in a statement, referring to the coronavirus that causes Covid. The group last month sought approval for the medicine from US and European authorities. Monoclonal antibodies from Regeneron, Lilly and GSK-Vir have been approved by US regulators for treating non-hospitalised patients with Covid. Earlier this month, Regeneron said a single dose of its antibody cocktail reduced the risk of contracting Covid by 81.6% in a late-stage trial. “This is an important addition to the therapeutic armamentarium for Covid” if the published study confirms the data released on Thursday, said Penny Ward, visiting professor in pharmaceutical medicine at King’s College London. While the injection may be seen as a potential alternative to vaccines, antibody drugs cost significantly more, which may limit their use to particularly high-risk groups. Antibody cocktails typically cost above $1,000 per dose, while Covid shots have on average sold for between $3 and $30 per dose. AstraZeneca’s executive vice-president for vaccines and immune therapies, Iskra Reic, said that unlike its vaccine, the drug would be priced commercially as it negotiates supply contracts with governments around the globe. The drug company’s chief executive, Pascal Soriot, said the treatment was more complicated to produce than a vaccine but that there would be enough production capacity around the world to meet demand. Monoclonal antibody drugs deliver lab-made versions of the body’s natural antibodies to fight off infection, while vaccines spur the body to make its own antibodies and build its own immunity. AstraZeneca has said the shot is primarily meant to help immunocompromised and at-risk individuals but at some point a wider group could benefit, such as military personnel on tours of duty or cruise ship passengers. It would be administered in addition to vaccines, the company has said. It added that about 2% of the global population was considered to respond inadequately to a Covid vaccine. For AstraZeneca’s Provent trial, close to 5,200 participants without an infection were randomly split into two groups, with one volunteer receiving an ineffective placebo without knowing for every two receiving Evusheld. Participants were at risk of suffering severe Covid if infected or were immunocompromised, meaning they were in cancer care, or receiving drugs due to an autoimmune disease or an organ transplant. The trial volunteers were not vaccinated, even though high-risk groups have been prioritised in global vaccination campaigns. Anyone opting to get vaccinated during the trial was excluded from the analysis. Trial volunteers will be followed up for 15 months to provide evidence of longer-lasting protection. Switzerland’s health minister insisted on Thursday new Covid-19 restrictions were not necessary despite daily new cases quadrupling in a month to an all-year high, AFP reports. “We are clearly facing the fifth wave,” Alain Berset told a news conference, adding that the course of the pandemic “will depend on the behaviour of all of us”. Though the virus is spreading particularly among younger people less likely to suffer severe illness from the disease, Berset said the surge in cases was more worrying as “the number of adults who have no immunity is too big”. A vaccination drive last week lifted the sluggish jab uptake of recent months and ministers hope the increased pace can be sustained. Switzerland had 10% of the population fully vaccinated by 23 April, racing to 50% three months later on 29 July. But in the subsequent months that progress has tailed off drastically. About 65% of the Swiss population are now fully vaccinated, while a further 2% have had the first dose of a two-jab course. With case rates having shot up since mid-October, the Swiss authorities fear an overload of hospital cases as the winter kicks in. Last week, Covid-19 hospitalisations increased by a quarter, while deaths were up more than 80% to 53 fatalities. Intensive care units are 77% full, with 17% of the overall capacity taken up by patients with Covid. Bern University epidemiologist Christian Althaus called for a return to working from home, free tests and greater mask-wearing indoors, given the surge in cases. Any restrictions on the freedoms of vaccinated people must be justified, he told the Neue Zurcher Zeitung newspaper, adding: We must not let unvaccinated people take society hostage. Althaus said that given the creeping vaccination rate – neighbours Germany, France and Italy all have higher rates – Switzerland could be in for a rough winter. “We are not out of the danger zone yet. Given the current situation, we could find ourselves once again in a critical situation by Christmas,” he said. As part of its famous direct democracy system, Switzerland will vote on 28 November on its Covid-19 laws, including the Covid certificate for fully vaccinated, recovered or tested-negative people. The pass facilitates international travel and entry to public events and indoor spaces such as restaurants and concert venues. The landlocked European country, population 8.6 million, has recorded nearly 931,000 positive tests – with nearly 6,000 more added on Thursday – and 10,926 deaths during the pandemic. The UK has reported another 46,807 Covid cases and a further 199 deaths within 28 days of a positive test, according to the latest data from the government’s coronavirus dashboard. That is compared to 38,263 infections and 201 fatalities reported in the 24 hours prior. The Spanish beach resort of Benidorm, famous for its nightlife and especially popular with British partygoers, has opened a Covid vaccination centre for tourists as cases rise along with arrival numbers. The clinic close to the hotel district was drawing queues of tourists this week and further mobile vaccination points will be set up in areas where big crowds gather. “I think this sends a message of safety,” Benidorm’s mayor, Antonio Pérez, told Reuters. “This is a public service we want to extend to our tourists.” Spain requires all visitors entering the country to present either a vaccination certificate or a negative PCR test. Bars and restaurants do not require vaccine passports, as is the case in many European cities. Benidorm’s Covid cases are significantly higher than the national average, with 249 cases per 100,000 confirmed over a rolling 14-day period, compared to 96 cases nationally, or the 101 cases for the Valencian region in which Benidorm lies. Rosa Louis, manager of the health district that includes Benidorm, said the return of tourists had played a part. “We don’t have proper data on the rise of the infections (in Benidorm), but we have noticed that as soon as tourists came back, infections rose too, that is without question,” she said. Toni Mayor, head of Valencia’s Hosbec hotel association, said while most hotel guests were vaccinated, some people were lax in wearing masks. “We have to keep reminding the British to put their masks back on,” he told Reuters. “Some of them get confused because in Britain you don’t have to wear one.” Spain’s crucial tourism industry has been getting to its feet in recent months, with visitor numbers increasing more than four-fold in September from the previous year. The government hopes Spain will recover two-thirds of its pre-pandemic levels in the fourth quarter of this year. Hungary will make a third Covid shot mandatory for all healthcare workers and will require protective mask wearing in most enclosed places from Saturday, Viktor Orbán’s chief of staff said on Thursday. Gergely Gulyás also told a government briefing that only vaccines can provide protection against coronavirus as case numbers are rising. “The government’s advice is that everyone should get a booster shot, which is possible to get four months after the second dose,” Gulyás said. Hungary reported 10,767 new Covid infections on Thursday, its highest daily tally since the end of March, and 131 people died of the virus the previous day. The daily number of new infections is getting close to the peak of 11,265 reached during the third wave of the pandemic. Hungary has hardly any restrictions in place and the vaccination rate is below the European Union average. The steady rise in new Covid infections prompted the Hungarian Medical Chamber to call on Wednesday for strict measures. The chamber called for a ban on mass events and mandatory mask wearing in enclosed spaces and said that entry to restaurants, theatres and cinemas should be conditional on a Covid immunity certificate. One of the most peculiar monuments in the UK is to be spectacularly lit up to be seen from as far as 20 miles away and accompanied by a blasting soundtrack including music by the 12th-century mystic Hildegard of Bingen. Penshaw Monument is a 20-metre replica of the ancient Greek temple of Hephaestus built by the Victorians on a hill near Sunderland. It was intended to commemorate John Lambton, the first earl of Durham, a Whig politician whose nickname was Radical Jack. This weekend it elegantly commemorates the victims of Covid-19 as part of Lumiere in Durham, the UK’s largest light festival. The work, A Telling of Light by the artists Elaine Buckholtz and Ian Winters, is a huge technical challenge involving about 140,000 separate points of light in tribute to the UK death toll from coronavirus. Buckholtz said they were offering visitors a place to mourn but also to be inspired. “Sometimes it looks like a chariot in the sky. It feels like it’s not reachable, but it’s there. For me it speaks to the relationship between life and death.” She said the intention had been to create a sublime, communal experience. No one has been able to mourn together. Everyone has been separate. A lot of people haven’t even had a funeral so we wanted to create a place for people to be together and honour their losses. Get the full story here: Slovakia will impose stricter measures for people who have not been vaccinated against coronavirus amid a surge in infections and hospital admissions that is stretching the health system, the prime minister Eduard Heger said on Thursday. The country of 5.5 million has seen a record number of cases in the past few days, topping 8,000 on Tuesday, and said earlier this week that it had few intensive care beds available for coronavirus patients. “It is a lockdown for the unvaccinated,” Heger told a news conference shown live on television. Under the new rules, only people who have been vaccinated or who have had Covid in the past six months will be allowed to enter restaurants, shopping malls, shops with non-essential goods, sports activities and public events. The measures, taking effect on Monday and foreseen for three weeks, echo those adopted in neighbouring Austria from this week. Tighter rules will exempt those vaccinated and those who have overcome Covid in the past six months. Slovakia has one of the European Union’s lowest vaccination rates, with 45% of the total population vaccinated versus the EU average of 65%. It has reported 13,725 deaths since the start of the pandemic. Some services will face further restrictions in most-affected regions even for those vaccinated, with restaurants only being able to serve takeaway. The new rules include the requirement to test unvaccinated people in workplaces in all but the least-affected regions. Heger said vaccinated people would be the first to benefit from an ease in restrictions. The German region hardest hit by the country’s fourth wave of coronavirus is considering a partial lockdown, local media reported on Thursday as regional and federal leaders discussed tighter rules nationwide. Saxony, which has Germany’s lowest vaccination rate and highest infection rate, is considering measures such as closing theatres, concerts and soccer games to the public and shutting bars and discos, according to Bild newspaper. The eastern region, where daily infections have risen 14-fold in the past month, is a stronghold of the far-right Alternative for Germany (AfD) party, which harbours many vaccine sceptics who have joined anti-lockdown protests. A Forsa poll published earlier this month found that half of unvaccinated respondents in Germany had voted for the rightwing populist AfD in the recent federal election. “This coalition is ready to now impose a hard and clear wave breaker,” Saxony’s leader, Michael Kretschmer, told the national parliament, according to Bild. The specifics would be hammered out this week, he said. The announcement comes the same week Austria imposed a lockdown for the unvaccinated. Kretschmer said he did not believe targeting only the unvaccinated was enough. German federal and regional leaders will later on Thursday discuss nationwide measures to tackle the pandemic as cases continue to touch new record highs although the rate of increase is slowing down slightly. Europe’s latest coronavirus wave comes at an awkward time in Germany with the chancellor, Angela Merkel, acting in a caretaker capacity while three other parties negotiate to form a new government after an inconclusive September election. Those three parties shepherded a law authorising a package of measures to tackle the pandemic through the Bundestag earlier on Thursday. On Friday, the law, which is designed to come into effect as emergency powers expire, goes to the Bundesrat. The law will tighten some measures currently in place, forcing people to show proof of vaccination or recovery or a negative Covid test on public transport and at work, in addition to wearing face masks. It will also provide states with a toolbox of other measures depending on the severity of their outbreak, with infection rates currently much higher in eastern and southern Germany. But some, especially among Merkel’s conservatives who are likely heading into the opposition after 16 years in power, feel it does not go far enough. They would prefer to see the state of emergency, which allows the government to impose school closures and blanket lockdowns without consulting the parliament, to be extended. Merkel described Germany’s Covid situation as “dramatic” on Wednesday. Separately, Germany’s vaccine advisory committee on Thursday recommended Covid-19 vaccine booster shots for all people aged over 18. Vaccinations have picked up lately in Germany, which has a history of vaccine resistance, although largely due to the uptake of booster shots as more indoor gatherings due to colder weather raises the risk of spreading the virus. Pfizer Inc has signed a $5.29bn deal with the US government to deliver 10m courses of its Covid-19 oral antiviral drug starting this year, the drugmaker said on Thursday. The oral drug could be a promising new weapon in the fight against the pandemic, as it can be taken as an early at-home treatment to help prevent hospitalisations and deaths. Pfizer on Tuesday filed for US authorisation of the drug, Paxlovid, and said it expects to manufacture 180,000 treatment courses by the end of next month and at least 50m courses by the end of 2022. “This promising treatment could help accelerate our path out of this pandemic by offering another life-saving tool for people who get sick with Covid-19,” said Xavier Becerra, secretary of the United States Department of Health and Human Services. The company earlier this month said the drug cut by 89% the chance of hospitalisation or death for adults at risk of severe disease. The trial’s results suggest that Pfizer’s drug surpasses Merck &amp; Co Inc’s pill, molnupiravir, which was shown last month to halve the chance of dying or being hospitalised for patients with Covid at high risk of serious illness. The US government has also signed a contract worth $2.2bn for courses of the Merck drug. A “shambolic” rollout of third Covid vaccinations in England has left an unknown number of immunocompromised people still without proper protection going into winter, and in other cases even given the wrong type of injection, a leading charity has said. Blood Cancer UK said a combination of poor planning and confusing messaging meant “many thousands” of people with weakened immune systems might have missed out, leaving them at greater risk of serious consequences if they catch Covid. In a lengthy statement, the charity said NHS England had repeatedly failed to acknowledge the problem, while Sajid Javid, the health secretary, incorrectly said more than six weeks ago that the “vast, vast majority” of eligible people had already been invited for a third jab. People were still coming forward to say they were struggling to get a third dose, said Gemma Peters, the chief executive of Blood Cancer UK. “The rollout of the third doses has been shambolic, causing yet more anxiety for immunocompromised people.” The full story is here: Only 63% of people in England believe information from the government about coronavirus can be trusted, official figures suggest, with a similar proportion reporting that they have taken additional measures, beyond those in in government guidelines and recommendations, to keep themselves and others safe. The experimental statistics come from the first bulletin of a new survey, published by the Office for National Statistics, looking at the behaviour of fully-vaccinated people who have come into contact with someone who has tested positive for Covid. Since 16 August, such contacts no longer have to self-isolate. Instead, advice of testing and guidance on preventing the spread of Covid is provided by Test and Trace. “Even if you do not have symptoms, you will be advised to have a PCR test as soon as possible,” the guidance states. The results of the survey, conducted between 25 and 30 October, involved 1,100 adults, with percentages weighted to be representative of the fully-vaccinated “contacts” population in England, reveals 90% of respondents reported wearing a face mask in shops before being alerted to being a contact of a Covid case. And 91% of respondents reported taking either a lateral flow or PCR test after being contacted by NHS Test and Trace or the app – 13% of which tested positive. However, only about 60% of all respondents said they trusted government information around Covid. A similar proportion revealed they went above and beyond government guidelines and recommendations to keep themselves and their families safe. The survey has limitations, including that it is based on a limited sample and behaviours were self-reported. But Dr Simon Williams, senior lecturer in people and organisation at Swansea University, said the data was important. “This report again shows how much individual responsibility most people are taking to help prevent the spread of coronavirus. However, it also suggests that government should be providing more or clearer guidance on what additional measures could be taken,” he said, adding that a third of respondents felt guidance on self-isolation for double-vaccinated people was inadequate. Williams added the data also show the importance of the booster: of those who had received two doses of the vaccine, 82% did not develop symptoms, compared with 96% of those who had also had a booster dose. “This is a reminder of how essential it is that people accept their booster jab when offered and how authorities need to roll it out as quickly as possible,” he said. Pressure on Austria’s government to impose a full Covid lockdown is growing as its worst-hit provinces said on Thursday they would adopt the measure for themselves since infections are still rising despite the current lockdown for the unvaccinated. Roughly 66% of Austria’s population is fully vaccinated, one of the lowest rates in western Europe. Its infections are among the highest on the continent, with a seven-day incidence of 971.5 per 100,000 people. As winter approaches, cases have surged across Europe, prompting governments to consider reimposing unpopular lockdowns. The Netherlands has imposed a partial lockdown that applies to all, but Austria has sought not to impose extra restrictions on the fully vaccinated. “We have very, very little room for manoeuvre,” the conservative governor of Upper Austria, Thomas Stelzer, told the province’s parliament, referring to its strained intensive-care units. Upper Austria, a stronghold of the far-right and vaccine-criticising Freedom Party, has the country’s highest infection rate and its lowest vaccination rate. It and neighbouring Salzburg are the hardest-hit of Austria’s nine provinces. Both border Germany. “If no national lockdown is ordered tomorrow, there will definitely have to be a lockdown of several weeks in Upper Austria together with our neighbouring province Salzburg as of next week,” Stelzer said. The conservative-led provincial government of Salzburg, which this week said it was preparing for a possible triage situation in which the number of people needing intensive-care beds exceeds supply, confirmed in a statement that it is planning a joint lockdown with Upper Austria. Austria’s governors are holding a meeting on Friday with the conservative chancellor Alexander Schallenberg and the health minister Wolfgang Mückstein. Daily infections on Thursday reached a new record of 15,145. The biggest wave before this peaked at 9,586 a year ago, when Austria went into full lockdown. Greece has ordered private sector doctors in five regions in the north of the country to assist its health system as it grapples with a rise in Covid infections, Reuters reports. The government had called on private sector doctors to help out earlier this month, as Greece’s public hospitals and intensive care wards have been overwhelmed by rising infections in recent weeks. The requisition order, published in the official government gazette on Thursday, is effective for a month. Greece reported 6,682 new coronavirus infections on Wednesday and 87 deaths, bringing total infections to 853,841 since the pandemic began last year, while 17,012 people have died. Earlier in November, the government imposed restrictions to unvaccinated citizens in an effort to curb soaring infections. The prime minister, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, is expected to address the nation later on Thursday, calling for more Greeks to get vaccinated. About 61.8% of a population of about 11 million are fully vaccinated, while authorities had hoped for a rate of about 70% by autumn. Good morning from London. I’m Lucy Campbell, I’ll be bringing you all the latest global developments on the coronavirus pandemic for the next eight hours. Please feel free to get in touch with me as I work if you have a story or tips to share! Your thoughts are always welcome. Email: lucy.campbell@theguardian.com Twitter: @lucy_campbell_ The head of Germany’s disease control agency has warned that the country faces a “really terrible Christmas” unless steps are taken to counter the sharp rise in coronavirus infections. The Robert Koch Institute, Germany’s disease control agency, said on Thursday that 65,371 newly confirmed cases had been reported in a single day, continuing the upward trend that experts have been warning about for weeks. It is another new daily record. “We are currently heading toward a serious emergency,” the agency’s director, Lothar Wieler, said. “We are going to have a really terrible Christmas if we don’t take countermeasures now.” Russia has had a remarkably consistent set of official Covid death figures. Since first rising above 1,000 on 20 October, they have gradually crept up to hover around the 1,200 mark. The country today has set a new highest official record for deaths at 1,251. There were 37,374 nationwide infections recorded. This is down slightly from the peak daily caseload of 41,335 recorded on 6 November. Virologists in the Netherlands have proposed extending holidays over Christmas to slow a surge in Covid-19 cases among children that has forced half of schools nationwide to send classes home. Sweden is introducing a digital Covid-19 vaccination certificate for public gatherings and events with more than 100 people indoors, authorities said Wednesday. Children aged 12 and over who have had a Covid-19 infection should not get a vaccine until 12 weeks later, UK officials have said. A rise in coronavirus cases in the UK is likely in the new year when schools return after the festive break, an expert has warned, adding that he is “cautiously optimistic” for Christmas. Prof Tim Spector, lead scientist on the Zoe Covid Study app, has reiterated his belief that people could have to deal with Covid-19 for the next five years and insisted it is important to look “much further ahead and not just to save Christmas”. Scientists studying an offshoot of the Covid Delta variant on the rise in England and known as AY.4.2, found it is less likely to cause symptoms than the dominant Delta variant, AY.4. A steep rise in Covid-19 cases in Europe should serve as a warning that the US could also see significant increases in coronavirus cases this winter, particularly in the nation’s colder regions, scientists say. “I do expect to see cases increasing – we’ve started to see this in the last week or so,” said Dr David Dowdy, an associate professor of epidemiology at Johns Hopkins University. South Korea has reported its biggest daily jump in coronavirus infections since the start of the pandemic. The 3,292 new cases reported by the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency on Thursday marked the second straight day of over 3,000 cases China has reported a third Covid-19 case among foreign athletes at preparatory events ahead of the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics. A foreign athlete participating in the Luge World Cup in Beijing was confirmed on Tuesday as being an asymptomatic case after a routine Covid test. The detention of Zhang Zhan, the Chinese journalist jailed after reporting on the Covid pandemic in Wuhan, is intended as a “warning to others”, her former lawyer has said, as calls grow for her emergency release on medical grounds. Indigenous health workers in the Northern Territory town of Katherine in Australia say they fear for vulnerable community members – including many living on the streets or in severely overcrowded homes – as authorities scramble to contain a Covid outbreak. Andrew Sparrow has our UK politics live blog. Lucy Campbell will be here shortly to carry on bringing you the latest coronavirus developments from the UK and around the world. I will be back tomorrow, but right now I am off to go and host the comments on our regular Thursday quiz. I will maybe see you there. Virologists in the Netherlands have proposed extending holidays over Christmas to slow a surge in Covid-19 cases among children that has forced half of schools nationwide to send classes home. The National Institute for Health (RIVM) this week reported a record of over 110,000 weekly cases through 16 November, an increase of 44% from the week before. The strongest rise was among children aged between four and 12. Anthony Deutsch and Bart Meijer report for Reuters that infections among children of primary school age, five to nine, jumped almost 85% and rose 76% among children aged 10-14. “Keeping primary schools closed for longer is an effective way to keep the virus under control,” the immunologist Ger Rijkers told the Algemeen Dagblad newspaper. “Children are virus factories and infect adults as well as each other.” Not all experts say closing schools is the best option, but Marion Koopmans, a virologist and member of the country’s leading Covid-19 advisory board, told the paper “we need to consider other measures” if rates don’t fall. The latest wave began after the government ended social distancing and other measures in September, a decision that has since been reversed. Caretaker prime minister Mark Rutte’s proposal to exclude the non-vaccinated from a pass for indoor events has faced opposition in parliament. Rutte’s government has reintroduced protective mask-wearing in stores and reimposed a partial lockdown. Here’s the chart showing the latest Covid incidence rates across Europe. Germany has again set a daily record for new cases, as part of wave of infection that appears to be gradually moving westwards across the continent. [See 9.16am] A rise in coronavirus cases in the UK is likely in the new year when schools return after the festive break, an expert has warned, adding that he is “cautiously optimistic” for Christmas. It is clear that children and school holidays play “a key role in the waves of infection”, said Tim Spector, professor of genetic epidemiology at King’s College London. PA Media report that the lead scientist on the Zoe Covid Study app reiterated his belief that people could have to deal with Covid-19 for the next five years and insisted it is important to look “much further ahead and not just to save Christmas”. He stressed the importance of “healthy behaviours such as working more from home when possible and self-isolation with all symptoms”, as well as wearing face coverings in high-risk areas. But Prof Spector said the most important thing is to get fully vaccinated, a term he said must be redefined to having three doses “to protect us all from Delta and the inevitable new variants of Covid yet to come”. Andrew Sparrow has launched our UK politics live blog. He will be no doubt absorbed with rail announcements and the ongoing Tory sleaze allegations, so I will be continuing here with UK Covid lines, as well as the latest coronavirus news from around the world. The head of Germany’s disease control agency has warned that the country faces a “really terrible Christmas” unless steps are taken to counter the sharp rise in coronavirus infections. German lawmakers are debating measures today that would replace the nationwide epidemic rules, which will expire at the end of the month. The Robert Koch Institute, Germany’s disease control agency, said on Thursday that 65,371 newly confirmed cases had been reported in a single day, continuing the upward trend that experts have been warning about for weeks. It is another new daily record. “We are currently heading toward a serious emergency,” the agency’s director, Lothar Wieler, said. “We are going to have a really terrible Christmas if we don’t take countermeasures now.” Wieler said Germany needs to increase its vaccination rates to significantly above 75%, from 67.7% at present. Some regions in Germany have vaccination rates as low as 57.6%. He warned that hospitals across Germany were struggling to find beds for Covid-19 patients and those with other illnesses. Associated Press reports that he also called for the closure of clubs and bars, an end to large-scale events and access to many parts of public life to be limited to those with vaccine or recovery certificates. The detention of Zhang Zhan, the Chinese journalist jailed after reporting on the Covid pandemic in Wuhan, is intended as a “warning to others”, her former lawyer has said, as calls grow for her emergency release on medical grounds. Hundreds of Chinese human rights lawyers and citizens have put their names to an open letter calling for immediate medical care for Zhang, who her family fear is close to death. Zhang has been on a hunger strike for more than a year in protest at her persecution for reporting on the Wuhan lockdown in early 2020. Her reports challenged official claims about the Wuhan lockdown and the outbreak, which authorities had attempted to cover-up. On Thursday she was awarded the Reporters Without Borders’ 2021 Press Freedom award for courage. Zhang, a 38-year-old former lawyer, was sentenced in December last year to four years in jail on charges of disseminating false information in her video and blog reports from Wuhan and in interviews with foreign press. She was first arrested in May of that year, accused of “picking quarrels and provoking trouble” – an accusation commonly used against dissidents, activists and journalists. Read more of Helen Davidson’s report from Taipei: China making example of jailed Wuhan Covid journalist, says lawyer From Washington, David Smith brings us this report about hard-hitting Covid-19 documentary The First Wave: It is tempting to suggest that the Covid deniers, the hoaxers, the hucksters, the anti-vaxxers, the flat earthers, the merchants of disinformation and the crackpot conspiracy theorists be strapped into a chair and force fed The First Wave, a harrowing documentary about the early toll of the coronavirus pandemic. Covid-19 has never been a “media-friendly” story: death and suffering happen in intimate spaces behind closed doors, where few cameras or reporters are permitted. It is therefore less spectacular news than the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, even though the current loss of life in the US is still equivalent to a 9/11 every three days. This relative invisibility was surely a factor in allowing disinformation to thrive in Donald Trump’s White House and rightwing media and social media. But The First Wave offers the kind of vivid, visceral, gut-wrenching account of tragedy up close that is as undeniable as a plane crash. Read more of David Smith’s piece about the documentary here: ‘We were in a war’: behind 2021’s most devastating Covid-19 documentary Russia has had a remarkably consistent set of official Covid death figures. Since first rising above 1,000 on 20 October, they have gradually crept up to hover around the 1,200 mark. The country today has set a new highest official record for deaths at 1,251. There were 37,374 nationwide infections recorded. This is down slightly from the peak daily caseload of 41,335 recorded on 6 November. At the beginning of the month there was a mandated paid week’s holiday for non-essential workers in Russia, which authorities hoped would break the transmission chain. Children aged 12 and over who have had a Covid-19 infection should not get a vaccine until 12 weeks later, UK officials have said. Deferring could help to reduce even further the “very, very small” risk of heart inflammation after vaccination, experts from the UK Health Security Agency (UKHSA) said. Current case rates of myocarditis after vaccination among under-18s are suspected to be around nine per million vaccinations, and cases have been “relatively mild”, officials said. The advice for older people and for people at high risk from Covid-19 – including those aged 12 and over – is that they should wait four weeks between Covid infection and having a dose of vaccine. But officials said this should be extended to 12 weeks in lower-risk children between 12 and 17. Read more here: UK under-18s with Covid advised to wait 12 weeks for vaccine dose HSBC CEO Noel Quinn has made an intervention in the debate about Hong Kong’s Covid measures by suggesting that he backs them. In an interview with Bloomberg, bank chief Quinn said “It’s important for Hong Kong to establish what they need to establish with China on reopening. I don’t want to do anything that may jeopardise that. I would love to get back to Hong Kong as soon as I can and when the authorities feel it’s right for me to go back, I will.” The mood isn’t shared among the business community, amid accusations that the strict approach to Covid from the city is hampering its position as an international business hub. Earlier this week delivery and logistics company FedEx said it was closing its Hong Kong operations in part because of the long quarantine periods needed for staff arriving into the city from abroad. China has reported a third Covid-19 case among foreign athletes at preparatory events ahead of the Beijing 2022 Winter Olympics. A foreign athlete participating in the Luge World Cup in Beijing was confirmed on Tuesday as being an asymptomatic case after a routine Covid test. The athlete has been transferred to an isolation facility for observation, state media reported, quoting Zhao Weidong, an official of the Beijing 2022 Winter Games. The Luge World Cup is serving as a test event for the 4 February-20 February Beijing Winter Olympics. The Winter Paralympics follow in March. Reuters remind us that all participants at the Games will be tested daily and spectators from abroad are not being allowed in. Athletes and other Games personnel will also be isolated in “closed loop” bubbles A steep rise in Covid-19 cases in Europe should serve as a warning that the US could also see significant increases in coronavirus cases this winter, particularly in the nation’s colder regions, scientists say. “I do expect to see cases increasing – we’ve started to see this in the last week or so,” said Dr David Dowdy, an associate professor of epidemiology at Johns Hopkins University. “I don’t think what we’re seeing in Europe means we’re in for a huge surge of serious illness and death as we [saw] here in the US,” last winter. In the last three weeks, new cases have increased in several cold weather states across New England and the midwest. However, vaccines remain roughly 85% effective at preventing hospitalization and death. “Even if cases go up this winter, we’re very unlikely to see the overcrowded [intensive care units] and morgues of a year ago,” said Dowdy. Vaccine-conferred immunity against infection may allow cases to rise, he said, but far fewer people will need hospitalization. The vast majority of people who were hospitalized or died from Covid-19 this summer, more than 90% in one CDC study, were not fully vaccinated. “People can still get Covid, there can still be breakthrough infections, but the great news is if you have been vaccinated you are very much less likely to be hospitalized or have severe infection,” said Rupali Limaye, an associate scientist at Johns Hopkins University and an expert in vaccine communication. Read more of Jessica Glenza’s report here: ‘Zero-Covid is not going to happen’: experts predict a steep rise in US cases this winter Hello, it is Martin Belam here in London, taking over from Samantha Lock in Sydney. Here are the most recent Covid numbers in the UK. The seven-day cumulative total of cases according to the UK government’s own dashboard is 272,862. That is 15.1% higher than a week ago. There were 1,022 deaths in the last seven days, which is down 11.7% on the week before, and hospitalisations are down 3.8% on a week ago. Indigenous health workers in the Northern Territory town of Katherine say they fear for vulnerable community members – including many living on the streets or in severely overcrowded homes – as authorities scramble to contain a Covid outbreak. The Northern Territory recorded no new Covid cases on Thursday, but the chief minister, Michael Gunner, says concern remains for “large vulnerable households” in Katherine and the tiny remote community of Robinson River. Our reporter Ben Smee has the latest. South Korea has reported its biggest daily jump in coronavirus infections since the start of the pandemic. The 3,292 new cases reported by the Korea Disease Control and Prevention Agency on Thursday marked the second straight day of over 3,000 cases and brought the national caseload to 406,065. The agency said 29 people with the virus died in the past 24 hours, bringing the death toll to 3,187, while 506 others were in serious or critical condition. The jump comes as hundreds of thousands of masked students flocked to schools on Thursday for the country’s highly competitive college entrance exam, AP reports. Hi it’s Samantha Lock back again to bring you all the latest Covid headlines. Sweden is introducing a digital Covid-19 vaccination certificate for public gatherings and events with more than 100 people indoors, authorities said Wednesday. Health Minister Lena Hallengren said the country expected to see a rise in cases during the winter and was “not isolated from the rest of the world”. The vaccination pass will be required for those over the age of either 16 or 18 - the government has yet to decide - at events like concerts, theatres and sporting events, but not at restaurants and bars. Scientists studying an offshoot of the Covid Delta variant on the rise in England and known as AY.4.2, found it is less likely to cause symptoms than the dominant Delta variant, AY.4. Here’s a quick summary of the latest headlines: The US is set to boost vaccine manufacturing and produce at least a billion doses a year. The Biden administration is planning to dedicate billions of dollars to build up vaccine manufacturing in the US to produce at least a billion doses each year, in an effort to shore up global Covid-19 supply for poorer countries while also pre-empting future pandemics. The Australian state of Victoria is set to ditch restrictions for fully vaccinated people from midnight on Thursday. The Covid Delta variant offshoot is ‘less likely’ to cause symptoms, researchers have revealed – although experts say the finding requires further scrutiny. Europe is the only region with increasing Covid deaths, the World Health Organization reports. Covid deaths rose 5% in the last week as deaths in all regions other than Europe remained stable or declined, and totalled 50,000 worldwide last week. Of the 3.3 million new infections reported, 2.1 million came from Europe. Spain has approved the use of a Covid-19 booster shot for people between 60-69 years old and for health workers, as part of an effort to combat an uptick in infections. The Czech Republic and Slovakia both reported record daily new coronavirus cases on Wednesday, a day before the two European Union countries plan to approve new restrictions for unvaccinated people in response to rising infections. A fourth Covid wave is hitting Germany with ‘full force’, Merkel says. Germany reported 52,826 new infections on Wednesday - up by a third from a week ago and another daily record, while 294 people died. Belgium tightened its coronavirus restrictions, mandating wider use of masks in indoor settings and enforcing work from home, as cases rose in the country’s fourth Covid wave. The country has one of the highest cases per capita rates in the EU. The UK reported another 38,263 Covid infections and a further 201 deaths within 28 days of a positive test. Mandatory vaccine passports are set to be introduced in Northern Ireland. Covid deaths have decreased 17% in the Americas over the past week, but the most populous countries like the US, Brazil and Colombia are seeing a levelling of new infections after weeks of declining trends, the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) said on Wednesday. Hungary reported 10,265 new Covid-19 infections, its highest daily tally since the end of March.Australians have shown themselves ready to accept radical encroachments upon their civil liberties for the sake of public health. This is in one sense laudable but in another, disturbing. It is laudable in that it displays a community-mindedness where the end goal is the common good. People have been prepared to accept restrictions on their freedoms as long as the measures are reasonably necessary to protect them and their loved ones from disease and death. There has been a social compact – people are happy enough to accept restrictions, as long as they don’t outlast the crisis. We have seen serious erosions of human rights and freedoms in this nation before, yet these have not been wound back once the crisis had passed. And this has happened without so much as a whimper from the public. Before 9/11, Australia had no anti-terrorism laws. Post 9/11, our governments enacted 92 pieces of legislation with unheard-of measures turning age-old principles of criminal justice on their heads. No longer was the commission of a crime a prerequisite for being imprisoned. Instead, you could be imprisoned for something you might do in the future. All of these measures had sunset clauses but night has fallen on none of them. This may not bode well but, if there is one thing the pandemic has done, it is to illustrate how precious and how fragile our civil liberties really are. People have seen that governments or their departments can impose severe restrictions on us at the stroke of a pen. We have been made subject to curfews, punitive fines and uneven policing. Our borders have been closed, Australians abroad have been denied the fundamental right of every citizen to return and we haven’t been able to travel interstate to see loved ones, receive medical treatment or attend to urgent business without exemptions, which have proved as hard to obtain (for most of us) as hens’ teeth. The anti-terrorism laws did not alarm people in the same way because we could mentally push them aside – they only applied to “terrorists”, after all. Surely they would never be used against the ordinary person? Yet because of the broad definition of terrorism, some of those laws could indeed be used against individuals who in common parlance did not fit the description. We have seen the social compact break down when the public perception has been that the public health measures are out of proportion to the threat posed by Covid-19. Now that vaccination rates have reached high levels, people have the legitimate expectation that the restrictions on our freedoms, some of them quite extreme, should be wound back. And that has happened. Yet in Victoria, a state that has seen some of the longest lockdowns in the world, some people seem to have lost all patience. The emergency health powers legislation before the Victorian parliament, while imperfect, offers some of the strongest civil liberty protections of any in the nation. Yet people have taken to the streets and are threatening politicians’ lives if they support it. The Labor government has had to defer debate on the bill, even though if passed it would improve the situation for Victorians. Power to declare a state of emergency would transfer from the chief health officer, a non-elected official not answerable to the electorate, to the premier of the day. The premier would have to be satisfied it was justifiable to do so “on reasonable grounds”. The health minister could then make a public health order. In New South Wales, while an elected person, the health minister Brad Hazzard, makes the decision, he has broad powers to make public health orders without declaring a state of emergency. Similar to the proposal in Victoria, he can only do so if he believes on reasonable grounds that there is a likely risk to public health. But the Victorian measures must be consistent with the state’s human rights charter, and any orders that restrict people’s liberty would be subject to greater scrutiny than they are under the existing laws. This is a significant improvement on the situation in NSW, which has no charter of human rights. In Victoria, the advice underpinning public health orders would have to be published and an expert oversight committee would advise the minister and premier before they made decisions. A fully resourced, independent oversight committee, the scrutiny of acts and regulations committee, would be able to review any pandemic order. It is strange indeed that a piece of legislation proposed in Victoria that would improve accountability is being met by protests in the street. It is no wonder that the NSW premier, Dominic Perrottet, has deferred debate on Hazzard’s proposed changes to pandemic laws in NSW. • Pauline Wright is president of the New South Wales Council for Civil Liberties. She is the immediate past president of the Law Council of Australia and a former president of the Law Society of NSWA Nobel peace prize laureate and media mogul Rupert Murdoch might not have a lot in common, but this week Filipino journalist Maria Ressa and the News Corporation executive chairman spoke with one voice against what they both say is a threat to journalism: social media platforms. Ressa told the Australian Strategic Policy Institute’s Sydney dialogue that Facebook and Google are biased against facts and are creating “a virus of lies” that threatens all democracies. Murdoch told his shareholders at the company’s annual general meeting that “Big Tech” needed reform because the algorithms are “subjective” and silence conservative voices. While Ressa is concerned about the effect on democracy, Murdoch, to be fair, is focused on the need to protect his business. Their comments come in the wake of accusations by a Facebook whistleblower that the social networks are responsible for the world’s increasingly polarised politics. Ressa was awarded the Nobel prize along with the Russian journalist Dmitry Muratov for their “courageous fight for freedom of expression, a precondition for democracy and lasting peace”. Outfoxed While Murdoch may not have powerful algorithms, he does have faithful lieutenants. And none more so than veteran business commentator Terry McCrann, who was first out of the blocks backing up the media mogul’s remarks. “Social media like Facebook, YouTube and the rest, search engines like Google, don’t need to be better regulated, they need to be destroyed,” he wrote in the Australian. That he rushed to print to support Murdoch comes as no surprise. Just a few weeks ago McCrann wrote a notable piece about the 25th anniversary of Fox News: Rupert Murdoch and his most amazing decade ever. Notable for its laudatory treatment of the boss, that is. “Extraordinary and impressive as the Fox News story has been in its own right, is the even more extraordinary fact that it was the culmination of a decade of breathtaking entrepreneurial business-creating risk-taking across three continents by Murdoch.” ABC in the way Murdoch does have an enemy closer to home than Facebook and Google of course, and that is the ABC, which like the digital giants is a roadblock to his total domination of the market. A stark demonstration of what Murdoch is up against when it comes to the ABC was a list of the top 20 Australian news sites, released this week by data analyst Similarweb and industry bible Mediaweek. The data, which is based on total non-unique traffic for October 2021, shows abc.net.au as the biggest Australian news publisher, with over 100m total visits for the month. In second spot is Murdoch’s news.com.au, the only Murdoch property not behind a paywall. The Daily Telegraph fails to make the list and the Australian is in 15th spot, not a great result for the “heart of the nation”. After news.com.au, News Corp websites don’t come in above 14th. Morris’s parting words Outgoing ABC news boss Gaven Morris addressed the constant attacks on the ABC by News Corp, in an exit interview with Inside Story. Morris told journalist Margaret Simons he wished ABC journalists would spend less time worrying about the “noise” that comes from the Australian and its News Corp stablemates and more time trying to broaden their focus to the “breadth of experience and views of the audience — working-class people, people living with a disability, people most journalists never meet”. The Australian takes pot shots at the ABC on a daily basis, leading to the unfair impression that the public broadcaster is in crisis and is failing viewers. Morris wants the ABC’s staff to ignore the criticism. “He worries, for example, about whether the organisation adequately reflected the views of the 30% of Australians who voted ‘no’ in the marriage equality referendum,” Simons wrote. “‘I’m not talking about religious zealots. I’m talking about genuine Australians who have a point of view that’s different to the 70%. Are we at least making sure that is reflected? I don’t necessarily think we struck that right.’” Morris also revealed he was not happy about the culture of leaking to the press and it stopped him being “upfront and honest” with staff for fear that what he said would appear in the paper. “That’s one of the real difficult parts of the ABC culture,” he said. “I’ve always struggled with that.” Ita not intimidated Ita Buttrose showed just how tough and fearless she is this week when accused the Morrison government of political interference. The ABC chair said the government was trying to intimidate the public broadcaster after the Senate established an inquiry into the ABC’s complaints handling process. “Any incursion of this kind into the ABC’s independence should be seen by Australians for what it is: an attempt to weaken the community’s trust in the public broadcaster,” Buttrose, a “captain’s pick” by prime minister Scott Morrison, said. The 79-year-old talked about her remarkable career and being the first woman to edit a major metropolitan newspaper in Australia in the 2021 Women for Media Report: ‘Take the Next Steps’. She says when she left Kerry Packer’s magazine empire to join Murdoch’s News Ltd in 1981 she was in complete shock because there were no women in the hierarchy. “They didn’t quite know what to make of me and clearly, editing newspapers was still ‘a man’s job’,” the former editor of the Australian Women’s Weekly said. Buttrose clearly has no qualms when it comes to calling out powerful men. On Sunday she accused Liberal senator Andrew Bragg of playing politics and in the report she made unflattering remarks about none other than the News Corporation executive chairman. Asked about working with Packer and Murdoch in the 1980s, Buttrose says: “Kerry was the smarter of the two”. Ming dynasty For someone who has been dead for more than 40 years, Robert Menzies had a particularly active day in The Australian on Friday. “Menzies ‘aghast’ at trends on campus,” read the page three headline. No, Ming was not back from the dead, but his spirit had been summoned for the opening of the Robert Menzies Institute at the University of Melbourne, where the federal education minister, Alan Tudge, said Australia’s longest-serving PM would have been outraged by “de-platforming” and “hostility to contrary views”. It’s a big claim given Menzies unsuccessfully tried to outlaw the Australian Communist Party and wasn’t above a bit of censorship himself. Smoke but no fire over BBQ man The press regulator has backed the Australian Financial Review’s right to name “BBQ man”, the mystery shopper who broke Sydney’s 110-day Covid-free run back in May. The AFR article revealed his name, his job and his face on the front page of the paper, sparking outrage that identifying Covid-19 patients would discourage people from getting tested and cooperating with contact tracers. “The council considers there is a public interest in reporting on the business activities of Apollo Global Management in Australia, and notes the named person is somewhat of a public figure given his position within the organisation,” the Australian Press Council said in its adjudication which cleared the Fin. Gender gap highlighted The statistics in the 2021 Women for Media report, by Dr Jenna Price and Dr Blair Williams, make for depressing reading. The academics took a snapshot of Australia’s media landscape by analysing articles published every day of May 2021. Men still dominate the media industry despite the pioneering work of women like Buttrose. The gender disparity is apparent in the journalists who write the stories, the subjects of the stories and the topics of the stories. For example female journalists wrote 43% of the highly visible, top billing stories, and women featured in 50% of the sample. But when men write, women feature in just 37% of the stories. Of the big print publications the Australian Financial Review, the Herald Sun and the Australian published many more stories by men. Of all the opinion pieces published across all media in May, 65% were written by men. And women’s voices are still not heard as frequently in the media: only 31% of quotes are attributed to women.The House is expected to vote this evening on the $2tn Build Back Better. The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office is saying that contrary to Biden’s promise that the climate change and social policy package would pay for itself, it would increase the federal deficit. The Treasury Secretary disagrees. This point is expected to come up as lawmakers debate the package. The White House is discussing a diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympic Games. Meanwhile, senators Todd Young and Tim Kaine appear to be working on a diplomatic boycott separate from the White House. The governor of Oklahoma, Kevin Stitt, has granted clemency to Julius Jones, a death row inmate who faced execution on Thursday afternoon. Following a recommendation from the state pardon and parole board, Stitt, a Republican, acted with hours to spare before the scheduled state killing. A steep rise in Covid-19 cases in Europe should serve as a warning that the US could also see significant increases in coronavirus cases this winter, particularly in the nation’s colder regions, scientists say. However, there is more cause for optimism as America enters its second pandemic winter, even in the face of likely rises in cases. Evidence shows vaccine-conferred protection against hospitalization and death remains high several months after inoculation, vaccines for children older than five can reduce Covid transmission, and new antiviral medications hold the promise of making Covid-19 a treatable disease. “I do expect to see cases increasing – we’ve started to see this in the last week or so,” said Dr David Dowdy, an associate professor of epidemiology at Johns Hopkins University. “I don’t think what we’re seeing in Europe means we’re in for a huge surge of serious illness and death as we [saw] here in the US,” last winter. In the last three weeks, new cases have increased in several cold weather states across New England and the midwest. However, vaccines remain roughly 85% effective at preventing hospitalization and death. “Even if cases go up this winter, we’re very unlikely to see the overcrowded [intensive care units] and morgues of a year ago,” said Dowdy. Vaccine-conferred immunity against infection may allow cases to rise, he said, but far fewer people will need hospitalization. The vast majority of people who were hospitalized or died from Covid-19 this summer, more than 90% in one CDC study, were not fully vaccinated. Read more: So what does this all mean? The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office is saying that contrary to Biden’s promise that the Build Back Better climate change and social policy package would pay for itself, the plan would increase the federal deficit by $160b over the next decade (or $367b not counting revenue recouped from tax enforcement). The CBO found that the bill’s tax cuts and spending programs were almost paid for by tax increases and savings in spending on prescription drugs. But those alone wouldn’t fully pay for the package, the CBO says. But the budget office disagrees with the White House on how much of the deficit the Internal Revenue Service would make up by cracking down on big tax dodgers. The Treasury secretary says it would be a lot – more than enough. While the CBO estimates the IRS can rake in an extra $207b over 10 years, the White House says it’s $400b that the IRS could grab over the same period. In a new statement today, Yellen reiterated her previous message. Countering the CBO’s top line, she said: The combination of CBO’s scores over the last week, the Joint Committee on Taxation estimates, and Treasury analysis make it clear that Build Back Better is fully paid for, and in fact will reduce our nation’s debt over time by generating more than $2 trillion through reforms that ask the wealthiest Americans and large corporations to pay their fair share. A particularly salient aspect of the revenue raised by the legislation is a historic investment in the IRS to crack down on high-earners who avoid paying the taxes that they owe, which Treasury estimates would generate at least $400 billion in additional revenue. With this bill, members of Congress have a unique opportunity to put our economy on a path to increased growth, productivity, labor force participation, and equity, while ensuring we do not burden future generations with unsustainable debt. I urge them to pass it. The Congressional Budget Office is estimating that enacting Biden’s Build Back Better plan would result in a net increase in the deficit totaling $367b during the period from 2022 to 2031. That is not counting any additional revenue generated by increased tax enforcement. Earlier this month, the Treasury secretary Janet Yellen said, “The investments and revenue provisions of the Build Back Better package would raise over $2tn in offsets, making the entire package paid for over ten years and would reduce deficits over the long term. By making our tax system more fair and asking the highest-income earners and big corporations to pay what they owe, Congress has put together a package that is fiscally responsible and critical to the future prosperity of our economy.” From Guardian staff and agencies: A bipartisan coalition of US state attorneys general has opened an investigation into Facebook for promoting Instagram to children despite the company’s own awareness of its potential harms. The investigation, which involves at least eight states, comes as Facebook faces increasing scrutiny over its approach to children and young adults. Documents leaked by a former employee turned whistleblower recently revealed the company’s own internal research showed the platform negatively affected the mental health of teens, particularly regarding body image issues. The investigation will cover whether the company violated consumer protection laws and put young people at risk and will be led by a coalition of attorneys general from California, Florida, Kentucky, Massachusetts, Nebraska, New Jersey, Tennessee and Vermont. “For too long, Meta has ignored the havoc that Instagram is wreaking on the mental health and wellbeing of our children and teens,” said California’s attorney general, Rob Bonta, in an emailed statement. “Enough is enough. We’ve undertaken this nationwide investigation to get answers about Meta’s efforts to promote the use of this social media platform to young Californians – and to determine if, in doing so, Meta violated the law.” Facebook, now known as Meta, did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Read more: The House rules committee is set to meet at 5:30pm local time on the Build Back Better Act, now that the Congressional Budget Office has come back with all the final estimates on the bill. From there, the House of Representatives is expected to vote on the package. Both the White House and members of Congress are discussing a diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympic Games. The governor of Oklahoma, Kevin Stitt, has granted clemency to Julius Jones, a death row inmate who faced execution on Thursday afternoon. Joe Biden met with Mexico president Andrés Manuel López Obrador. We’ve got an update on the Build Back Better Act: it looks like the pieces are in place for, at the very least, a vote to take place in the House of Representatives today. To recap, members of the House were all waiting for the final estimates from the Congressional Budget Office. The CBO set a Friday deadline for itself, but it appears they have beaten it. Despite court challenges to the federal order, White House press secretary Jen Psaki urged large businesses to continue with pushing forward with their Covid-19 vaccine mandates for their workforces. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration said earlier this week that it would suspend enforcement of vaccine mandates after a federal appeals court reaffirmed its decision to suspend the mandate. “Our message to businesses right now is to move forward with measures that will make their workplaces safer and protect their workforces from Covid-19,” Psaki said. “That was our message after the first stay issued by the fifth circuit. That remains our message and nothing has changed.” Joe Biden is now meeting with Mexico president Andrés Manuel López Obrador. White House press secretary Jen Psaki addressed the negotiations over the Build Back Better Act, which could possibly advance in the House of Representatives today. In question at this point in negotiations is Salt deductions - the deduction of state and local tax. Salt deductions are a way for taxpayers to bypass double-paying on taxes by allowing individuals to deduct their state and local taxes from their federal income taxes. Democrats in states with high state and local taxes - cough, California and New York - are supportive of a high cap. However, the argument now is that raising the cap on deductions would primarily benefit the wealthy. “It obviously wasn’t what he proposed in his initial package,” Psaki said. “It’s been conveyed to him by leaders in the House and the Senate that this needs to be included in order for this legislation to move forward.” Joe Biden said earlier today that a diplomatic boycott of the 2022 Beijing Winter Olympics is “something we’re considering”. Meanwhile, senators Todd Young and Tim Kaine appear to be working on a diplomatic boycott separate from the White House. White House press secretary Jen Psaki said the talk about a diplomatic boycott “doesn’t say anything” about the recent meeting with Xi Jinping. Read more about what a diplomatic boycott means here: White House press secretary Jen Psaki is at the podium now for the White House press briefing to tout the economy recovery under Joe Biden. She noted that the country is in its seventh consecutive week of decline for new unemployment claims. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development put out a new report today that the US has returned to pre-pandemic size of its economy earlier than other countries. Psaki touched on the supply chain issue as well. “New data shows we are moving more goods than ever before, ports are moving these goods more quickly and large retail stores like Walmart, Target, Best Buy and TJMaxx are fully stocked,” she said. “Americans should feel good about the progress being made in addressing these disruptions and ensuring that shelves are stocked at these big retail stores around the country.” Three decades have passed since Republicans’ hero, Ronald Reagan, went to Berlin to exhort Mikhail Gorbachev to “tear down this wall!”, the Soviet Union collapsed and America claimed victory in the cold war. For the GOP in Washington, however, these appear to be mere historical footnotes. On Thursday they dusted off the “red scare” playbook to portray Joe Biden’s choice to run one of the agencies that oversees the banking industry as a dangerous communist. Saule Omarova, 55, was nominated in September to be America’s next comptroller of the currency. If confirmed, she would be the first woman and person of colour in the role in its 158-year-history. Omarova was born in Kazakhstan when it was part of the Soviet Union and moved to the US in 1991. For John Kennedy of Louisiana, a member of the Senate banking committee, this was like a red rag to a bull. Questioning whether Omarova was still a member of communist youth organisations, Kennedy said: “I don’t mean any disrespect: I don’t know whether to call you professor or comrade.” The remark prompted gasps in the hearing room on Capitol Hill. Omarova replied, slowly and firmly: “Senator, I’m not a communist. I do not subscribe to that ideology. I could not choose where I was born. “I do not remember joining any Facebook group that subscribes to that ideology. I would never knowingly join any such group. There is no record of me actually participating in any Marxist or communist discussions of any kind.” Huma Abedin, one of Hillary Clinton’s closest long-time aides, has defended vice president Kamala Harris against the political and media chatter that she is underwhelming in the job and runs a dysfunctional team. In an interview earlier on CNN, Abedin said: “Her team, I would publicly and privately support the work that they are trying to do. There is always..” CNN anchor Kate Bolduan interjected to ask if Abedin thought there was sexism in the reports undermining Harris. “Absolutely I see sexism in some of the ways we talk about women leaders,” Abedin said. She went on to say: “And I’ve seen it with Hillary and...and I end the book [Abedin’s new book] with, you know, my belief that we really need to be supporting our vice president. She is extremely smart, talented, you know, a history-making figure and I resent every time there is a negative accusation made, but personally I do see sexism in it.” Abedin is estranged from her husband, the disgraced Anthony Weiner, former congressman and candidate for mayor of New York. Read the Guardian’s recent interview with Abedin here. The governor of Oklahoma, Kevin Stitt, has granted clemency to Julius Jones, a death row inmate who faced execution on Thursday afternoon. Following a recommendation from the state pardon and parole board, Stitt, a Republican, acted with hours to spare before the scheduled state killing. Stitt reduced Jones’s sentence for the murder in 1999 of Paul Howell, a businessman in the affluent Oklahoma City suburb of Edmond, to life in prison without the possibility of parole. The parole board had recommended life with the possibility of parole. Jones, 41, has maintained his innocence for more than two decades but had been scheduled to receive a lethal injection at the state penitentiary in McAlester. Full story: Debate began in the House of Representatives for the Build Back Better Act. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi is optimistic that the last piece needed for a vote - final estimates from the Congressional Budget Office - will be in today and that the House will be able to vote on the package. Vice president Kamala Harris went on ABC to push back on criticism that she’s being underused. Joe Biden signed into law three bills related to law enforcement while announcing that the Justice Department was giving $140m in community policing grants to 183 law enforcement agencies, allowing for the hiring of more than 1,000 law enforcement positions. GK Butterfield, a Democrat congressman from North Carolina, announced his retirement, making him the second Democrat member of the House of Representatives to do so this week and putting the Democrats’ thin majority at risk. Saule Omarova, Biden’s pick to lead the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, is before the Senate banking committee today and facing some heated, red-baiting questions accusing her of being a communist because she was born in Kazakhstan. GK Butterfield, the Democrat congressman from North Carolina, announced his retirement today after 10 terms in office. His announcement comes two days after his colleague Jackie Speier announced her retirement as well, putting the Democrats’ thin majority margin (221 Democrats to 213 Republicans) in the House of Representatives at risk. In his retirement video, Butterfield condemned the state’s Republican-majority legislature for its new Congressional map. “The map that was recently enacted by the legislature is a partisan map. It is racially gerrymandered,” Butterfield said. “It will disadvantage African American communities all across the first congressional district. I am disappointed, terribly disappointed, with the Republican majority legislature for once again gerrymandering our state’s congressional districts and putting their party politics over the best interests of North Carolinians. “While I am hopeful that the courts will ultimately overturn this partisan map and see that a fair map is enacted, I have made the difficult decision that I will not seek reelection to the United States House of Representatives. It is time for me to retire and allow the torch to be passed to someone who shares the values of the district and can continue the work that I have labored so hard for the past 18 years.” Here’s a look at the effects of gerrymandering: Today in xenophobia: Senator John Kennedy, a Republican from Louisiana, told Saule Omarova, the Kazakh-American nominee for comptroller of currency: “I don’t know whether to call you professor or comrade.” Some background from NPR: this particular nominee from Joe Biden is facing an uglier and more personal fight than usual. If confirmed, Omarova, a law professor at Cornell University who immigrated to the United States as a college student, would helm the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, which is responsible for regulating the assets held by more than 1,000 banks. Progressive Democrats applauded Biden’s choice while Republican critics see her as a “radical” who wants to nationalize banking. Her critics are bringing up Kazakhstan, her place of birth, as proof that she is a supporter of the dreaded C word of McCarthyism days – communism – but are also pointing to recent academic papers she has written on how the Federal Reserve could use a central bank digital currency and proposing a reinvention of the US financial system as proof she is too radical. “I’m not a communist,” Omarova responded to Kennedy. “I do not subscribe to that ideology. I could not choose where I was born. I do not remember joining any Facebook group that subscribes to that ideology – I would never join any such group. There is no record of me ever actually participating in any Marxist or communist discussions of any kind. “My family suffered under the communist regime. I grew up without knowing half of my family. My grandmother herself escaped death twice under the Stalin regime. This is what’s seared in my mind. That’s who I am. I remember that history. I came to this country. I’m proud to be an American. And that is why I’m here today, Senator. I’m ready for public service.” Senator Sherrod Brown, chairman of the Senate banking committee, has been outspoken about these attacks on Omarova – if you watch to the end of the first clip, he and Kennedy have a heated exchange of senatorial courtesy. “Now we know what happens when Trumpism meets McCarthyism,” he said. Let’s hear some debate on the Build Back Better Act. ICYMI from yesterday: minutes after the House of Representatives voted to censure congressman Paul Gosar and strip him from his committees for tweeting an anime video depicting violence against Democrat congresswoman Alexandria Ocasia-Cortez, the Republican allegedly retweeted the video. Read more here: In a letter to the Democratic caucus, House Speaker Nancy Pelosi provided an update on the Build Back Better Act, the bill formerly known as the reconciliation bill, which has also been referred to a time or two as the “human infrastructure” bill. “Very soon, the American people will have an historic cause for celebration, with the passage of the transformative Build Back Better Act,” Pelosi wrote. Debate in the House of Representatives on the bill began this morning, with a very optimistic hope of a vote tonight. A vote hinges on final estimates from the Congressional Budget Office, and when members will receive them - the CBO has given itself a Friday deadline. “As soon as we receive the final CBO estimates for Member review, we can then proceed to votes on the revised Rule with the Manager’s Amendment and final passage,” Pelosi wrote. Meanwhile, in the Senate, at least one of the two moderate Democrats who balked at the size of the reconciliation package is still unsure how to proceed. West Virginia senator Joe Manchin, who along with Arizona senator Krysten Sinema stymied negotiations, still appears to be very much a wildcard. Joe Biden ended his remarks by asking bipartisan leadership to come together and “finally pass the George Floyd Justice in Policing Act.” “That’s next,” he said. Biden had wanted to sign the bill into law before the one-year anniversary of the murder of George Floyd, whose 2020 killing at the hands of Minneapolis police officer Derek Chauvin sparked protests and demonstrations worldwide. The legislation seeks to invest in police training, ban the use of chokeholds and establish a national database of police misconduct. In signing into law these bills about law enforcement, the president made clear his stance on the movement to defund police: Joe Biden announced $140m in community policing grants from the Justice Department that will go to 183 law enforcement agencies and fund more than 1,000 new law enforcement positions. In addition, these grants will fund other initiatives addressing gun violence, violent crimes and hate and domestic extremism as well as “enhance response to people in crisis”, Biden said. “When you look at what our communities need and what our law enforcement is being asked to do, it’s going to require more resources, not fewer resources,” Biden said. “That is why my administration is investing in the community policing we know works and the training and partnership that law enforcement and our communities have requested, and in community-based programs and interventions that can stop violence before it starts.” Read more about the defunding police movement here: These are the bills that Joe Biden is signing into law today: The Protecting America’s First Responders Act of 2021 updates the Public Safety Officers Benefits Program that was established in 1976 to provide death benefits to survivors of officers who die in the line of duty. Specifically, the new law will update the definition of disability, ensuring that officers who are permanently unable to secure meaningful gainful employment following an injury in the line of duty remain eligible for benefits. The COPS Counseling act will provide confidentiality to federal law enforcement officers who use peer counseling services, while excepting admissions of criminal conduct or threats of serious physical harm. The Jaime Zapata and Victor Avila Federal Officers and Employees Protection Act was named after US immigration and customs enforcement special agents Jaime Zapata and Victor Avila, who were attacked by Mexican drug cartels in San Luis Potosi, Mexico on 15 February, 2011. Zapata was killed, and though his killers were arrested and tried, a federal appeals court dismissed the murder convictions because the district court did not have jurisdiction over the crimes committed against law enforcement stationed overseas. This law will clarify that the Justice Department may try any attackers of federal officers and federal employees serving internationally in federal court. Joe Biden is delivering some remarks now as he signs into law three bills: the Protecting America’s First Responders Act, the Confidentiality Opportunities for Peer Support Counseling Act (also known as the COPS Counseling Act) and the Jaime Zapata and Victor Avila Federal Officers and Employees Protection Act. According to vice president Kamala Harris, she and Joe Biden have not even begun discussing 2024 yet. Joe Biden tasked vice president Kamala Harris earlier this year with addressing the root causes of migration, but Good Morning America anchor George Stephanopoulos pointed out that the past year had the highest number of illegal border crossings since they began being recorded since 1960. “What are you doing to turn that around? How long will it take?” Stephanopoulos asked. “It’s not going to be overnight,” Harris responded. “We can’t just flip a switch and make it better. The reality is we inherited an immigration system that was deeply broken and it’s requiring us to actually put it back together in creating a fair process that is effective and efficient. “In the root causes piece, what we’re looking at is, frankly, people don’t want to leave home, George. When they do, it’s for one or two reasons: they’re fleeing some kind of harm or to stay at home, they simply cannot satisfy the basic needs of their family.” Vice president Kamala Harris told Good Morning America anchor George Stephanopoulos that the economy and skyrocketing prices is “one of the highest priorities for the president and for me”. “It’s real and it’s rough,” Harris said. “The cost of groceries has gone up, the cost of gas has gone up. And this is all happening in the context of two years of a pandemic. It’s one of the highest priorities for the president and for me. “We’re dealing with this issue in a number of ways. Short-term, one of the issues is the supply chain. We’re seeing a bottleneck and we need to relieve that bottleneck. We’re bringing people together everyone from the teamsters to Target to say, hey let’s bring everyone together from the truckers to the folks who are moving product and let’s open up some of our major ports for work, 24 hours a day and seven days a week. That’s happening and we’re seeing great results. “Long-term, we need to bring down the cost of living. That’s a long-standing issue. We passed this week, the bipartisan infrastructure bill and that’s going to be about repairing roads and bridges and bringing high-speed Internet to all families but also we need to deal with the cost of childcare, the cost of prescription drugs, the cost of housing. That’s what we intend to do when we get the Build Back Better agenda passed.” Good Morning America anchor George Stephanopoulos asked vice president Kamala Harris about growing frustrations among her friends and allies who “think you can be more helpful than you’ve been asked to be.” “Do you share that frustration?” Stephanopoulos asked. “What do you say to your friends who are frustrated?” “This was a good week. This week, when we got this bipartisan infrastructure act passed and signed by the president, makes a statement about all the hard work that has gone into it,” Harris responded. “Month after month after month, I have traveled around the country, as has the president, we have convened members of Congress, we have convened people around our nation, asking, ‘What do you want’? “This is a response to what they want, and it’s actually going to hit the ground in a way that’s going to have direct impact for the American people. We’re getting things done and we’re doing it together.” “So you don’t feel misused or underused?” Stephanopoulos asked. “No I don’t,” Harris chuckled. “I’m very, very excited about the work that we have accomplished but I am also absolutely, absolutely clear-eyed that there is a lot more to do and we’re going to get it done.” Good morning, US politics live blog readers, it’s going to be another busy one in Washington today so please stay tuned. Here’s what’s afoot. US Vice-President Kamala Harris has just appeared for an interview on ABC News, pushing back against the build up of chatter in the media and politics circles that she’s, at best, on the sidelines in her job. Responding to Good Morning America anchor George Stephanopoulos asking do you “feel misused or underused?” Harris said: “No, I don’t. I’m very, very excited about the work that we have accomplished,” but “there is a lot more to do, and we’re gonna get it done.” More on that in the blog this morning. The US House of Representatives is expected to begin formally debating the Build Back Better $1.75tn mega-bill that is packed with social protection programs and action to tackle the climate crisis. House leaders are hopeful there will be a vote this week and determined that if not, then before Thanksgiving – or no break for lawmakers! If bill passes, it then goes back to the Senate. Joe Biden and Kamala Harris are meeting today with Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau and Mexican president Andrés Manuel López Obrador (sometimes known as Amlo), so we’ll bring you that news. Biden will make remarks this morning as he signs several smaller bills at the White House.Belarus has said the hastily constructed migrant camps on its border with Poland have been cleared of people in a sign that Minsk is keen to defuse the deadly crisis that its leader, Alexander Lukashenko, helped to create. On Thursday, that crisis claimed its 13th victim after an NGO reported that a one-year-old child had died after his family attempted the perilous journey through Belarus into the EU. According to the Polish Centre for International Aid, the child’s family was from Syria and had been trapped outside in the forest for six weeks. The cause of death was not given, although the child’s family was said to have suffered stab wounds from an attack. Belarusian state media, along with some international press, reported that the campsite near the Polish city of Kuźnica, where people attempting to cross the border were forced back with teargas and water cannon, had been cleared of people on Thursday morning. All that remained of the migrant camp, Belarusian state media wrote, were “huts, remnants of tents, abandoned clothes and dying fires”. News agency photographs taken at the scene supported the reports, showing tents, clothes and other belkongings seemingly left abandoned. The Polish border guard service confirmed: “The campsite near the border crossing in Bruzgi was deserted. The Belarusian services sent the foreigners to the transport and logistics centre located several hundred meters away.” Belarus had already moved more than 1,000 migrants to the warehouse on Wednesday, where they were given food. It is unclear where they will go from there. On Thursday, a press spokesperson for Lukashenko also claimed that he and Merkel had discussed creating a humanitarian corridor to Germany for 2,000 of the migrants on the border, and that Belarus had agreed to help transport the remaining 5,000 back to their country of origin, mainly Syria or Iraq. The spokesperson said that the first repatriation flight had departed Belarus on Thursday with 431 Iraqi immigrants on board. The remaining people “have categorically refused to leave but we will work on that,” they added. Reports said the flight had landed on Thursday evening. Migrants from Syria, Iraq and other countries in the Middle East have reported spending more than £10,000 in travelling to Belarus and then contracting smugglers to help them across the border. Many have said they have no plans to go back. “We are keeping our promises,” the spokesperson said. “Meanwhile, the EU has not fulfilled any of its own obligations.” The suggestion of a secret deal between Lukashenko and Merkel on migration is politically explosive but the Belarusian leader has reason to exaggerate the results of his talks with Merkel. Germany has not confirmed striking any deal for a humanitarian corridor with Lukashenko and media on Thursday cited government sources denying that a deal had been made. The EU has confirmed that only technical talks would be held with the Belarusian government in order to manage the return of migrants to their home countries. Nonetheless, European politicians have expressed anger at Germany and Merkel for engaging directly with Lukashenko, who had not spoken with a single EU leader since he launched a brutal crackdown on the opposition last year. The Lithuanian foreign minister, Gabrielius Landsbergis, criticised the appearance of a “separate negotiating track with the dictator, the illegitimate president”. The EU has not recognised Lukashenko as the legitimate leader of Belarus after claims of widespread abuse and voter fraud in 2020 presidential elections. Landsbergis also said that at least one EU government had sought to remove Belavia, the Belarusian state airline, from a sanctions list agreed to by EU foreign ministers earlier this week. Politico has reported that Germany and Italy have held back on signing off on the full sanctions list because of a last-minute limits by the airline on flights with Iraqi, Syrian and Yemeni nationals from Istanbul. The publication also reported that a Syrian airline could be taken off the sanctions list. Vladimir Putin, Lukashenko’s main backer, accused the west of using the migrant crisis “as a new reason for tension in a region close to us, for putting pressure on Minsk.” He also criticised Polish border guards for using water cannon and teargas on children. The US Secretary of State Antony Blinken meanwhile warned that Belarus’s attempt to “weaponise migration” had to stop. “We have in place authorities to, as necessary, add to sanctions,” Blinken told reporters on a visit to Nigeria. “First and foremost, it is doing a terrible injustice to these people that it has victimised by making them pawns.”As the full moon rises on Friday night it won’t be as lovely and bright as usual – but it will be fascinating. Across most of Australia the moon will be partially shrouded in Earth’s shadow, so it will undergo a partial lunar eclipse as it rises. A lunar eclipse happens roughly every six months somewhere on Earth. For most of the year, the moon’s orbit takes it above or below Earth’s shadow but, during an eclipse, the full moon travels through it. If the entire moon travels through the shadow, it is a total lunar eclipse. Friday’s eclipse won’t quite make it to totality and instead will be a very deep partial eclipse. The fact that Friday’s event occurs at moonrise for viewers in Australia means this will be a different experience to what is typically seen when watching a lunar eclipse. The moon will be low in the sky for much of the eclipse, meaning you’ll need an unobstructed view towards the east-north-eastern horizon, perhaps with the aid of an elevated viewing position. In the opposite part of the sky, the sun will be setting and Venus, Saturn and Jupiter will be visible. The sun sets a few minutes after the moon rises, so for the first half hour or so the eclipsed moon, low on the horizon, will be battling the bright twilight sky. As the moon climbs higher and the sky darkens we will have a lovely view of the eclipse’s final phase. We can watch the moon emerge from Earth’s shadow and return to its full brightness. What to see and when? As the eclipse occurs at moonrise for viewers in Australia, your location (latitude and longitude) will determine when you will see the moon appear above the horizon. It’s a little uncertain exactly how much we’ll be able to make of the eclipse against the twilight sky but it’ll be interesting to see what happens. At the moment of maximum eclipse, 97.4% of the moon’s diameter will be in shadow, while just a sliver will remain in sunlight. Because it’s almost a total eclipse, this will be the longest partial eclipse of the 21st century, lasting three hours and 28 minutes. In Brisbane, Sydney and Canberra the moon will rise before the eclipse reaches its maximum. Brisbane will have the best view of all the capital cities, as the sky will have darkened and the moon will be fairly high by the time of maximum eclipse. Sydney and Canberra will also see the maximum eclipse but against a twilight sky. For the other Australian capitals, the maximum eclipse occurs when the moon is still below the horizon. Those places will only see the moon as it begins emerging from the shadow. New Zealand is in a better position to see the eclipse. Viewers in North Island will see the entire event, while for South Island the moon rises about half an hour after the eclipse begins. The eclipse maximum will occur at 10.03pm NZDT, so it may even be possible to see a slight red tinge to the moon against the dark sky. Perth will miss out, as the moon will rise 10 minutes after the eclipse ends. But in northern Western Australia the moon rises roughly an hour earlier, so the final stages of the eclipse will be visible there. An optical illusion Watching a full moon rising is always special because of the optical illusion that makes the moon appear much larger when it’s near the horizon. Of course, the moon doesn’t change size at all – you can prove this by making an “OK” sign with your thumb and forefinger and viewing the moon through the hole, or simply by using your thumb to cover the moon. Measure the moon at the horizon and then later in the evening when it’s higher and its size doesn’t change. This illusion is a trick our minds play on us, most likely because we instinctively think the moon is further away when it is on the horizon. When we see a bird flying, for example, it is closest to us when directly overhead, and gets further away as it flies towards the horizon. But the moon is much further away than a bird, so its distance from us doesn’t vary depending on its position in the sky (its distance varies slightly month to month but that’s not relevant to this effect). Yet our brains treat it as though the moon’s distance does change, meaning when we see the moon near the horizon we assume it’s much further away, and interpret it as being much bigger. A simple way to explain this trick is using the Ponzo illusion, where objects at a distance appear larger, even though the two moons in the image below are actually the same size. Here’s hoping the weather holds out this evening, so we can enjoy this rather interesting lunar eclipse. This article was first published in the Conversation. Tanya Hill is an honorary fellow of the University of Melbourne and senior curator (astronomy) at Museums VictoriaScott Morrison has defended his response to Victorian anti-lockdown protests but warned that while he has no sympathy for “violence” he has sympathy for those who “have had a gutful of governments telling what to do”. The prime minister told reporters on Friday that he had been “very clear in denouncing any violence, threats or intimidation”, responding to suggestions from federal Labor and Daniel Andrews that he had failed to unequivocally denounce violence as “completely false”. On Thursday Morrison said disputes needed to be ventilated respectfully “no matter how frustrated people might be” but also declared it was time for the governments of Australia to allow people to make their own choices, urging Australians to “take their lives back”. Morrison was then accused by the Labor frontbencher Ed Husic of seeking to establish “some sort of moral equivalency, like what we saw with Donald Trump at Charlottesville”. The Victorian government faces civil unrest in Melbourne and alleged death threats over proposed amendments to pandemic laws at the same time as Morrison is campaigning on easing coronavirus restrictions. On Friday the federal Labor leader, Anthony Albanese, told reporters in Sydney it was “extraordinary” that Morrison had “failed to unequivocally condemn the violent and extreme statements” including “explicit threats”. “When [Morrison] made some statements saying that was inappropriate, but then went on to speak about people’s frustrations, he only put the second bit up on his Facebook post – thereby eliminating any criticism of this activity,” Albanese said. “When people marched on the Victorian parliament with gallows, threatening people with being hung, he spoke about how he understands people’s frustration. “I ask people to think about that, and whether that represents the leadership that this country needs.” Andrews accused the prime minister of “double speaking to extremists”. On Channel Nine’s Today program, the Victorian premier promised not to engage in “double speak”, adding: “If others choose to do that, that is on them.” “I am not here to treat you like you’re French, mate,” he said, an apparent reference to Emmanuel Macron’s accusation that Morrison lied to him over cancellation of the $90bn submarine deal. Morrison responded by claiming he “couldn’t have been clearer about denouncing the violence and the threats and the intimidation. They have no place in Australia’s public policy debate whatsoever.” He said he had “consistently” referred to the national plan as a “deal with Australians” that when vaccination targets were met “Australians expect governments to step back and for them to step forward”. “We’re going to keep going with that plan. Australians have earned that. They’ve kept their part of the deal. I assure you that I intend to keep mine.” Under pressure from the renegade senators Gerard Rennick and Alex Antic, Morrison has begun to dissociate his government from vaccine mandates, despite the commonwealth seeking a vaccination mandate for aged care workers. On Thursday the Nationals senator Matt Canavan hit out at the Queensland deputy premier, Steven Miles, for describing protesters as a “fringe element”. “Labor is the enemy of the free people of Australia,” Canavan said. Miles told reporters in Brisbane he didn’t want to give oxygen to “very dangerous views” opposing vaccine mandates. “First of all – [Morrison] made that statement yesterday where he criticised Queensland [for its mandates] … in Sydney, where you have to be vaccinated to get a cup of coffee. He singles out Queensland while ignoring the fact similar restrictions operate in his home city.” Miles noted that Morrison required journalists to be vaccinated to attend his press conferences: “Why should a barista in Brisbane be less safe at work than the prime minister at one of his press conferences at home in Sydney?” Earlier the government leader in the Senate, Simon Birmingham, claimed that the “conga line of Labor premiers” attacking Morrison was “no doubt” coordinated in “a WhatsApp group with Anthony Albanese”. Asked for evidence, Birmingham told Sky News it “wouldn’t surprise him” but provided none – except a glancing reference to Labor offering to pay content creators on “Chinese TikTok app” for anti-Morrison content. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Birmingham, a factional leader of the Liberals’ moderates, also rejected criticisms that Morrison had been double speaking to extremists, warning that “exacerbating political fights” might harm Australia’s high vaccination rates by making it a partisan issue. “I’ve got no doubt … that some of the protesters will have legitimate concerns, and the right to protest is a very valid right in Australia, as it should be in any free and democratic country. “The behaviour of some of the protesters has been deplorable, reprehensible and deserves condemnation.”Emergency crews in western Canada were still trying to reach some 18,000 people stranded by landslides and struggling to find food among bare grocery store shelves after devastating flooding. John Horgan, the premier of British Columbia province, declared an emergency on Wednesday. In an emotional address on Thursday, the province’s public safety minister, Mike Farnworth, said: “This has been a terrible terrible disaster but I know this: As British Columbians, as Canadians, we stick together. I want to come out of this. I’m going to build a stronger better province and a stronger and better country.” Appearing to fight back tears, he said: “Canadians are supporting our province that we are one big family and absolutely that to me is something that we all instinctively know it is absolutely just a remarkable feature and facet of our communities, our people, our province and our country.” One person is confirmed dead in a landslide that swept vehicles off a road near the village of Pemberton, but with many others missing – and with searchers still combing through the debris – that number is almost certain to rise. Meanwhile, communities in already-inundated areas braced for more rain next week “I am not concerned about today’s rain. What I’m concerned about is next week, and what’s coming,” said Henry Braun, mayor of the city of Abbotsford where officials kept close watch over a pumping station. If the pumps failed, Braun warned, the results would be “catastrophic” for a community already grappling with thousands of drowned farm animals and a bill that could reach $1bn to rebuild the city. As the the military joined the effort to rescue thousands left stranded by the floods, residents say the recent days have exposed the vulnerability of small communities to natural disasters worsened by the climate crisis. When Krystal Babcock got word that a wildfire was approaching her community of Merritt earlier this summer, she and her family prepared to leave as dark clouds of smoke blacked out the sky. The town was spared but when turbid flood waters rushed through it months later, Babock knew she couldn’t leave. Her mother needed care and her father was without a vehicle. “I just sat there speechless. I didn’t know what to do. I didn’t know what to think. You’re told to grab what you can and get out. Some people didn’t even have time to grab anything.” As officials issued a mandatory evacuation order, she stayed behind. She and a handful of others are the few that remain in the mountain town submerged in muddy water earlier this week. The family has taken to using their motorhome as a restroom and are washing everything “pioneer-style” in basins after the town’s water treatment plant shut down. They have enough food and friends have passed them water and supplies at a police checkpoint near the town limits. “We’re just trying to help each other out and survive,” she said. “But right now, we’re literally cut off from everything.” But as she cares for her parents, Babcock has grown frustrated that more care wasn’t taken in helping people evacuate, especially those with greater needs who have difficulty moving. With most roads closed, the majority of Merritt’s 7,000 residents travelled to nearby Kamloops, where they were told by emergency services that shelter and warm food was waiting. Soon, stories began trickling back of long lines to find shelter. Melanie Racher arrived in Kamloops with her husband, family dog, diabetic mother and elderly father to find hundreds of people waiting ahead of them to be temporarily housed – and quickly hundreds lined up behind her. Despite promises from emergency services she would get a call, none came. “We ended up sleeping in our car. And there was elderly people outside in the snow, sleeping, having to wait overnight”, she said. “And they never got phone calls back either.” Frustrated, the family drove an hour and a half east to Vernon, where they rented a hotel room. “We ended up depleting my dad’s savings account for the room. We’re very fortunate to have the money – but we can’t do this for months or weeks. We don’t know how long that’s going to happen,” she said. With major highways washed out across the south-western areas of the province, travelers have remained trapped for days. Allie Dexel was driving home over the weekend when she and her partner narrowly missed multiple slides that choked off traffic and destroyed sections of the highway. “We spent a cold night in the car with no water left next to the mountain which had copious amounts of water coming down off of it onto the road,” she said. “We were worried there would be another landslide where we were, but we had nowhere else to go.” The couple eventually joined 300 other stranded stranded travelers at Camp Hope, where they have been since Monday. Dexel has a spotty internet signal from a diesel generator, but no mobile reception. She sleeps on a mattress on the floor but considers herself lucky. Food was recently brought in by helicopter, neighbors with chickens have provided eggs and the Chawathil and Skawahlook First Nation sent over canned salmon and a bag of rice. Members of the Lytton First Nation, who are also at Camp Hope after being displaced by fires months ago, have also welcomed the newcomers. “Initially I was so focussed on surviving and coping with being caught up in a natural disaster that I was only really aware of our immediate situation,” she said. “Every time I see a new image, I feel like I have to stare at it for minute to really believe it. It’s impossible not to reflect on climate change and worry about our future with the flooding and slides after the wildfires we had in the summer.” As Babcock surveys her community, now covered by muddy debris and a fresh dusting of snow, she also worries how vulnerable her family will be in the future and how long they can stay. Merritt is used to fires in the summer and floods in the spring as snow melts from the surrounding hills, but the speed and ferocity with which the water overtook the community – and a fire season that stripped the surrounding hills of critical vegetation to help slow the water – has left Babcock in shock. “The water has never done anything like this. I would have never thought that that water could come that fast … There was no time before the town was turned into a river,” she said. “This has been a really big eye opener for us. We were thinking of moving before, but this has pushed us even more. We all know the town is in a floodplain. But the fact that it can happen this fast from rain is just unbelievable.” • This article was amended on 19 November 2021. The state of emergency in British Columbia was declared on Wednesday, not on Thursday as an earlier version said. And the quotes from the province’s public safety minister Mike Farnworth made during an address on Thursday were wrongly attributed to premier John Horgan.Australia is failing to meet its own plastic reduction targets, with just 16% of plastic recovered last year despite more than half of packaging found to be easily recyclable, a new report shows. The latest progress report released by the Australian Packaging Covenant Organisation (Apco) found plastic recycling has flatlined since a voluntary plan was implemented in 2017. The Australian Marine Conservation society plastics expert Shane Cucow said the report should be a “sharp wake-up call” for the federal government and business sector. Australia has set targets for 70% of plastic packaging to be recycled or composted by 2025, and unnecessary single-use plastic packaging to be phased out. However, the report found that with the current recycling upgrades in place, Australia will be able to recycle only 36% of plastics annually by 2025. Of 1.1m tonnes of plastic packaging placed on the market last year, only 179,000 tonnes were recovered. Products with recycled plastic content also remain low, accounting for just 3% of plastic packaging on the market. Cucow said that despite many domestic companies touting sustainability, Australia was still “asleep at the wheel” in responding to the growing problem of plastic waste. “We’ve been encouraged by moves to ban key single-use plastics, and investments to build new recycling infrastructure, but it is still too little too slowly when it comes to plastic packaging,” he said. “One thing is abundantly clear: if we keep on the way we are, we’ll never make it past the halfway point as the tidal wave of plastic continues to fill up our oceans and our landfills.” Cucow said voluntary targets weren’t working and greater incentives and penalties were needed to encourage companies to increase recycling uptake, particularly among soft plastics. About 4% of soft plastics, commonly used for food packaging, were being recycled in Australia despite it being the most lethal consumer plastic for ocean wildlife. “There’s simply not enough demand for recycled plastic because virgin plastic is cheaper and easier to obtain,” Cucow said. “It’s time for the Australian government to level the playing field with a levy on virgin plastic and mandated targets for recycled content. “It’s also high time all the big product manufacturers took responsibility for the environmental devastation their packaging is causing … Australia is drowning in a sea of plastic.” Boomerang Alliance director Jeff Angel said the report was a “shocking indictment” of the voluntary nature of Australia’s recycling targets and mandatory targets were needed to reach the 70% plastic-packaging recycling goal. ‘’The bright spots on banning single-use plastic items and accelerating recovery of drink containers under container deposit schemes are the direct result of legislation, not APC action,” he said. “The report repeats more of the same mantra about voluntary action to develop more plans, encourage investment and collective action. These are just words. Government needs to step in to stop the waste, protect the environment and get the packaging industry on the path to quick results. “The packaging covenant has missed too many goals and should not be given another chance. We’ll give them credit for admitting failure and being transparent but that must mean they join with us to craft an effective regulatory response now, rather than wait till 2025.” Apco chief executive Brooke Donnelly said the report showed that if Australia was to achieve its 2025 national packaging targets, “we all need to do more and the time to act is now”. “We have seen fantastic progress so far towards the targets, but … the gaps identified in the report require significant attention and we need to see a wholesale collaborative effort from actors across the supply chain,” she said. “It’s absolutely critical that businesses across every industry sector engage with this report and discuss within their organisations how they will work to address these gaps.”In the weeks before Australia’s most populous state of New South Wales emerged from a 106-day lockdown in October, a surge of Covid cases seemed certain to coincide with the easing of restrictions. Experts predicted infections would rise and hospitals braced for a spate of new admissions. But instead, the opposite happened. Daily Covid cases have dropped and – more than a month after exiting lockdown – the numbers continue to fall. On 11 October, thousands of Sydneysiders flocked back to newly reopened cafes, bars and gyms. A total of 446 new cases were reported across the state and 769 people were being treated for Covid in hospital. Modelling predicted daily cases in the state of 8 million people would swell to 1,900 each day in the weeks following restrictions easing, as schools and offices reopened, with a second, larger peak around Christmas. Australia’s leading medical research centre, the Burnet Institute, forecast hospitalisations would reach between 2,286 and 4,016 in Sydney by the end of September. Instead, new daily Covid cases in NSW fell from a peak of 1,603 on 10 September, and now hover at about 200 to 250 new cases a day. The past week saw a seven-day average of 226 new infections each day. Hospitalisations have also dropped by more than two-thirds. Australia’s second most populous state of Victoria has similarly seen a steady decline with new daily Covid cases dropping from a peak of 2,293 on 13 October to fewer than 1,000 over the past week. It is unexpected but welcome news as other parts of the world eye their own rising Covid case numbers with trepidation, reinstate lockdowns and race to roll out booster programmes. Fourth and fifth waves of the virus are sweeping across Europe. This month alone, Germany, Greece, France, Italy, the Netherlands, Russia and many countries in the eastern bloc have seen infection rates surge to record highs as hospitals face increasing strain. Health experts say there are lessons that can be learned from the success of NSW in keeping case numbers low while reopening its economy. The combination of an impressive and rapid vaccine uptake, together with mask mandates, contact tracing and isolation requirements as well as vaccination entry permits, has largely been credited for containing the outbreak and keeping case numbers low. On the first day of Sydney’s lockdown, fewer than 9% of adults in NSW had received both jabs, according to government health data. By the time lockdown ended several months later, this figure had risen to 73.5%, with 90.3% of the eligible population receiving their first dose. Dore said the turnaround in vaccine rates was “in one word: phenomenal”. NSW now boasts one of the highest vaccination rates in the world with 91.4% of adults double-dosed as of 18 November. The speed at which the state ramped up the rollout is counter to countries like the US and the UK, which began to stall as they approached the 50% mark. Still, experts believed even high levels of vaccination would not be enough to contain Covid. “Models underestimated the impact of the vaccination on transmission, and the rate of the vaccine take-up in those first few months, particularly targeted vaccination spreading to broader geographical areas,” Dore said. Timing was also crucial. A short interval period between Pfizer doses allowed NSW Health to vaccinate huge swaths of the population quickly and “optimised the impact in preventing infection”, Dore said. So when lockdowns lifted, immunity levels were high. Unlike other parts of the world, NSW maintained key public health measures even after restrictions eased. The University of NSW epidemiologist Dr Abrar Chughtai said health authorities continued to mandate masks in public places while maintaining contact tracing and isolation requirements in order to curb the spread. The Doherty Institute’s final report, released this month, credited continuing public health measures such as testing, tracing, isolating and quarantine as “critical interventions” in achieving low case numbers. Prof Alexandra Martiniuk from the University of Sydney school of public health also cited the importance of the state government’s “gradual reopening”, with vaccination requirements for entry in most indoor venues and social distancing measures. She said NSW had also maintained “excellent” testing rates, with low test positivity compared with other countries that have similar vaccination levels. About 0.3% of tests were coming back positive in NSW, while tests had continued to exceed 50,000 a day. Martiniuk explained the reopening of NSW was done gradually compared with countries such as England, which reopened much sooner and with more restrictions taken away all at once. The public health expert acknowledged that while lockdowns can work, the “number one” avenue other countries should take in order to curb the spread was to increase vaccination rates. “Those who were vaccinated more than six months ago should get boosters,” she said, adding that although other countries vaccinated more quickly than NSW, their booster roll out had been slower. “NSW vaccinated late but quick,” she said. “We reopened in a phased approach whereas other countries reopened all at once.”Our live coverage of Canada’s catastrophic floods will now close. Thanks for joining us and you can catch up with any new developments by following along here. An advance team of Canadian soldiers is on the ground in British Columbia assessing the needs of local authorities as more are on the way. The Royal Canadian Air Force shared a snap of soldiers departing Edmonton bound for Abbotsford late Thursday. Thousands of farm animals have died and many more are trapped by floods in desperate need of food and water Abbotsford, one of Canada’s most intensively and diversely farmed areas, was among places hardest hit. Home to more than 1,200 farms, it supplies half of the dairy, eggs and poultry consumed by British Columbia’s 5.2 million residents. Aerial footage showed several barns engulfed by flood waters. Farmers and residents have been frantically scrambling to save their animals from rising waters, resorting to motorboats and jetskis to tow partly submerged cows one by one to higher ground. Our reporter Ashifa Kassam has more on this story here. Some dramatic new pictures of the devastation caused to British Columbia’s roads are now in. Some major highways have reopened to limited traffic in British Columbia, but officials said the situation continues to remain critical. Floods and mudslides have blocked key transportation routes, leaving thousands in the province stranded. Transportation minister Rob Fleming said Highway 7, which connects Vancouver to the interior of the province, had been reopened to alternating, single-lane traffic. Another major route is expected to be opened by the weekend while other highways could take months to repair. Federal Transport Minister Omar Alghabra said talks were underway with Canadian and US border officials to reach an agreement that would allow cargo trucks to detour through border crossings to reach their destinations. Public safety minister, Mike Farnworth, said at an afternoon news conference that the cost of repairing damage to roads, bridges and other infrastructure is “going to be substantial.” British Columbia deputy premier Mike Farnsworth made an emotional address during a press conference on Thursday afternoon. Appearing to fight back tears, he said: “The positive I’m going to take out of this is that it had shown British Colombians coming together supporting each other. “Canadians are supporting our province that we are one big family and absolutely that to me is something that we all instinctively know it is absolutely just a remarkable feature and facet of our communities, our people, our province and our country. “This has been a terrible terrible disaster but I know this: As British Columbians, as Canadians, we stick together. I want to come out of this. I’m going to build a stronger better province and a stronger and better country.” Emergency crews on Thursday are reportedly still trying to reach 18,000 people stranded after floods and mudslides destroyed roads, houses and bridges in British Columbia in what could be the costliest natural disaster in Canadian history. Receding floodwaters helped rescue efforts, but the downpour blocked off entire towns in the Pacific coast province and cut access to the country’s largest port in Vancouver, Reuters reports. Many of the affected towns are in mountainous areas to the east and north-east of Vancouver with limited access. Provincial cabinet ministers told a briefing on Thursday that some major highways are slowly starting to reopen. That’s all from me today, but my colleague Samantha Lock will have more on Canada’s catastrophic floods shortly. Four people are missing in connection with a deadly mudslide on Highway 99 near Lillooet. Authorities have already recovered one body from the area. The disaster has completely destroyed parts of Coquihalla highway, a major route connecting Vancouver to the British Columbia interior, including a bridge. Officials have said repairs will take months. Joe Biden offered his sympathies to Canadians affected by this week’s floods and landslides during a press appearance with Justin Trudeau and said the pair are committed to addressing the climate crisis. “I know we are both keeping our minds close to the families affected by the storms flooding the British Columbia area in the Pacific north-west.” Officials in British Columbia are urging residents not to panic-buy food and groceries as the region continues to grapple with the impacts of this week’s historic floods. Four people are missing in connection with a deadly mudslide on Highway 99 near Lillooet, officials announced Thursday afternoon. Authorities have already recovered one body from the area. A cameraman who survived the mudslide said the disaster happened quickly and “all the cars that were on the road and all the people, they were just gone”. “I couldn’t believe it, it was almost like, in the blink of an eye, there were roads, there were cars, there was people, and then bang, everything was gone, just gone. Not a sign of a car, not a wheel, just trees and mud. It was all you could see.” Flooding and landslides in Canada have completely destroyed some roads and bridges. Parts of Coquihalla Highway, a major route connecting Vancouver to the British Columbia interior, have been hit hard. Footage from Global BC shows a shattered bridge along the highway. Officials have said repairs will take months. Officials in Abbotsford say some residents have refused to leave despite the catastrophic floods, putting emergency workers’ lives at risk. “We are not out of this by a long shot,” said Henry Braun, the Abbotsford mayor, during a news conference on Thursday. The 40 residents who have refused to leave are probably farmers concerned about their animals, Braun said. The floods have killed thousands of animals and left many more trapped and in need of food and water. Meanwhile, officials rescued 11 residents overnight from the Sumas Prairie area of Abbotsford, the Vancouver Sun reported. Cameraman swept up in mudslide: ‘There was just no stopping it’ A news cameraman has shared a harrowing account of being caught in a mudslide on a British Columbia highway. Mike Timbrell, a Global BC cameraman, was on his way back to Vancouver when he heard a “loud, terrifying roar”. “This roar came and it hit my truck and there were trees flying. I had my seatbelt on. I took it off and laid on the floor of my truck. My truck was moving all over, getting hammered by trees. I thought I was a goner.” “There was a roar and it slammed. There was just no stopping it.” When the mudslide came to a stop, Timbrell got out through the passenger door and ran. “I turned around and looked at my truck and it was half-buried and all the cars that were on the road and all the people, they were just gone.” British Columbia officials ask residents not to panic-buy Officials in British Columbia are urging residents not to panic-buy food and groceries as the region continues to grapple with the impacts of this week’s historic floods. “Please, do not hoard items. What you need, your neighbours need as well,” John Horgan, the BC premier, said Wednesday. “We are confident we can restore our supply chains in a quick and orderly manner provided we all act as we have been acting over the past two years.” Joe Biden offered his sympathies to Canadians affected by this week’s floods and landslides during a press appearance with Justin Trudeau. “I know we are both keeping our minds close to the families affected by the storms flooding the British Columbia area in the Pacific north-west, but one of the things we spent time on, on our global agenda, is climate change,” Biden said. “We’ve spent a lot of time dealing with [climate change] and we are on the same page as to the need for us to move on it, and get the rest of the world to move.” Experts have linked the Pacific north-west flooding to the climate crisis. Scientists expect atmospheric rivers to form in more rapid succession, grow more intense, and become longer, wetter and wider as the climate warms. Hello. I’m Dani Anguiano and I’ll be taking over the Guardian’s live coverage of Canada’s devastating floods. The storms have destroyed roads and bridges and prompted the deployment of troops to Canada’s westernmost province to help residents stranded by landslides. The extreme weather has also left some Christmas tree farms underwater, which will make it more difficult and expensive to purchase a tree this year. Canada is the world’s top exporter of natural Christmas trees with about 2.3m trees exported. “We can’t ship them because all the roads are closed,” Arthur Loewen, whose tree farm in Chilliwack has been swamped, told Reuters. “We’re basically shut down until the water recedes.” Joe Biden has commented on the floods and mudslides ravaging the Pacific north-west, saying minds are with the people affected in British Columbia. More details to follow. As residents impacted by flooding in British Columbia and Vancouver Island begin the process of assessing damage and navigating the flood’s aftermath, financial assistance has become available. Officials from British Columbia announced via Twitter that Disaster Financial Assistance (DFA) is now available for eligible residents “affected by flooding and landslides from Nov. 14-16, 2021.” A Vancouver resident has spoken with the Guardian and provided insight into the current flooding and how community members are coping. Rebecca Orr, 53, works for a large VFX company. A resident of British Columbia for over 20 years, Orr said she has “never seen anything like this before” regarding floods in the area. From a morale perspective, we feel cut off. Everyone I’ve talked to in Vancouver feels like this is something which cuts us off from the rest of Canada not just physically, but emotionally. None of us here can deny climate change is real anymore, because it’s drowning us, but we don’t feel like the rest of Canada understands that. There’s been people saying: ‘try a Toronto winter’, and things like that. I’m in Vancouver and the main way I’m affected is the supply chain disruption and panic buying. Even though we have the port here in Vancouver, a lot of access by rail to the port in Vancouver inland is actually flooded and the airports too. It’s not so bad in Vancouver but toilet paper has been getting light and it’s hard to get hold of fresh fruit. I’m definitely going to be stocking up on canned goods. If you look at any videos of the interior of Canada, people are going crazy, all the stores are empty. In my area there has been torrential rains and high winds. I have had a couple of hour-long power outages because of the winds and floods; some peoples’ have been worse. One coworker’s power was out the entire day. Other colleagues have had evacuation notices and I’ve had to cover them. I’ve been fairly lucky working from home, but I think this is just the beginning... The Coquihalla, the main BC highway that’s been destroyed, has been around since the 80s, and this is the first time this has happened to it. They’re talking about it taking months to fix. A lot of farmers have lost their livelihoods. So we’re feeling worried. A happy end to one rescue out of Abbotsford: the Abbotsford police department tweeted that a service dog named Bowser, rescued by firefighters on Tuesday night, has been reunited with its handler. The dog had been rescued amid intense flooding in the Sumas Prairie area and reunited with the help of law enforcement. Abbotsford mayor Henry Braun warned senior level Canadian officials that damage from recent flooding could cost upwards of $1bn, reports the Globe and Mail. During a news conference today, Braun said he spoke to Canada prime minister Justin Trudeau, British Columbia premier John Horgan and other ministers who assured him that the region had their support following the natural disaster. “I take them all at their word, but I’ve also prepared them for one big bill at the end of this, because this is not just going to be $10m or $50m; this is in the multiple hundreds, if not higher than that,” said Braun this morning. Braun also added that current cost estimates didn’t include replacing the city’s dikes, as a cost for that is still to be generated. A previous study done years ago estimated that only replacing the Sumas and Matsqui dikes would cost around $400m. “They said that the province will be there for us. When you start totaling those things up, you’re going to get up to $1bn, I predict,” said Braun. New images posted to social media show the extent of flooding throughout British Columbia, with water levels receding in some areas. A park in Abbotsford, one of the regions hit hardest by recent flooding, remains submerged. Similar images show that while water levels are lowering slightly, the park, like many places in Abbotsford, is still badly damaged. Similarly, many homes were still impacted by the storms, as thousands remain displaced. Shared images show some progress as water levels lower, but surveying the full damage is ongoing. Railways in British Columbia that link Vancouver to the rest of the province are expected to be unusable due to flood damage, reports the Globe and Mail. Rail lines owned by Canadian national railway Co. and Canadian pacific Railway Ltd. run along the Fraser River, which spilled its banks and cut off roads, bridge and tracks on Sunday in heavy rain and flooding. CP’s tracks between Spence’s Bridge and Falls Creek are blocked due to damage in several sections, said Salem Woodrow, a CP spokeswoman. The washouts have severed halted freight on CP’s busiest rail corridor, linking the port and overseas ports with shippers of grain, consumer goods and other products. “There is no time estimate for when service will resume,” Ms. Woodrow said. Work currently being done to fix the damaged lines owned by the Canadian national railway was slowed down due to three sink holes opening up beneath the railway. Highways and roads in Vancouver and throughout BC are similarly flooded and out of service. Read the full report here. Canadian forces have started arriving in British Columbia to help stranded residents and search areas hit by landslides and heavy flooding. Floods could lead to country-wide shortages and price surges More information from the Guardian’s Chris Watson on the causes behind flooding in British Columbia Abbotsford mayor Henry Braun said the flooding situation is not resolved, saying, “We are not out of this by a long shot.” Flooding in BC could be Canada’s costliest disaster according to local news outlets It’s morning now in Canada and local news outlets are reporting that the floods could become the country’s costliest disaster. Some more from Mayor Braun on the weather over the coming days: Let me address the rain. I am not concerned about today’s rain. What I’m concerned about is next week and what’s coming. There is predicted 80 to 100 milimetres of rain coming next week. Henry Braun, the mayor of Abbotsford, has just said in a press conference that water levels are continuing to rise in some areas to the east of the city. “We are not out of this by a long shot,” he said. He said the damage caused to farms in the area likely cost “hundreds of millions of dollars plus”. A reminder: Much of the area lies on the former site of Sumas Lake, a vast body of water that was drained in the last century. City officials feared that pumps, which divert water from the basin at a rate of half a million gallons a minute, were on the verge of failing – meaning even more water would inundate parts of the city. Mayor Braun said the pumps were still operational as of Thursday morning. It might seem trivial compared to the devastation caused, but Reuters is reporting that the floods could mean the US might suffer a Christmas tree shortage this year. Canada is the world’s top exporter of natural Christmas trees, exporting about 2.3 million trees per year, with some 97% going to the US. While British Columbia does not export cut Christmas trees, it is a significant domestic supplier. That means shortfalls in that province will have to be made up with supply from elsewhere, leaving fewer Canadian trees for export, Reuters reports. “We can’t ship them because all the roads are closed,” said Arthur Loewen, whose tree farm in Chilliwack, east of Vancouver, has been swamped. “We’re basically shut down until the water recedes.” Trees already cut and wrapped for wholesale buyers are piled up on wood pallets, surrounded by water, he said. His self-serve fields, where people choose and cut their own Christmas trees, are 75% flooded. Loewen said that if the waters don’t subside within the week, younger trees could be damaged, hurting future supply. Here is an updated map with the key developments around British Columbia: Thousands of farm animals have died and many more are trapped by floods in desperate need of food and water after the storm battered a major hub of Canadian agriculture. Abbotsford, one of Canada’s most intensively and diversely farmed areas, was among places hardest hit. Home to more than 1,200 farms, it supplies half of the dairy, eggs and poultry consumed by British Columbia’s 5.2 million residents. Aerial footage showed several barns engulfed by flood waters. Farmers and residents have been frantically scrambling to save their animals from rising waters, resorting to motorboats and jetskis to tow partly submerged cows one by one to higher ground. Many of the farms are in Sumas Prairie, a low-lying fertile stretch of land created by the draining of a lake nearly a century ago. An evacuation order on Tuesday included 121 dairy and poultry farms, according to farmers associations. Local officials pleaded with about 300 people who defied the order. “If you are still on Sumas Prairie, you need to leave,” said Henry Braun, the mayor of Abbotsford. “I know it’s hard for farmers to leave their livestock, but people’s lives are more important to me right now than livestock or chickens.” Share your experiences Whether you live or work in the area, or are helping with search and rescue efforts with the emergency services, we would like to hear from you. You can get in touch by filling in the form here or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. The area has been drenched by unusually heavy rain – what one meteorologist has referred to as a “parade of storms” – since September. More rain fell in Bellingham in Washington State between Saturday and Monday than normally falls there during all of November. The heavy rainfall is linked to an atmospheric river, a narrow corridor of concentrated moisture in the atmosphere. Hurricane scientist Jeff Masters has described the phenomenon as like “a river in the sky that acts like a pipe transporting huge amounts of water vapour out of the tropics”. The flooding has been exacerbated by clearcut logging and its effect on slope stability, the rate at which water is absorbed into the ground and the ability to hold soil in root systems. Without trees, heavy rains can wash large amounts of sediment into nearby water systems, choking creeks and streams and causing them to quickly overflow. The risk of landslides and debris flow has also been heightened by summer wildfires in the region. “There’s a very clear link between a wildfire happening and the risk of a landslide or debris flow,” Thomas Martin, a forester in the province, said on Tuesday. “If you burn a lot of the trees, grass and shrubs, there are fewer living things to intercept the water. It just flows directly off the hill. And fires can make the soil hydrophobic so the runoff increases even more.” Further rain is forecast for Thursday, although not on the scale of the massive downpour earlier this week. Meanwhile, evacuation alerts have been removed in some areas of the city of Abbotsford. There are concerns that the catastrophic flooding in British Columbia could see Canadians in other parts of the country face higher prices and shortages in the coming weeks. The Port of Vancouver is Canada’s largest port but has been cut off due to highway closures. Retail analyst Bruce Winder told the Canadian Press that the sector will feel the impact of the flood at the peak of the busiest holiday season. “It’s brutal,” Winder said. “Supply chains for retail have been under siege for some time now due to the pandemic. And this is going to add to the shortage at the worst possible time.” I was just contacted by a man who lives in the small town of Okanagan Falls, in the interior of British Columbia and a five-hour drive east of Vancouver. He said he had been “lucky” to avoid the worst of the flood. However, he adds: “The big problem is panic buying has emptied the shelves of the local supermarkets.” The local government has asked people not to “hoard supplies”. Fuel stations in British Columbia are also facing shortages and long lines. Authorities in British Columbia have temporarily reopened a highway out of the district of Hope, where hundreds of people have been stranded. There is limited capacity and the route is only open to passenger vehicles – allowing those who were stuck there to move on. “Though there is no confirmed closing time, we encourage anyone wanting to leave to do so now,” the local government said. Hope is located about 150km east of Vancouver. On Wednesday, a late-night evacuation train carrying about 200 people stranded for days was also able to leave Hope. Canadian forces have started arriving in British Columbia to help stranded residents and search areas hit by landslides and heavy flooding. During the past few days, a powerful storm has dumped a month’s worth of rain across a swath of the Pacific north-west. Canadian military personnel will assist with evacuation efforts in British Columbia. They will also assess the damage in an area that has largely been cut off. Hello Readers. My name is Oliver Holmes and I’m starting a new live blog today, bringing you all the latest on the floods and landslides. If you see anything worth covering, please email me at: oliver.holmes@theguardian.comA battery sign, flashing dangerously low, appears superimposed over a view of the globe as seen from space. “Green technologies, electric cars, clean air – all of these depend on one of the most significant lithium deposits in the world, which is located right here in Jadar, Serbia,” a gravel-voiced narrator announces. “We completely understand your concerns about the environment. Rio Tinto is carrying out detailed analyses, so as to make all of us sure that we develop the Jadar project in line with the highest environmental, security and health standards.” Beamed into the country’s living rooms on the public service channel RTS, the slick television ad, shown just after the evening news, finishes with images of reassuring scientists and a comforted young couple walking into the sunset: “Rio Tinto: Together we have the chance to save the planet.” The pivot to ecological saviour and bastion of transparency is perhaps an unlikely one for Rio Tinto, the world’s second-largest metals and mining corporation. Throughout its almost 150-year history, the Anglo-Australian multinational, which posted profits after tax of $10.4bn (£7.3bn) in 2020, has faced accusations of corruption, environmental degradation and human rights abuses. It is currently fighting a civil lawsuit by the US Securities and Exchange Commission that accuses the company of fraud at its Mozambique coal business. That follows a £27.4m fine in 2017 from the UK’s financial watchdog for breaching disclosure and transparency rules. The chief executive of Rio Tinto’s iron ore operation, Simon Trott, conceded earlier this year that the company was “not proud of its history” at its Marandoo mine in Western Australia where hundreds of ancient artefacts were thrown into a rubbish dump. Last year, the then chief executive resigned after the company deliberately blew up an ancient cave, one of Australia’s most significant archaeological research sites, where there had been evidence of 46,000 years of continual occupation. This summer the company finally agreed, after decades of appeals, to fund an “environmental and human rights impact assessment” of its former copper and goldmine in Panguna, in Papua New Guinea, where it is claimed that 1bn tonnes of mine waste was dumped into the Kawerong-Jaba river delta and continues to wreak catastrophic damage. It is a troubling history. One critic has said Rio Tinto could be seen as “a poster child for corporate malfeasance”. But for Rio Tinto executives the future is also a cause for concern despite current bumper profits. The share price has been struggling. The price of iron ore is under pressure from massive Chinese production. Scandals in Australia have put its future expansion in jeopardy and the company’s management of a major copper mine in Mongolia has come under heavy criticism. It is in that context that the world’s dash for decarbonisation and the European Union’s drive for self-sufficiency in raw materials to achieve its climate targets have caught the company’s eye. In July, Rio Tinto announced that it would invest $2.4bn in a project in the Jadar valley, in western Serbia, overlooked by the Cer and Gučevo mountains, building what it says will be Europe’s biggest lithium mine, and one of the world’s largest on a greenfield site. The company estimates that over the expected 40-year life of the mine, it will produce 2.3m tonnes of battery-grade lithium carbonate, a mineral critical for large-scale batteries for electric vehicles and storing renewable energy, and 160,000 tonnes of boric acid annually, necessary for the renewable energy equipment such as solar panels and wind turbines. Rio Tinto boasts the mine will make it one of the top 10 lithium producers in the world, and could produce enough for more than 1m electric cars a year, of which annual sales are expected to jump from 1.2m vehicles in 2017 to at least 23m in 2030, according to the International Energy Agency. The EU, with which Serbia has an association agreement facilitating trade and regional funding, imports all its battery-grade lithium from outside Europe. Talks about supplying leading German car manufacturers have begun. Four 40ft shipping containers carrying the infrastructure for a lithium processing plant have set sail for Serbia from Australia. The project is gathering momentum. But anxious and angry campaigners, including the thousands of protesters who have taken to the streets of the Serbian cities of Loznica and Belgrade over recent months, say they are witnessing an unfolding disaster in the country’s “breadbasket”, responsible for around a fifth of total agricultural production, raising questions about the strange bedfellows being made in the maelstrom of the green revolution, and whether lessons have been learned about consumption and production that has made the transition to a decarbonised world so urgent. Shortcomings in Serbian democracy further raise concerns over whether the voices of those on the frontline are being heard. It is 17 years since lithium, a silvery-white alkali metal, was discovered by chance by Rio Tinto geologists in one of two boreholes in a cornfield in Jadar valley. The team had been looking for borates, used in fertiliser and building materials, but found something unexpected: borates and lithium in one mineral, a combination that would later be given the name jadarite, after the valley. Marijana Petkovic, 47, a teacher , lives with her husband, Nebojša, 49, and two daughters in Gornje Nedeljice, one of the nine villages that will be most affected by the planned mine. She remembers the day the Rio Tinto men arrived. “They were taking samples and were around all the time. We got to know them, they would be invited in for coffee, lunch, for saints’ days and local events – they were Serbian,” she said. “They were talking about a small mine then, 20 hectares, and that we would never even know it was here.” Over the following years, donations started to be made by Rio Tinto to local causes. Gornje Nedeljice’s school received funds for classroom renovations. The football team’s clubhouse got a new roof and farmers were offered vouchers for expensive agricultural equipment. There was even cash for the Christmas bazaar among the 107 donations dished out since 2003, of a total value of $608,807 (£451,034). “After a year or two, the mine was suddenly going to be 80 hectares,” said Petkovic. “Then in September last year, we received letters telling us that our land had been rezoned from being agricultural to building land. I remember a friend invited me to her house where a group of us women were asked by a lady from Rio Tinto about what we wanted from the mine, what opportunities might interest us … We were idiots. We weren’t paying attention.” Rio Tinto said it did not recognise the figures cited by Petkovic but conceded that plans had evolved. According to the spatial plan published by the Serbian government in March, the zone at risk of subsidence will be spread across 850 hectares, the size of more than 1,000 football pitches. The core mine will be on a site of just over 200 hectares on a bank of the Korenita River, a tributary of the Jadar, with further hundreds of hectares set aside for landfills of waste and new transport infrastructure. Excavation will take place underneath the two riverbeds where lithium has been identified at depths of 100 to 650 metres. In 2014, flooding of the Korenita led to a dam overflowing into a closed coalmine, spilling toxic material over farmland. Rio Tinto says it plans to convert the liquid waste from the mine into dry “cakes” to make it safer to store. It is making contingency plans for a “once in 10,000 years flood event”, just in case. The mine will involve the relocation of 81 households, voluntary or otherwise, and the purchase of fields of 293 landowners. A brochure circulated among those affected stated that expropriation of homes and land would be a “last resort”. The company has already bought up about 80% of the land and property, for what are said to be “unheard of” sums, according to Petkovik, amounting to hundreds of thousands of euros in some cases, based on payouts of €470 (£397) per sq metre of a property. Rio Tinto is offering 5% bonuses to those who complete within four months of an offer. About 30 homes have been bought in Petkovic’s village. Knowing their properties are destined to be destroyed, the owners rip out windows, doors and even roofs, leaving desolate scenes for those who have resisted Rio Tinto’s money or are yet to be offered anything. “Our neighbours did it so we had to,” said Živana Šakic, 67, who recently sold up. Close to the proposed works, lies the Paulje necropolis dated 1500-1000BC, the biggest central Balkans cemetery from the bronze age. Rio Tinto has paid a local museum for an archaeological dig and hundreds of artefacts including pottery, jewellery, tools made of painted stone and bronze, aceramic spool and a three-legged altar have been uncovered so far. Zlatko Kokanovic, 45, a vet who farms about 32 hectares with his brother, in which a five bronze age graves are located, said he had rejected attempts by Rio Tinto to lease the land for excavation. “They will never buy me off – they can only steal it from me,” the father of five said. “The Jadar project will not have any impact on this important site in any of its phases,” Rio Tinto said. There are also two Important Bird and Biodiversity Areas internationally recognised as important for the conservation of bird populations. “But so far no risks have been identified for the existing fauna in these zones … No activities have been or will be carried out during the period of active nesting of birds,” added the company spokesperson. Obtaining lithium will nevertheless entail a heavy environmental toll, generating 57m tonnes of waste over the mine’s life of rock material and industrial detritus. The average water demand is estimated to be 6-18 litres a second, or about 1.3 litres of water for every kilo of product. As for carbon emissions, the company says on its website that it “anticipates” using renewable energy. “Such mines are mostly opened in deserts precisely because of the detrimental effect on the environment and biodiversity,” said Prof Dragana Đorđević, head of environmental chemistry and engineering at the University of Belgrade. “The basins of the Drina and Sava rivers, from which about 2.5 million people are supplied with water, are endangered.” Rio Tinto deny this. Rio Tinto has commissioned 12 environmental studies, none of which the company would make available when asked by the Guardian. The company also declined requests for an interview. But one study funded by the company, summarised in a slide presentation obtained by this newspaper, offers an insight. Dr Imre Krizmanic, from the biology faculty at the University of Belgrade, found that attempts to mitigate the damage to more than 145 protected species , from wolves, beavers and bats to salamanders, pond turtles, dragonflies, fish, flora and fauna, would have a highly limited impact. The presentation concluded that “due to the expected irreversible changes in certain ecosystems, as well as risks of significant endangerment of the living world of the rivers Jadar, Drina and downstream watercourses, the optimal and basic measure to prevent the negative consequences of the state of biodiversity in this area is the abandonment of planned exploitation and processing of the mineral jadarite”. While the Jadar project does not yet have the permits necessary for construction, Rio Tinto is confident that the Serbian ministry of environment will give the green light when it submits its environmental impact assessment (EIA) later this year. A Rio Tinto spokesperson said of the core site, “almost all species at this location can be found in western Serbia or beyond. In other words, there are no species that cannot continue their life beyond this territory, meaning that impact on biodiversity will be minimal.” Serbia’s president, Aleksandar Vučić, told a TV chatshow in January: “We do not have sea or natural resources that will bring us millions. We have jadarite, and I’m dying with laughter when I hear that people are protesting over it. They are protesting down there, in western Serbia, over Rio Tinto and they say it will be a disaster. No, it will not. No disaster will happen there.” Vučić has suggested he could open up the issue to a referendum but Miroslav Mijatović, from NGO, the Podrinje Anti-Corruption Team (Pakt), worries that the government is revising the rules over such votes. “Both the previous government and this current government are clientelistic towards the company and adapt the laws to their needs,” he said. As for the potential electoral threat posed by the unpopular mine, minutes of a meeting between the European Commission and Rio Tinto executives, released under freedom of information laws, note in bold that EU officials had been informed that “site development [will] start – from [the second quarter] of 2022 – after the elections in Serbia (March 2022)”. Rio Tinto says it will create 2,000 jobs during the mine’s construction and 1,000 long-term positions, making a 1% direct and 4% indirect contribution to GDP. But people fighting the plan find it difficult to see beyond the imminent destruction of a longstanding community and way of life. Dragan Karajcic, 51, leader of the parish council, who has corn and soya fields close to what will be the landfill site, said Rio Tinto’s record had been that of leaving “deserts behind”. “Even if they were planning a chocolate factory in the name of Rio Tinto I wouldn’t give up my land”, he said. Beekeeper Vladan Jakovljevic, 60, from Stupinica, 2km from the mining zone, whose 400 hives produced three tonnes of acacia honey last year, said the area where his bees feed would be left “desolate.” Ratko Ristic, a forestry professor has lobbied with others from the Serbian Academy of Sciences and Arts against the Jadar mine, claiming “the possible benefits for the state of Serbia is between €7m to €30m a year, the possible income from advanced agricultural activity in the same area would be more than €80m a year without pollution or relocation”. A petition against the mine has more than 130,000 signatures, 2% of the Serbian population. The company has already had to pay small sums in damages due to leakage in fields where it has carried out research. Pakt has filed a criminal report with the basic public prosecutor’s office in Loznica against Rio Tinto, incorporated in Serbia as Rio Sava Exploration, claiming it has acted contrary to its research permits by illegally dumping rubble, and that lorries have driven over weak bridges. Rio Tinto said it had not been contacted over the claims, and “the competent authorities have confirmed that the activities of Rio Sava Exploration are in line with applicable legislation”. The company’s assurances, however, that its operations will be in compliance with Serbian and European regulations, offer little succour to locals. While Serbia is obliged to align its water and waste management and industrial emissions regulations with the EU, as part of its route to joining, the European Commission conceded in a letter to lawyers for the Marš Sa Drine (Get Off Drina) anti-mine campaign that while Serbia “has achieved some progress regarding the alignment with the European legislation … implementation is still at an early stage”. Lucas Bednarsk, author of Lithium: The Global Race for Battery Dominance and the New Energy Revolution, said a moral argument could be made that Europe should bear the ecological costs of the lithium excavation it needs. It is currently imported from Australia, Latin America and China. But Meadhbh Bolger, from Friends of the Earth Europe, says that batteries for electric vehicles and renewables are predicted to drive up demand for lithium by almost 6,000% by 2050 – and asked why such consumption was not being questioned. “There is still no talk about reducing demand,” says Bolger. “We have asked the question and the commission said they were not at the stage that they could address constraint. The reason we got to where we are in the first place is by exploiting the resources, too much extraction, to meet the needs of the luxury rich and European industry … We are just doing it again.” • This article was amended on 22 November 2021 to name a protest movement as Marš Sa Drine (Get Off Drina), instead of “Mars Sa Drine (The March on Drina)”.A tearful Tim Paine announced his resignation as Australia’s Test cricket captain after a previous investigation into a sexting scandal surfaced less than three weeks before the start of the Ashes, sending the hosts’ plans for the series into disarray. Paine stood down at a press conference in Hobart – with 19 days until the start of the series against England – after it became clear to him that details of explicit text messages sent to a female former colleague in 2017, which predated his appointment as Test captain, were about to be made public. An integrity unit investigation four years ago had cleared Paine of any breach of Cricket Australia’s code of conduct but he said he “deeply regretted” his actions at the time and still to this day. Having only announced Australia’s 15-strong Ashes squad 48 hours beforehand, CA accepted Paine’s decision to stand down, effective immediately. It means the national selection panel must now appoint a new captain to lead the side into the first Test in Brisbane on 8 December. Pat Cummins, the vice-captain, had been tipped to take over from the 36-year-old once he retired but Australia have traditionally favoured batters in the role which may bring into play the credentials of Marnus Labaschagne, or, controversially given his role in the ball-tampering scandal, former captain Steve Smith. Paine said it was a difficult decision to make, but “the right one for me, my family, and cricket”. “We thought this incident was behind us and that I could focus entirely on the team, as I have done for the last three or four years,” he said. “However, I recently became aware that this private text exchange was going to become public. “On reflection, my actions in 2017 do not meet the standard of an Australian cricket captain, or the wider community. I’m deeply sorry for the hurt and pain that I have caused to my wife, my family, and to the other party. I’m sorry for any damage that this does to the reputation of our sport. And I believe that it is the right decision for me to stand down as captain, effective immediately. I do not want this to become an unwelcome disruption to the team ahead of what is a huge Ashes series.” Paine had been in the role – termed by some as Australia’s second highest-profile job after the nation’s prime minister – since March 2018. He took the job from Smith in the wake of the Cape Town ball-tampering scandal and was seen as a steady pair of hands to guide Australian cricket in the aftermath of one of its most turbulent periods. In 2019, he became the first Australian men’s captain to retain the Ashes in England since Steve Waugh in 2001, but pressure mounted on his captaincy after losing last year’s home series to India. During that series he apologised to teammates for letting them down in the Sydney Test after his sledging crossed a line. In total his captaincy ledger includes 11 wins, eight losses and four draws from 23 Tests. CA acknowledged that Paine had been cleared of any breach of the code of conduct regarding this matter some years ago but CA’s chair, Richard Freudenstein, said the board “does not condone this type of language or behaviour”. Cricket Tasmania said in a statement it too does not condone his behaviour, but “because of the consensual nature of the actions it was determined that no further action was required or appropriate”. The interaction was, according to CT, “consensual, private, occurred on the one occasion only, was between mature adults and not repeated”. Paine also received backing from the Australia Cricketers’ Association which said in a statement: “While regrettable, this was an historical mistake that was a private matter between consenting individuals. Tim fully cooperated in an integrity investigation by Cricket Australia in 2018 in which he was exonerated. “Tim humbly recognised the respect that comes with the Australian captaincy and his resignation reflects the esteem in which he held the role that he served so well in a trying period for Australian cricket. While Tim has clearly made a mistake, he will continue to have the full and unequivocal support of the ACA.” Despite standing down as captain, the wicketkeeper-batsman will still make himself available for playing selection over the summer. He is facing a race to be fit in time for the first ball at the Gabba after undergoing invasive neck surgery to fix a bulging disc. Losing the captaincy may put his position in the team under pressure. Paine has yet to score a Test century in 57 Test innings and neither his glovework, nor his career average of 32.63, make him an automatic selection with Alex Carey and Josh Inglis also vying for his spot.Afghan and Australian rights groups have warned the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan must not be allowed to disrupt or delay Australia’s plan to compensate victims of alleged war crimes. A key recommendation of the Brereton report, released exactly one year ago, was that the Australian government provide redress to the families of victims, without waiting for prosecutions to conclude. The report found “credible information” implicating 25 current or former Australian Defence Force personnel in the alleged unlawful killing of 39 people and the cruel treatment of two others in Afghanistan and recommended a number of cases be referred for investigation. Defence has previously signalled it will release a compensation plan by the end of this year. The plan is yet to be produced. An alliance of human rights groups said on Friday that the “essential” task of involving Afghans should not be put off due to the dramatic deterioration in the country’s humanitarian situation and its fall to the Taliban. A joint statement issued by 13 human rights groups, including the Afghanistan-based Transitional Justice Coordination Group and Afghanistan Human Rights and Democracy Organization, said it was crucial that survivors of alleged abuses were consulted to determine the proper forms of redress, which should include guarantees of non-repetition. “The Brereton report recommended that the families of survivors be compensated without delay,” the statement said. “One year on, the Government has yet to produce a plan.” “The humanitarian situation in Afghanistan has deteriorated dramatically in the twelve months since the Brereton Report was published. This will likely complicate the task of involving people from Afghanistan in the process of reckoning with this dark chapter in Australia’s history. “Yet it remains an essential part of the path forward.” The Afghanistan Human Rights and Democracy Organization executive director, Hadi Marifat, said the change of circumstances in Afghanistan “must not affect the resolve of the Australian government”. “Victims’ families and survivors impatiently wait for the long-promised justice, accountability and reparations,” Marifat said. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Other signatories to the joint statement include Amnesty International, the Human Rights Law Centre, the Australian Centre for International Justice, and Human Rights Watch. The Taliban’s resurgence this year makes access for war crimes investigators particularly problematic. But the Human Rights Watch Australia director, Elaine Pearson, said the fall of Afghanistan made it “even more crucial” that justice and accountability was afforded to survivors of alleged abuses and their families. “The special investigator’s office should ensure that proper protection measures are in place to minimise any risks for potential witnesses to crimes,” Pearson said. The Australian Council for International Development chief executive, Marc Purcell, said access for investigators should be a focus of any future talks with the Taliban. “Such dialogue around access does not require the government to recognise the Taliban,” he said. “However, a failure to secure access and investigate alleged war crimes by the Australian SAS would be justice denied to the Afghan victims and their families.” The Office of the Special Investigator (OSI), established last year, is continuing to collect evidence of potential war crimes committed by special forces troops. Chris Moraitis, the OSI director general, told a parliamentary committee last month none of the 19 special forces soldiers potentially implicated by the report had been exonerated, and that its investigations were continuing. “We have not exonerated anybody, we are starting our investigations to examine the evidence,” he told the Senate’s legal and constitutional affairs committee. It is understood some former soldiers have had discussions with officials over potential immunity from prosecution if they agree to give evidence against comrades. Moraitis said it could still take between one and five years before the investigation – involving more than 50 investigators – was ready to present evidence to the DPP to determine whether charges would be laid and former soldiers brought before a court. He said the Taliban’s swift and complete takeover of Afghanistan was likely to impede the investigation as it progressed and obtaining evidence from inside the country was currently nearly impossible. “The situation is not ideal from an investigations perspective and its pretty self-evident access to individuals in Afghanistan … is extremely difficult if not currently impossible.” The Australian federal police is also conducting investigations into potential war crimes by Australian troops that fall outside the OSI’s remit, but has said gathering evidence and approaching witnesses inside Afghanistan poses too great a risk. “The AFP is not engaging with Taliban controlled Afghanistan,” it said, in a submission to a Senate inquiry into Australia’s involvement in Afghanistan. “The security situation in Afghanistan may affect the ongoing investigation of war crimes allegedly perpetrated by ADF personnel, in that obtaining evidence and accessing potential witnesses residing there is likely to be more difficult. Any future engagement in Afghanistan would require an assessment of the security situation and other relevant considerations at the time, with the safety of investigators and Afghan nationals remaining the paramount concern.”Richard Segovia’s house is as loud as the Latin rock music he teaches children to play in his basement studio. With colors ranging from jungle green and royal blue at the pavement to a red and yellow sunburst at the ridge, the otherwise modest Spanish-style home is essentially one enormous mural, a crowded portrait of long-gone musicians, Segovia’s family members, social activists, various psychedelia, and the odd jungle animal. Segovia has lived in San Francisco’s Mission district since 1963, and he sees himself as a custodian of the neighborhood’s culture, specifically as the birthplace of Latin rock. (Carlos Santana, a family friend, grew up nearby.) But increasingly the 68-year old “Mayor of the Mission” finds himself face to face with a stark representation of all the color that has been bled out of the city over successive waves of tech-fueled gentrification. “I walk the neighborhood every day and I see all these gray houses,” Segovia says. “It’s like being in a cemetery.” From the Golden Gate Bridge’s International Orange hue to the elaborately carved and painted façades of the Painted Ladies fronting Alamo Square, vivid color has long been the grammar of San Francisco’s vernacular architecture. But more and more, amid the pastels and the gold-leaf embellishments, you see a striking juxtaposition: 125-year-old houses painted in the tones of a cold war-era nuclear warhead or a dormant cinder cone. In neighborhoods like the Mission and the Haight, this phenomenon reads to some residents as an erasure of the Latino community or of the lingering counterculture. Gentrification gray homes have become a totem of affluent interlopers. The rush of wealth into central cities is global in scale, but its effects in San Francisco have been particularly pronounced – all the more so because of the city’s famously high opinion of its own uniqueness. Some of these houses have accents in black or darker gray. Some are entirely the hue of a beached humpback whale. Many have the crisply oxidized planters full of succulents or geometrically rigorous horsetail plants straight out of a Dwell magazine spread, while others display garishly painted doors in the same off-neon palette as athleisure apparel. To their proponents, they’re understated and contemporary, with paint jobs that will take a beating without ever looking dirty. To their detractors, they’re unimaginative, historically inaccurate aberrations, the kind of thing that an affluent biotech CEO who wears a gray Patagonia fleece vest every single day might appreciate – or worse, something realtors urge to lend curb appeal to a potential investment property that no one may ever even live in. “I had some concerns about painting our house gray, when that is a symbol of gentrification in the Mission,” says Kate Shaw, who lives with her partner Dav Rausch in a Mission Victorian they purchased in 2012. But the couple, a professional designer and a designer by hobby, say that gray was a “jumping off point” to “reimagine the form” of their pre-1900 house. “Going toward the monochrome could be interpreted as lazy, but getting those colors right is its own thing. It’s an art in and of itself,” she says, during a tour via Facetime. “Color emphasizes the shape, and not the other way around.” “We hired a Latino crew led by a man who was Latino, who got laid off by my company,” Shaw adds. “People were like, ‘Employ him! He’s amazing, and we want to make sure he’s looked after and cared for.’ His crew was like, ‘We’re used to so much more color, and we love this!’ They put it at the top of their web page, as the thing they were most proud of.” The idea that Victorian houses were traditionally polychromatic is as much a myth as our contemporary conception of ancient Roman cities as bone white. As a form of civic improvement, Roman buildings were decorated brashly – even luridly, by most modern standards – whereas San Francisco’s Victorians were likely relatively drab at first construction. “When these Victorians started out, they didn’t have as many options in colors – typically white or gray, in lead paint. They didn’t pick out the trim,” says architect David Baker, himself an occupant of a gray house. “I don’t think we should take it seriously – it’s just paint.” But for Bob Buckter, known as Dr Color, it’s anything but just paint. For more than 50 years, he’s worked as an independent color consultant on historical buildings in the Bay Area – some 18,500 by his count. “I talk to people, find out what their taste field is, what they like, what they don’t like, if they’re a wild thang or a conservative thang, if they like dark blue or dark gray or polychrome, how they’re dressed, how they do their interiors,” he says, sitting in his gray-violet office with aubergine drapes and ceiling medallions he painted by hand. Many of Buckter’s clients come back for a second or third treatment – in a few cases, even a fourth. He takes a straightforward, give-the-client-what-they-want approach, striving not to impose his own tastes on people. But the usual result is a uniquely harmonious blend of colors, so a monochrome, matte exterior would seem antithetical to his practice. Is that simply people’s taste preference, or the mutilation of an irreplaceable treasure built of old-growth redwood? “All of that. I’ve spent my life attending to the architectural details of historic homes and other types of architectural things and I want to find out the purpose of their having me come in and do color. Whether it’s for the market to sell the building or pride of ownership, I have to worry about all that in my design,” Buckter says.“Excitement is in small quantities in this world, and if I can provide excitement for people, then I think I’ve done something.” Having consulted on so many houses, and gotten enough attention that his work has given rise to copycat jobs, it’s likely that Buckter has shifted the collective taste in a certain direction. Consequently, the rise of the gray Victorian could be a reaction against his aesthetic. “That may be part of it,” Buckter says. “I think the main reason is a trend toward simplicity and being modern. They’re tired of the polychrome look, some of these people. This trend has been noticed by other people and some people are just going on the wave of that trend.” The absence of color rankles some longtime residents whose love of San Francisco’s more riotous houses has never wavered. “I wish they would make me the color commissioner for San Francisco, so people would check with me what colors they use,” says artist and photographer Liz Mamorsky. “Some people try to do a good thing and restore a Victorian, but they don’t get the colors quite right. You want that retinal flash you get by two complements of the same hue.” Fred Messbarger, a 15-year Mission homeowner, calls the gray trend “heartbreaking” and said that the “beauty of San Francisco is in the Victorians and Edwardians, and the contrast of the houses and the curves and the detail – and also the neighbors. One house could be totally different colors from the others.” Messbarger had his circa-1870 Italianate home repainted turquoise, navy blue, and white, with gold detail and a neon-green door. Everyone in the family had input, and the response has been positive. “When I’m outside gardening or even leaving the house, on numerous occasions I have people commenting or giving us compliments,” Messbarger says. “It’s nice to hear, because it took us five years to decide what to paint.” “I didn’t think we were going bold,” he adds. “I just thought we were bringing color back. The door is bold, but that’s our son’s fault.” But sometimes, gray is what happens when a diverse group tries to make a decision. Eric Carlson owns a condo in a four-unit building, occupying the space with a Latino family, a Greek American family, and another single man. When it came time to repaint the exterior’s “abysmal light pink with white trim”, these very different people found it challenging to agree. After six weeks of looking at swatches, everyone made lists of their top four and their two “absolutely nots”. The result? Homburg Gray, with a Vellum White trim. “I would have been OK with a much more expressive color,” Carlson says. “I was also well aware that this was going to have to be a consensus, and these were acceptable colors. Do I love them? No. But does it look a lot better than what we had before? In the grand scheme of things, life is about compromises. I knew that there was not going to be an appetite for a historically accurate color from the early ’20s.” If no one really loves it, why does gray seem to predominate? “I think we’re in this weird place where this slate gray looks like a popular color, so it’s self-reinforcing,” Carlson says. “We’re attuned to this matte palette of modern architecture, and it’s bland. We’re not exactly in a baroque period of architecture.” For some realtors, a coat of lusterless tungsten gray can be about muting more than just the visuals. When a luxury real estate company bought the house next door to Segovia’s and repainted it gray, Segovia attempted to flag down the real estate agent and let him know that whoever eventually bought the house would have a rock musician for a neighbor. “He wouldn’t pay attention to me. So I said, ‘I’ll get even with those suckers.’” Segovia placed his speaker system against the wall and blasted Metallica during the open house. Eventually, the real estate company spent $40,000 to soundproof Segovia’s home studio so they could unload their property – to people who paid $750,000 and sold it to the current owner four years later for $1.7m. Segovia has been offered $2.5m in cash for his house so many times that he threatened one aggressive agent with legal action. “I’m not moving. I’m not going anywhere. I got my roots,” he says. “Working with children, teaching kids music without asking for any money. It’s about me giving back to the community. Latin rock music was created here in the Mission district, so it’s about me keeping that alive.” As for the advancing creep of gray, “There should be a law,” Segovia says. “Enough is enough. It’s penitentiary colors to me.”Japan should seek to work with Aukus members on cybersecurity and artificial intelligence, long-serving former Japanese prime minister Shinzo Abe has said. Japan was excluded when the leaders of Australia, the US and the UK announced their new security partnership with much fanfare in mid-September, but Abe believes it is “extremely important” for Tokyo to find ways to collaborate with its friends. In a virtual address to the Sydney Dialogue on Friday, Abe noted that the Aukus deal was broader than its initial project of delivering at least eight nuclear-powered submarines for the Royal Australian Navy. Without directly mentioning China, he said the regional security environment had become “increasingly severe”. Abe said the concept he had championed while in office – a “free and open Indo-Pacific” – could only be achieved if like-minded countries remained engaged in the region in the long-term. “From this point of view, I welcome the creation of Aukus,” said Abe, who was prime minister from 2006-07 and again from 2012-20. “It is extremely important to promote multilayered efforts for peace and stability of the Indo-Pacific region. I think that Japan should engage in the cooperation under the Aukus in such areas as cyber capabilities, artificial intelligence, and quantum technologies.” Abe, who has been a strong backer of deepening the Quad grouping among Japan, Australia, the US and India, did not elaborate on what that cooperation would look like. But he argued that external cyber threats were “growing day by day”. Abe’s view is in line with that of the Japanese ambassador to Australia, Shingo Yamagami, who hinted Japan was looking for avenues to participate in Aukus initiatives such as on AI and cyber. “We have been told there are some instances or areas where Aukus members may need Japanese cooperation and participation and we are more than willing to do our contribution,” Yamagami told an Australian Strategic Policy Institute podcast last week. Japan has broadly welcomed Aukus as a sign of “strengthening engagement in the Indo-Pacific region”, rather than wholeheartedly backing the nuclear-propelled submarines aspect. Michito Tsuruoka, an associate professor at Keio University in Japan, noted the use of nuclear propulsion for military vessels “remains controversial in Japan” and it was unclear whether the US would actually agree to further share its sensitive technology. The idea of Japan itself acquiring nuclear-powered submarines was supported by two unsuccessful contenders in the leadership contest for the ruling Liberal Democratic party in September, but the winner, prime minister Fumio Kishida, was sceptical. In an article for The Diplomat this week, Tsuruoka argued it was “no coincidence that the three allies of Aukus are the core of the already exclusive Anglo-Saxon intelligence-sharing framework of the Five Eyes”. “Despite the fact that intelligence cooperation between the United States and Japan has developed over the years, particularly regarding China and other related issues in the Indo-Pacific, the overall level of trust in the intelligence domain is still said to be inadequate,” Tsuruoka wrote. “Aukus has made this reality visible yet again. Fully aware of this, there is a sense of detachment regarding Aukus in the foreign and security policy community in Japan.” Amid increasing strategic rivalry with China, Japanese officials have expressed an interest in Japan one day becoming a member of the Five Eyes intelligence-sharing alliance – which currently includes the US, Australia, Canada, the UK and New Zealand. However this idea is not seen as likely to be achieved in the near future. Abe said on Friday there was “no doubt that the Indo-Pacific region has been and will continue to be the source of global economic growth of the world economy”. But he also described the largest challenges facing the countries of this region as being “maintaining a free and open order, such as freedom, democracy, the rule of law, and free trade, for years to come”. Japan and Australia should elevate their security and defence cooperation to a new level, he said, including by increasing the complexity and sophistication of joint exercises. The Quad countries should also work on building reliable supply chains. “Semiconductors and critical minerals are key bases that serve as the backbone of a country, and we should prevent and reduce the risk of over-dependence on a particular country as for the supply of these materials,” Abe said. The UK’s outgoing Chief of Defence Staff, General Sir Nick Carter, has previously given an upbeat assessment of whether countries like Japan, Canada and New Zealand could eventually join Aukus, saying the partnership was “not designed to be in any way exclusive”. “I absolutely know that the architects of it reckon that if it could be made more inclusive, if there were opportunities there, then that’s the direction of travel it would go,” Carter told a Center for a New American Security event last month. But the Australian foreign minister, Marise Payne, responded to Carter’s comments by saying there were “no plans for the expansion of Aukus itself at this stage”. At Senate estimates, Payne said the three Aukus members would continue to pursue a wide range of security and defence cooperation activities with like-minded partners. “I think there’s plenty of potential for initiatives under Aukus to naturally intersect with those other cooperative relationships,” Payne said.Who is Peng Shuai? Peng Shuai, 35, is one of China’s most recognisable sporting stars. The former tennis doubles World No 1, she also reached No 14 in the singles rankings, and won two women’s doubles grand slams at Wimbledon in 2013 and the 2014 French Open. She also competed in multiple Olympics. Peng is now the subject of international speculation and concern after she posted sexual assault allegations against a powerful former government official earlier this month, and hasn’t been seen since. What happened? On 2 November Peng posted a lengthy statement to Weibo, China’s Twitter-like social media platform, in which she accused the country’s former vice-premier, Zhang Gaoli, of sexually assaulting her. Peng said she and Zhang, now 75, had for several years had an on-off extramarital “relationship”. Peng said Zhang had stopped contacting her after he rose in the ranks of the Communist party, but about three years ago invited her to play tennis with him and his wife and then sexually assaulted her in his house. In her Weibo post, Peng said she couldn’t produce any evidence of her accusation but was determined to voice them. “Like an egg hitting a rock, or a moth to the flame, courting self-destruction, I’ll tell the truth about you,” she wrote. The accusation is the most significant of China’s #MeToo movement, which has struggled to gain traction in the face of strict censorship, an opaque justice system, and social and political hostility. No public accusation has been levelled against a senior official of the Chinese Communist party before, let alone one as high-ranking as Zhang. How did China react? The post was deleted by China’s strict censors in less than 30 minutes, but nonetheless went viral. As people sought to discuss and share the news, censors clamped down, blocking keywords like “tennis”, disabling comments on Peng’s account, and removing numerous references to her from China’s internet. There has been no official response. Neither China’s government nor Zhang, who sat on the CCP’s highest ruling body, the seven-member Politburo Standing Committee, have responded to media queries or made any public statements. The spokesperson for China’s ministry of foreign affairs, which deals with foreign press, has said it is not a diplomatic issue and he has no knowledge of the incident. How has the tennis world reacted? The Women’s Tennis Association (WTA), through its chief executive Steve Simon, has demanded a full investigation into Peng’s allegations. Simon said he had received “assurances” from the Chinese Tennis Association (CTA) that Peng was “safe and not under any physical threat” but no one from the WTA was able to contact her to confirm. Across several statements and interviews, Simon made it clear that the WTA expected action on Peng’s claims, and they were willing to jeopardise the lucrative access to the Chinese market to ensure it. Simon said allegations that one of their players had been sexually assaulted was an area where there could be no compromise. “We’re definitely willing to pull our business and deal with all the complications that come with it,” Simon told CNN. “Because this is certainly, this is bigger than the business. Women need to be respected and not censored.” Tennis stars have also joined the campaign, often posting under the hashtag #whereisPengShuai. Serena Williams, Naomi Osaka, Kim Cljisters, Martina Navratilova, and Stanislas Wawrinka were among those calling for answers. Spanish footballer Gerard Piqué, founder and president of the investment group which co-runs the Davis Cup, also posted to his 20.1 million followers. There are now calls for the International Olympic Committee to step in. Beijing is hosting the Winter Games in February and was already subject to calls for a boycott. The IOC declined to comment, instead cryptically saying: “Experience shows that quiet diplomacy offers the best opportunity to find a solution for questions of such nature.” Where is she? Just as demands for answers were escalating China’s state-run English-language broadcaster, CGTN, said Peng had emailed Simon to say “everything is fine”. As evidence the broadcaster tweeted a screenshot of a block of text which it said was the email. “The news in that [WTA press] release, including the allegation of sexual assault, is not true. I’m not missing, nor I am unsafe. I’ve just been resting at home and everything is fine. Thank you again for caring about me.” Simon and the WTA dismissed the suggestion the email came from Peng, and said it only increased his concern. “I have a hard time believing that Peng Shuai actually wrote the email we received or believes what is being attributed to her.” There were other elements which also prompted skepticism. The language of the letter was similar to previous forced confessions by detainees in China, the screenshot included a visible cursor in the text, and it was not published anywhere inside China, or in Chinese. On Friday Hu Xijin, editor of the fiery state-media tabloid Global Times, said he didn’t believe Shuai had been subject to any “retaliation”. However in a sign of the sensitivity inside China, the usually free-speaking Hu didn’t specify the allegation, referring instead to “the things people talk about”.It comes suddenly – rising concussions against the walls of the house, followed by the usual glances outside, the tone in the voice: “Wind’s getting up.” Autumn gales aren’t unusual; perhaps we notice them more now, from enforced acquaintance with the same air, the same space, the same view. This one is different, though. The suddenness and the severity make me cease everything and stare, at first with curiosity, then concern. Stout-limbed horse chestnut trees that have stood steadfast for decades bow stiffly, suddenly brittle; brush-topped silver birches are a flurry of motion, like dusters waved at a cobweb. Yet still the winds build. For a moment, strange notions begin to grip – this isn’t just a wind; something has happened, something is coming. Perhaps it won’t stop getting stronger; perhaps it will continue plucking trees from the ground, ripping the roof from the house, scratching us off our plot. Extreme thoughts outside a tornado belt, or an apocalypse movie. But then, nature in its swing persuades you to elemental thoughts, not logical ones. A branch comes down off a pine and lands in the garden. I look with apprehension at the other trees, some of them old and very large. Still the wind builds. I look up at the sky. It is filled with leaves. The gale has come at a moment when leaves are starting to crisp and twist on the trees. Now, stripped from their branches, they are filling the sky in clouds moving north-east, like a strange migration – a migration from one season to the next, ripped off indecisive trees by this demon wind, brutally hastening winter. It ends as suddenly as it started. Local news erupts with tales of a freak storm, of trees falling on cars, lucky escapes. Outside, our world seems suddenly a little more skeletal. Even away from her grandest, fiery spectacles, nature can make us cower, make us fear. And when all is done and our oft-forgotten fragility is reasserted, however briefly, she can make us thankful that this time, it was only the leaves. • Country Diary is on Twitter at @gdncountrydiaryIn January, the New York Times documentary team released Framing Britney Spears, a succinct and bruising retrospective on the pop star’s career and the shadowy legal arrangement that governed her affairs. The 75-minute documentary, which included virtually no new information but offered a cohesive, damning portrait of her treatment by the press, launched a grenade in pop culture. It triggered widespread calls to end her conservatorship, which Spears, 39, later championed (a judge terminated the 13-year arrangement last week); as well as meditations on punishing cultural commentary, callous treatment of mental health, or the hollow, deceptive empowerment proffered by Spears’s sexy teenage image; and a queasy wave of Britney Spears content (including an NYT follow-up, Controlling Britney Spears, that was part retrospective and part, uncomfortably, true crime. Malfunction: The Dressing Down of Janet Jackson, the latest New York Times documentary for FX on Hulu, aims for the same type of cathartic reframing through an infamous episode of early 2000s pop culture: the baring of Janet Jackson’s breast for nine-sixteenths of a second at the 2004 Super Bowl, and the subsequent cultural firestorm. The 70-minute film follows a similar format to its predecessors – archival footage (including plenty of gag-worthy early 2000s fashion) synthesized with first-person interviews and commentary from cultural critics. Whereas the Spears films operated as part journalistic investigation into a confusing, shrouded and by all reports predatory legal situation, Malfunction, directed by Jodi Gomes, has a looser objective: resubmit the episode to national consciousness, present the available facts and restore Jackson’s reputation. With participation from NFL and Halftime Show insiders, reporters and critics – though, crucially, not Jackson herself, nor Justin Timberlake, her co-performer who ripped off part of her bodice in the final seconds of the performance – the immediate question is: what did we learn here? The answer is: not much, at least in terms of new information. Like Framing Britney Spears, Malfunction finds its punch in the power of a simple timeline, a chronological cataloging of Jackson’s trailblazing career (with scant mention of the Jackson family) and the blow-up after the Super Bowl. Handwringing by lawmakers and the disappearance of Jackson from radio, in particular, underscores the absurdity and unfairness of the whole episode, even if there’s not much new to see. The film-makers did get some access, including the former NFL commissioner Paul Tagliabue and NFL executive Jim Steeg, who reveals that of the halftime show roster that year – Jackson, Diddy, rapper Nelly and Kid Rock (Timberlake was a surprise guest) – NFL brass were least concerned by Jackson. Salli Frattini, the MTV executive in charge of the halftime show, recalls how said executives, pressed to suggest sex appeal to the broadest swath of Americans possible without becoming overtly explicit, provided a two-page memo of edits to the halftime show days before the event – requested changes to Diddy’s lyrics, Nelly’s lyrics, Kid Rock’s intention to wear an American flag. A plan to have Timberlake tear off Jackson’s skirt to reveal a jumpsuit, timed to his lyrics “have you naked by the end of this song”, was scrapped. Someone on Janet’s wardrobe team visited a tailor, though it’s still unclear what was altered; likewise, Jackson and Timberlake spoke for a few minutes before the show, but it’s not known what was said. In the aftermath of the show, Jackson was reportedly upset, and unreachable. “Janet fled – we couldn’t get her on the phone, we couldn’t get her manager on the phone,” Frattini says. “She should’ve said, ‘no one knew, and it was a mistake. She never said anything to us. Here we are trying to ask the person that this happened to – because it happened to her – and she was gone.” Ron Roecker, the former VP of communications and artist relations for the Recording Academy, sets the record straight on Jackson’s absence from the Grammys, which CBS aired a week later. The then CBS chief, Les Moonves, he says, decided that both artists had to apologize on the air, on top of their written apologies, to attend the show. Timberlake agreed (and said on-air “I know it’s been a rough week on everybody [to laughs], what occurred was unintentional, completely regrettable, and I apologize if you guys are offended”); Jackson did not attend. “It felt like another request for something that was an accident,” says Matt Serletic, former CEO of Virgin Records, Jackson’s record label at the time. “Something that didn’t need to be laid completely on her. And so she didn’t do it, and good for her.” If there is a singular villain in the story, it’s not Timberlake, who comes across as a career-hungry star more willing to kiss the ring and more culturally suited to escape the fallout. It’s Moonves, toppled after numerous allegations of sexual assault and harassment in 2018, who was reportedly incensed by the episode and demanded an in-person apology from Jackson and Timberlake (Timberlake reportedly agreed). Malfunction is less a revelatory film than a swift recounting of an episode many already remember, one whose obvious corrective mandates have, by and large, passed. Timberlake was invited back to preform the halftime show in 2018, to much criticism; earlier this year, in the wake of Framing Britney Spears and the mainstreaming of the #FreeBritney movement, he issued a personal apology (in an Instagram statement) to both women. Jackson is widely considered a trailblazer in popular music, and the film ends with Jackson’s induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2019. (There’s also a final note revealing that she and Timberlake still share the same publicist, which I have questions about!) “Our culture doesn’t know what to do with independent women, and definitely independent Black women,” says the New York Times critic Jenna Wortham in the film. “And forget about an independent Black woman who makes her own money, who knows who she is and is apparently a completely sexually liberated woman. When there was an opportunity to punish her for it, they did.” But Jackson may still have the last laugh, or at least the opportunity to delve into or completely ignore her lowest public episode at her choosing: her own first-person documentary, Janet, will air in January on Lifetime and A&amp;E. It will perhaps offer another chapter to this era’s many revisions of 2000s pop culture history – or just a chance to hear the voice that’s noticeably missing here.Rightwing extremists are using Covid controversies and online gaming as a way of recruiting young people, as data shows half of the most serious cases of suspected radicalisation reported by schools and colleges now involve far-right activity. Figures published by the Home Office show twice as many young people in education in England and Wales last year were thought to be at risk of radicalisation by the extreme right-wing, compared with those at risk from Islamic extremists. The new figures from the government’s Prevent anti-extremism programme, covering 2020-21, show that 310 people were referred to Prevent by schools, colleges and universities because of far-right links. Just 157 were referred because of vulnerability to Islamic extremism. But while fewer than one in five cases of suspected Islamic extremism were escalated by the authorities, nearly one in three cases involving far-right extremism were passed on to the government’s Channel scheme, which aims to safeguard individuals thought most likely to be radicalised and drawn into terrorist activity. Sean Arbuthnot, a Prevent coordinator for Leicestershire, said that while far-right extremism has been on the rise for several years, online apps and platforms were increasingly cropping up in referrals, including gaming platforms and chat apps such as Discord, as rightwing groups sought to reach young people. While eight violent and racist rightwing groups have been proscribed by the government, Arbuthnot said he was concerned by far-right groups that have yet to be banned attaching themselves to existing controversies. “[Some] during the pandemic conducted leafleting campaigns, where they would promote the narrative that Covid is a hoax, that hospital wards are empty, and that you shouldn’t get the vaccine. Then they load their leaflets with pseudo-scientific evidence. But at the same time they drop leaflets purporting that white people are going to be a minority in Britain, which plays into peoples fears,” Arbuthnot said. “If you engage with them on a YouTube platform, and scroll through the comments section, you may then find links to more encrypted chatrooms or extreme right-wing codes or signs and symbols that you may be tempted to research. “That’s one of the troubling ways right-wing extremists can play on the fears that have resulted from Covid-19 and conspiracies, to groom, essentially, vulnerable young people in the online space.” One school leader in the east Midlands – who asked not to be named – said that the lockdowns and extended time spent out of school meant there had been a “shock” in hearing pupils return to school with dangerous and extreme attitudes. “A few came back, and it was like they were speaking a different language that I imagine they can only have picked up online,” she said. Research by UCL’s Institute of Education earlier this year found teachers are seeing a rise in extremist views and conspiracy theories among pupils, but feel they lack the training or resources to tackle it. Becky Taylor of the UCL Institute of Education, said: “The teachers we spoke to told us it was rare for young people to join extremist groups, but it was very common for young people to express extreme views in schools.” Of the teachers surveyed, 95% had heard pupils express racist views, 90% had encountered homophobia or conspiracy theories and nearly three-quarters had encountered extremist views on women or Islamophobic views. “For teachers in the classroom, because young people can get quite deep into these views and can be very well versed in all the arguments, if you are not expert in these things yourself, it can be very difficult to challenge them,” Taylor said. Owen Jones, director of training and education for Hope Not Hate, said the charity was seeing younger students becoming involved in far-right extremism, including boys as young as 13, often using the Telegram messaging app. Schools are “poorly equipped” to tackle the problem, Jones said, because the language of the new extreme right or alt-right has changed so much, that many teachers may not have a clue what students were talking about. But Arbuthnot said schools and colleges in Leicester had developed bespoke projects using local organisations and charities, adapting their techniques as they became aware of new dangers. Geoff Barton, general secretary of the Association of School and College Leaders, said the Prevent figures emphasised the need for improved support for schools in tackling those issues, as well as more action by platforms to block and remove harmful content and robust online regulation. While overall referrals from the education sector under Prevent have fallen – from close to 2,000 to 1,221 in 2020-21 – the extended closure of schools, colleges and universities after March last year is responsible. The largest category of referrals was for individuals with unstable or unclear ideologies, but fewer than one in 10 of those referrals became Channel cases. A Home Office spokesperson said: “It is vitally important that if anyone has a concern about someone they think may be being radicalised, that they act early and seek help.”The NHS is to introduce a revolutionary new treatment to tackle the leading genetic cause of death among babies and young children. About 1,500 patients in England with certain types of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) are expected to benefit from risdiplam, after a recommendation from the health watchdog. The drug, also called Evrysdi and made by Roche, is a syrup that can be taken at home and is the first non-injectable treatment for the condition. SMA is a progressive neuromuscular condition affecting the nerves in the spinal cord controlling movement and can cause paralysis, muscle weakness and progressive loss of mobility. The NHS England chief executive, Amanda Pritchard, said: “In the last three years the NHS has revolutionised care for people with SMA, by securing access to a trio of innovative treatments – Spinraza, Zolgensma and now risdiplam – where three years ago clinicians had no effective medicines at all. “Spinal muscular atrophy is a cruel disease and the leading genetic cause of death among babies and young children, which is why NHS England has been determined to make these treatments available to people as soon as possible to help transform the lives of patients and their families.” Risdiplam has initially been recommended for limited use for people with certain types of SMA as part of a deal known as a managed access agreement between NHS England and Roche, the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (Nice) said. Babies as young as two months old will be among the first to benefit. The list price of risdiplam is £7,900 per 80ml vial but a cut-price deal has been struck to make it available to the NHS. Dr Elizabeth Wraige, a consultant paediatric neurologist at Evelina London children’s hospital, part of Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS foundation trust, said the development was “excellent news”. “This will be especially important for those with SMA who cannot receive either of the two existing treatments, Spinraza and Zolgensma. These are very exciting times and I am sure this news will be welcomed by those families and individuals affected by SMA as well as by their clinicians.” Meindert Boysen, the deputy chief executive of Nice, said the watchdog was pleased to recommend a “convenient oral treatment for people with SMA that can be administered at home”. He said: “This will not only be less burdensome, and therefore have a positive impact on the lives of both people with SMA and their caregivers, but it will also reduce the treatment administration requirements for the NHS. “In practical terms, the availability of an oral drug should lead to greater adherence to treatment, along with giving access to a treatment to those who aren’t able to have other currently recommended options.” The mother of a nine-year-old boy from London who was the first patient from the UK to receive risdiplam through a clinical trial said the change she had seen in him was “absolutely amazing”. Melvil Vedrenne-Cloquet, who started taking the drug when he was five, had shown “really positive results” and could look forward to “a brighter future”, his mother, Eve Chirdkiatisak, said. She added: “It’s fantastic for the other children and their families out there that it will now be available on the NHS, because when it comes to a diagnosis of SMA, time is of the essence. Children will never get what they have lost back, so the faster they can get the right medicines the better.”These long years of Conservative rule have been bewildering for many liberal and leftwing Britons. Your party being out of power often is. But this time, as well as all-too-familiar feelings of frustration and impotence, many non-Tories have a new sense of betrayal. They are realising they can’t rely on the BBC to stand up to the government. During the previous era of Tory dominance, under Margaret Thatcher, the corporation clashed with her administration sufficiently often for the official history of the BBC then to be titled Pinkoes and Traitors. Challenging governments is what many Britons who love the BBC – and some who do not – believe the corporation always does. Officially, the BBC agrees. Its editorial guidelines state: “We must always scrutinise arguments, question consensus and hold power to account.” Yet since the Tories returned to office in 2010, it has become increasingly clear that the BBC is not properly fulfilling these roles. From its inadequate coverage of the huge death toll caused by David Cameron’s austerity policies to its less than even-handed treatment of Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour leadership; from its blunders during the 2019 election – such as allowing Boris Johnson to avoid an interrogation by Andrew Neil – to its presentation of Johnson’s often extreme administration as just another Tory government, the corporation has failed to give its huge audience the full picture. Instead, it has often played down the Conservatives’ excesses and disasters. There was a typical example on the 5 live breakfast show last week. One of the co-presenters, Rachel Burden, was reviewing newspaper coverage of the latest Tory sleaze scandal. “They talk about one in four Conservative MPs [having] additional jobs,” she said. “But of course there are MPs from right across the political spectrum who have second jobs … ” The fact that the vast majority of MPs with second jobs are Tories was almost completely obscured. Burden is a good broadcaster and not a partisan one. But such moments reveal that, contrary to its reputation, the BBC is less interested in depicting the realities of power in Britain than in achieving what it regards as political balance. Last year, the then editorial director of BBC News, Kamal Ahmed, told its senior political editors that they should be neither “too soft on the government” nor “too condemnatory”, and should instead seek the “delicate middle ground”. Similar instructions have been issued by BBC executives throughout its history. Yet the Johnson government is different from Britain’s other governments since the corporation was founded. It is divisive by design. It ignores our democratic norms. And it sees media organisations as it sees most interest groups: as either enemies to be defeated or obedient allies. To try to find a “middle ground” with such a bullying regime seems an unrealistic, even naive, strategy for such a worldly organisation as the BBC. So far its coverage of the government – however helpful it has been to Johnson – has not earned it any favours. The government has made threatening noises about freezing or abolishing the BBC’s licence fee. It has appointed Nadine Dorries, a fierce critic of the corporation, as culture secretary. And for over a year, despite endless controversy, its preferred choice as the new head of the broadcasting regulator Ofcom, which oversees the BBC, has been the former editor of the Daily Mail, Paul Dacre: perhaps the most famous BBC-hater in the country. Meanwhile, the corporation’s credibility with non-Tories has steadily drained away. In leftwing circles, it’s commonplace to hear people say that they’ve stopped using the BBC for news. For some lefties, the mainstream media has never and will never be good enough, and the internet provides ever more alternatives. But other non-Tory viewers and listeners that the BBC has alienated – such as remainers enraged by its coverage of Brexit – include allies it may regret having lost, if and when the Conservatives get really rough. It’s possible to argue that the BBC has no choice but to cover the Johnson government so respectfully. Ofcom requires that all British broadcasters practise “due impartiality”. But that phrase is open to a degree of interpretation, as the regulator’s own website points out. The word “due”, it says, “means … appropriate to the subject” of each programme. In other words, the impartiality of a broadcaster’s entire output does not have to be absolute. For much of Thatcher’s premiership, the BBC had enough confidence to produce programmes that made her party and the state very uncomfortable. The director-general from 1982 to 1987, Alasdair Milne, so riled her government by his independence that it eventually forced him to resign. It’s hard to imagine such a confrontation happening now. Thanks to tight licence fee settlements imposed by the Tories since 2010, the BBC is preoccupied by cost-cutting rather than pushing political boundaries. It also has a very different director-general. Tim Davie is a former Conservative activist and local council candidate. The corporation’s tentative approach to Johnson’s premiership is also part of its broader failure to cover rightwing populism robustly. The BBC often skated over the authoritarian aspects of Donald Trump’s presidency, mesmerised by the spectacle and keen not to be seen as liberal or elitist. When I complained once to a BBC executive about this, he rolled his eyes: “Do we have to say he’s a fascist every time?” Subsequent events suggest it might have been better journalism. Like Britain, the BBC is always changing, but changing slowly. Eventually, perhaps when the current Tory ascendancy is obviously crumbling, the corporation will become tougher again on the ruling party – assuming it first survives whatever it has in store for it. Yet the BBC’s dealings with the Tories since 2010 ought to teach liberals and leftists, once and for all, that the corporation’s independent-minded phases are the exception, not the rule. If you want a broadcaster that will always “hold power to account”, look somewhere else. Andy Beckett is a Guardian columnistThe UK must scale up recycling of materials for low carbon industries or risk facing a critical shortage of key metals, a new report warns. The projected use of lithium, cobalt, silver and rare earth elements by the UK’s low carbon industries over the coming decades is set to soar. China controls 60% of global mine production and 40% of rare earth metal reserves, raising fears of a significant threat to the supply chain for businesses. But the thinktank Green Alliance said the UK could limit the threat by building up domestic recycling of valuable materials and reducing energy use. A rapid scaleup of the recycling of green products and their components would result in almost all critical raw material demand for electric vehicle batteries, wind turbines and solar panels being met from secondary materials by 2050, the report said. Susan Evans, senior policy adviser of Green Alliance, said: “With net zero, there’s also a big opportunity for the UK to become much more resilient and self-sufficient. “By investing in making our homes more efficient and improving public transport, we can cut the amount of energy we need to use and, therefore, reduce our reliance on imported critical raw materials. “This is also about ending needless waste. It would mean keeping these valuable materials in use, creating jobs in new recycling industries, and lowering household energy bills at the same time.” In 2019 the country’s small fleet of electric cars contained more than 1,400 tons of lithium and 800 tons of cobalt, worth £26.3m and £31.5m respectively. Green Alliance’s analysis suggests, if recycled, that volume of lithium and cobalt would be enough to make 220,000 batteries for electric cars, or 10% of projected new sales in 2035. The opportunity for using secondary materials will increase as the number of electric vehicles increases. Adopting a circular economy in the raw materials could contribute to jobs and cut dependence on China for critical raw materials. By cutting energy demand and introducing measures such as insulating homes, increasing car sharing, increasing the use of public transport and walking and cycling, the UK could halve its use of some critical resources by 2030. “By also scaling up recovery and reprocessing, through circular economy approaches, an increasing share of remaining demand could be met with secondary materials, resulting in less environmental damage,” the report said. “This would allow the UK to retain and maximise the value of critical raw materials, build more resilient supply chains and create good jobs across the country, contributing to both the levelling up and green recovery agendas.” Mining, processing and refining of the critical raw materials – such as lithium for a low carbon economy – can cause considerable environmental and social harm, run counter to goals on climate change, biodiversity and human rights, the report said. “The UK should adopt a strategy to ensure long-term supplies of critical raw materials that prioritises both energy demand reduction and circular economy approaches. Under this strategy, primary extraction would be the higher risk, last resort option to meet industry’s requirements,” the report said. Tom Tugendhat, Conservative MP for Tonbridge and Malling, said: “We know China dominates the processing of rare earths. But, as Green Alliance point out in this important report, the UK can significantly reduce supply chain risks by creating a proper plan to recycle net zero products like solar panels and electric vehicles, as well as being smarter with our energy use.”It’s not always easy for a famous parent to pass the baton to the next generation. Kirk Douglas bristled when he realised the young women approaching him no longer wanted to flirt with him, but to ask for his son Michael’s phone number. When her daughter Christina was cast in a soap opera but then hospitalised for an ovarian cyst, Joan Crawford snatched the role for herself. The narcissism that underlies the need for fame is not usually conducive to happy parenting. Ivan Reitman – director and producer of many of the most beloved mainstream comedies of the 70s, 80s and 90s, including Animal House, Stripes, Ghostbusters, Twins and Dave – is a different kind of famous parent. “My dad had always hinted about me directing a Ghostbusters movie, but I shied away from it, the way young people shy away from their parents’ legacy. I think I had to learn how to stand on my own feet,” says Ivan’s son, Jason Reitman. So Jason went out and racked up four Oscar nominations by the age of 32 – two for best director for Juno and Up in the Air, one for best adapted screenplay and one for best picture, both for Up in the Air – which is a hell of a way for a man to prove that he knows where his feet are and how to use them. “I never achieved anything like that,” says Ivan, sat next to him and smiling proudly. The three of us are in a central London hotel to discuss Jason’s long-awaited contribution to the Ghostbusters canon, the genuinely delightful Ghostbusters: Afterlife. Ivan started the franchise back in 1984 and Jason kept him on board for this one as his producer. Throughout the shoot, Ivan sat next to his son, watching the monitor with him. Wasn’t that a bit weird for Jason? “You gotta remember, when growing up, I would sit next to my dad [when he was making a movie], so there was something already pretty natural and familiar about us sitting next to one another at the monitor. And this was lovely because I had the world’s foremost Ghostbusters expert sitting next to me and the person I trust the most on earth. No kid wants to take notes from their parents in general, but never does a director have someone they trust as much as I trust my dad, somebody who’s just looking out for them – and that made me feel incredibly safe,” he says. Were there any times when Ivan said things like: ‘Hey, you don’t hold a proton pack like that’?” “It was the exact opposite. My father was way more flexible with the idea of Ghostbusters evolving, and I was the archaeologist, wanting to stay true to the last detail. My dad was like: ‘You know, it’s not scripture!’ And I’d be saying: ‘This is text! We cannot change a single thing!’” “This movie is a lovely combination of our two sensibilities. It has the style of what Jason has developed in his directorial life, coupled with the fantastical storytelling that represents the original Ghostbusters. I’m just delighted to be involved,” says Ivan, with quiet pride. The two men don’t look much alike: with his thick dark hair and confident patter, Jason, 44, still comes across like the indie director he once was, touting his wares on the film festival circuit. Quiet, lugubrious Ivan, 75, has a gentler manner, and it’s easy to see the Jewish immigrant he once was, after he and his family left Czechoslovakia for Canada in 1950 when he was four. But they have exactly the same laugh – a happy bark on the inhale – and the closeness between them quickly becomes apparent. I ask Ivan if he had any concerns about encouraging his son to drop out of medical school and go into film directing, given that history is littered with bitter and twisted offspring who tried and failed to follow in a famous parent’s footsteps. “I thought he was a really creative young man who needed that creativity as a central force in his life and, um,” he says, and suddenly stops, sits very still and stares at his hands. When it’s clear Ivan is not going to say any more, Jason quickly takes over: “I said: ‘But Dad, I’ll either succeed in your shadow or fail in a spotlight.’ And he said: ‘Being scared is not a reason not to do something.’” “I’m not leaving, I’m taking a break,” says Ivan, getting up and heading to the bathroom. Jason continues his spiel, but as soon as the bathroom door is shut, I ask if his father is OK. “He’s 100% fine. This is part of the experience, and it’s emotional for both of us. I found myself on set all time making directorial decisions and realising that my father had made the exact same decision 35 years ago. It’s like when you realise you put your hands on the steering wheel the same way your parents did, and for a brief moment you know what it feels like to be your parent,” he says. Ivan returns, eyes dried, and squeezes Jason’s shoulder as he takes his seat. I tell him he must be a very good parent, given his son still sees him as such a role model, and tears swim in his eyes. “Don’t set him off again!” says Jason, and the two men make their perfectly synced barking laugh. My expectations were pretty low when I went to a screening of Ghostbusters: Afterlife, and not just because the original Ghostbusters is my all-time favourite film (although that was a major factor). The current tendency to squeeze nonexistent drops from overly wrung-out franchises generally feels more exhausted than exciting, and memories of Paul Feig’s 2016 all-women version, which tried to make up for its lack of fun with a surfeit of good intentions, only compounded my dread. But Ghostbusters: Afterlife is actually properly fun: funny, scary and sweet, just as a Ghostbusters movie should be. The special effects feel charmingly homespun, like in the original film, as opposed to being CGI-ed, Marvel movie-style, to the hilt. “It’s like your grandmother’s recipe: you know it when you taste it. My father’s one note was: ‘Wind is the presence of the supernatural,’ so when you see someone’s hair starting to tickle their forehead, you know something’s coming,” says Jason. It is almost impossible to talk about this movie without spoilers, so I’ll just say that it is the story of a little girl who is connected to one of the original Ghostbusters – whom we’ll call X – and ends up having to don his famous flight suit. “I wanted a story which could dovetail my own relationship with picking up the legacy of these main characters,” says Jason, who wrote the script. I ask if that means X is based on Ivan. “I think of myself as some distillation of all the Ghostbusters,” says Ivan. “You really are!” says Jason with delighted surprise at the idea. “The part of you that is Egon [played by the late Harold Ramis] is his discerning brilliance. The part that is Ray [Dan Aykroyd] is his overwhelming passion. The part that is Venkman [Bill Murray] is obviously his sense of humour, and the part that is Winston [Ernie Hudson] is his business acumen. I hadn’t thought of that before.” “Thank you. That’s beautiful. Thank you,” says Ivan, veering close to tears again. It’s hard not to suspect that Ghostbusters: Afterlife is a bit of a reaction against Feig’s version, not least because Aykroyd complained at the time that the 2016 film didn’t involve “the originators” enough. This is clearly not a problem for Ghostbusters: Afterlife, and unlike Melissa McCarthy, who implored the public not to compare her film with the original, Jason pretty much does the opposite. Afterlife is stuffed with references to the original film and I tell them I especially liked the Twinkie that falls out of Ecto-1’s glovebox. “My favourites are the nods to other films of my father. One character mentions the movie Beethoven, and at one point you can see the title Cannibal Girls, which was one of his early movies,” Jason says. Jason was seven when the original Ghostbusters was released. His father used to bring him to the set, and he was there when they were figuring out how to make the library card catalogues open and spew the cards out. “It was wondrous. Afterwards I said to the special-effects guy: ‘Can you do that again?’ And he said: ‘Sure, if you pick up all the cards!’” Whereas Jason was born into the profession, Ivan was very much not. His mother, Klara, had survived Auschwitz and his father, Ladislav, was in the underground resistance. I ask if they met after the war. “No, they knew each other before, and my father had tried to talk my mother into running away with him, because he knew what was coming. But she believed families should stick together, so she stayed with her parents and ended up in Auschwitz with her sister. They were put on one of those forced marches, but they stayed alive and away from the Russians, who were basically as terrible as the Germans, and she ran into …” he stops as the tears overwhelm him. “Let’s leave the war,” says Jason gently, hand on his father’s knee. In Canada, Ivan’s father got a job in a dry cleaners. Within two years, he started his own, and then a franchise, and he became so successful that he bought a big chunk of land in Toronto, which Ivan later donated to the Toronto film festival. “His was a great success. He took care of his children,” says Ivan with filial pride. Ivan was directing short films from a young age and in 1975 he produced the off-Broadway National Lampoon Show, starring Murray, John Belushi, Brian Doyle-Murray, Gilda Radner and Ramis – all then unknowns. “I made the mistake of thinking I could be creatively helpful and had the temerity to say: ‘Hey, why don’t you …’ And Bill immediately came over and put his arm around me, took me over to where the coats were hanging, grabbed my scarf, wrapped it dangerously tightly around my neck and said: ‘Hey man, thank you for dropping in.’ He ushered me out of the room without any force, but he had force within him,” says Ivan. This was the beginning of one the most fruitful artistic pairings of Murray’s life, as Reitman went on to direct him in Meatballs, Stripes, Ghostbusters and Ghostbusters 2. Only Wes Anderson has worked with Murray more. “He has a wonderful relationship with Wes,” says Ivan. But he had him in the trickier years, I say. “Yes, he was younger and angrier then, and he’s sweeter now. He has become a very fine actor, as well as being this universally beloved figure. I’d like to take some credit for that, but really it’s him,” says Ivan. Like his father, Jason engenders loyalty in his actors: Vera Farmiga, JK Simmons and Charlize Theron have worked with him repeatedly, and his three most interesting films – Juno, Young Adult and Tully – were all written by Diablo Cody. He has also worked with his father before, when Ivan produced Up in the Air. “That was a learning experience for me. At one point we were having a terrible disagreement and Jason said to me: ‘I’ve worked with a lot of different producers and none have talked to me the way you do.’ And I thought: ‘Whoa! He’s right!’ I had to think of him as a professional, not my son, whom I could boss around,” Ivan chortles. But despite having been born on third base, Jason hasn’t had the easeful coast to a home run that his initial successes suggested he might. After the quadruple whammy of Thank You for Smoking, Juno, Up in the Air and Young Adult, his career faltered with the generally panned Labor Day and Men, Women &amp; Children. Did his father give him any advice on how to cope with professional disappointments? “He said to me: ‘You will be surprised by your greatest success and your greatest failure. You can’t decide them in advance. Your only regret will be not making more movies, so just keep telling stories.’” So is he worried about how the critics and audiences react to his new film? “Of course you want people to like your movie. But if I had to narrow it down to who I made this movie for, it was my Dad,” Jason says. Cue tears. • Ghostbusters: Afterlife is on release nowPicks of the week When Diana Met … “Yes, this is a show about Diana Spencer … but it really is about us – what our perceptions of her say about us.” Host Aminatou Sow is a self-confessed Princess Di obsessive – something she inherited from her mum, along with so many other thirtysomethings – who unpicks Diana’s most notable meetings in each episode. First up: author Candice Carty-Williams and biographer Andrew Morton revisit the dinner with Camilla. Hollie Richardson Dark Woods Chicago Fire’s Monica Raymund and Corey Stoll (House of Cards) lead the cast for this thriller of a podcast from the creators of Law &amp; Order. On the brink of divorce, the pair investigate the death of a young volunteer in a California forest, setting up a classic tangle of personal and professional lives, with added intrigue and pesticides. Hannah Verdier Bonaparte These days, lawyer Annie Champion’s work includes defending Mary Trump. However, closer to home, the question of whether her friend Laura Van Wyhe’s death in Iowa in 1996 was a hit-and-run or a murder still looms large in her life. Jason Stavers’s unsensational and engrossing podcast investigates. Hannah J Davies Murder, Mystery and Makeup True crime reaches an innovative new niche with makeup artist and YouTuber Bailey Sarian’s podcast in which she pops on a full face while she chats about cases. Charles Manson and Jeffrey Dahmer are among the criminals on her list and, although their stories are well-trodden, Sarian has a great way to spin a yarn with gossipy asides. HV Self Evident A third series for the show shining a spotlight on a variety of Asian American experiences, from the distressing rise in pandemic-era racism to heartening pop culture representation and queer self-discovery. First up, powerful reporting on activists tackling white supremacy in an unexpected setting in Indiana. HJD Producer pick: Things Fell Apart Chosen by Madeleine Finlay Jon Ronson is back with a new eight part series, digging into the origin stories of topics which have become the focus of fraught arguments or ‘culture wars’. Even the concept of a culture war has become ground for controversy, divisiveness, and bad takes. But Ronson is safe pair of hands – he’s written with empathy and nuance on public shaming, fighting on social media, and internet pornography. His podcast on the latter – the Butterfly Effect – was genuinely brilliant. Much like the Butterfly Effect, Things Fell Apart shows how small events can ripple outwards; in episode two, a Christian mother who opposes her children’s school curriculum ends up instigating a state-wide fight over textbooks. Ronson masterfully tiptoes his way through each story – there’s little judgment, endorsement, or forgiveness – just a sense of intellectual curiosity. Things Fell Apart is the antidote to an argument over Twitter: a deep, calm and fascinating look at issues that would usually get your hackles up. Talking points Podcasts hosted by famous faces are all around … but some are more niche than others. Freddie Prinze Jr joins the culty side of celeb audio this week with Wrestling with Freddie, a show in which he reminisces about his days writing storylines for WWE. Why not try: Decoder Ring | I am Kobe | History Daily Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about Hear Here or any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to the Guide, our weekly look at the best in pop cultureReducing carbon dioxide alone will not limit global temperature rises to 1.5C; we have to limit methane emissions too. The global methane pledge could therefore be one of the biggest achievements from the Glasgow climate conference. Cutting methane has a double benefit. In addition to contributing to climate heating, methane is also one of the main gases that causes ozone to form in the lower atmosphere, where it harms our health and damages our crops. The global pledge is the first step to a 45% reduction target. The United Nations Environment Programme estimates that the decreased ozone that would follow would prevent 255,000 early deaths, 775,000 asthma-related hospital visits and 26m tonnes of crop losses globally each year. Prof Mathew Heal, of the University of Edinburgh, said: “Targeting local and regional energy and transport will not be sufficient to achieve substantial ozone air quality benefits in the UK and Europe without also targeting methane sources. If methane concentrations continue to rise, average ozone will increase, and vice versa.” Methane from waste decaying in landfill sites can be captured and flared or used to generate electricity. Travel to a historical coalmining area and you will meet communities that have lost loved ones in explosions from what the Victorians called “fire-damp”. This methane emitted from coalmines looks set to increase as modern pits become deeper. However, it can be removed from vents, and old mines can be flooded. Changes to the ways that rice is grown, modified animal feeds, better treatment of manure and less crop burning are all needed along with decreasing food waste and meat consumption. The biggest benefit could come from the petroleum and fossil gas industries, where stemming leaks would increase revenue. Individual leaks on wells and pipes may be small but their total is huge. Leakages from the US fossil gas industry have been measured as far away as the Swiss Alps and in Cape Verde. Fossil gas also contains ethane, which is far more potent in forming ozone. Prof James Lee, of the University of York, said: “Air pollution around fracking operations in the US is highly sensitive to gases such as ethane, which contributes about 50% to the ozone production. Prioritising leaks from fossil gas would have the added benefit of helping to limit local ozone. This is likely to be true in the UK too.” India has experienced the greatest rise in ozone and experiences the greatest health impact and crop losses of any country. It has not signed the global pledge.Bridget Riley: Painting the Line 9pm, BBC Two “She moved art forward by about, I don’t know, 500 years, a thousand years – and nobody ever gave her the right credit for that.” Tracey Emin, and fellow fans such as Martin Freeman, wax lyrical about the revolutionary artist Bridget Riley in this comprehensive look at her legacy. There is illuminating archive footage dating back to the 1960s, and Riley herself speaks to Kirsty Wark, recalling the stories behind her seemingly simple black-and-white – and colourful – geometric shapes. Hollie Richardson Children in Need 2021 7pm, BBC One Danny Dyer presenting The Wall. Celebrities taking on Graham Norton’s infamous red chair. An I Can See Your Voice lip-sync challenge. These are some of the treats from this year’s live event to raise funds for disadvantaged children and young people. Alex Scott, Mel Giedroyc, Paddy McGuinness and Alison Hammond are just a few of the hosts on hand. HR Unreported World: Girls Who Surf 7.30pm, Channel 4 Senegal’s first professional female surfer, Khadjou Sambe, and her group of female surfers are making waves against the country’s traditional expectations of women. Reporter Minnie Stephenson follows them as they face the intimidation of male surfers and opposition from their families. Will Sambe’s efforts to build a surf school pay off? HR The Wild Gardener 8pm, BBC Two Having recently inherited his childhood country garden on the east coast of Ireland, wildlife cameraman Colin Stafford-Johnson sets out to transform the overgrown tangle into a sanctuary for the natural world, in this new two-parter. “Lose those lawns – nature needs your garden!” he cries, as he encourages viewers to do the same and help the planet. Ali Catterall Griff’s Great New Zealand Adventure 8pm, ITV Comedian Griff Rhys Jones has the ultimate comfortable gig exploring New Zealand, starting at Cape Reinga in the north. But his journey is not without its challenges, as he finds himself sliding down Te Paki sand dunes and venturing to “The Hellhole of the Pacific” before treating a Māori tribe to a slightly unnecessary rendition of God Save the Queen. Hannah Verdier Cobra: Cyberwar 9pm, Sky Max Chaos reigns as this slightly ridiculous yet entertaining thriller, starring Robert Carlyle as an embattled prime minister, concludes. The UK’s critical infrastructure has been comprehensively paralysed by sophisticated malware and Kent is rubble. So why are traditional international allies refusing Britain’s calls for help? Phil Harrison Film choice Tick, Tick … Boom! (Lin-Manuel Miranda, 2021), Netflix Before Rent, which only became a success after his early death in 1996, Jonathan Larson was a struggling New York composer of stage musicals. Lin-Manuel Miranda’s song-filled film is a vibrant adaptation – part staging, part fiction – of Larson’s one-man show about his attempt to get a sci-fi rock musical off the ground. Andrew Garfield plays Larson as an engaging, Tigger-like obsessive; he worries about turning 30, about his relationship, about the 90s Aids crisis, but mostly about emulating his Broadway idol, Stephen Sondheim. Simon WardellThe Morrison government has rejected a call by the Greens and Labor to provide Australia’s live performance sector with an insurance guarantee to guard against future cancellations and border closures due to Covid. On Friday a report resulting from an inquiry into the feasibility of a new insurance scheme for the performing arts sector was tabled in parliament. The Senate committee inquiry was called after senator Sarah Hanson-Young announced the Greens’ intention to introduce a private member’s bill calling for a government-run insurance guarantee to future-proof the industry. The report recommended the bill not be supported because it would require the federal government to provide insurance against state government actions such as public health orders that would necessitate the cancellation of an event. The report also said the arts sector had received “significant funding” from federal, state and territory governments during the pandemic and as public health orders, lockdowns and travel restrictions had begun to ease, “the arts and entertainment sector has shown the capacity to recover”. The recommendation not to support the bill was voted against by two Labor senators and one Green senator, who issued a joint dissenting report on Friday. Three Coalition senators voted in favour of the recommendation, with Liberal senator Andrew Bragg using his deciding vote as chair. The complexities of federalism used to justify the report’s conclusion was an issue proponents of the insurance scheme had used during committee hearings to justify the bill’s necessity. John Watson, representing the music copyright agency Apra Amcos and Eleven Music, told the committee the live performance industry needed a national approach because touring was national. “The restrictions might be state-based [but] it doesn’t really help if you can go ahead with your gig in New South Wales but your drummer can’t get in from Victoria or Queensland,” he said. Watson, along with other industry leaders giving evidence during the inquiry, argued there was proof of a market failure when it came to insuring live events against Covid outbreaks, border closures, lockdowns and last-minute cancellation because there was no insurance product on the market available to insure against such events. In many European countries and in the UK, governments have stepped in to create such a product. The British government introduced its £750m live events reinsurance scheme in August, creating partnerships with insurers to allow promoters and performers to purchase cover against future government-enforced cancellations due to the pandemic. Evelyn Richardson, the chief executive of Live Performance Australia, told the committee that pre-Covid, the costs of insurance premiums against cancellations were already significant, ranging from $50,000 for a modest commercial theatre production to $750,000 for a major concert tour or festival. “The inability to insure [against Covid] is a major market failure, and there is a role for governments to intervene,” she said. Treasury argued the lack of a Covid-proof insurance product was not so much a market failure as a “gap in the market”. According to the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, market failure alone is not an argument for government intervention, particularly “if the failure does not have a material impact on the functioning of the wider market”. “But in the event of a market distortion leading to inefficient or inequitable outcomes, the cost of intervention may be justified.” Hanson-Young said artists, musicians and their crews had been devastated by another season of events, festivals, concerts, exhibitions and live performances being cancelled without insurance protection. The contribution the sector made to the Australian economy annually dropped from$36.5bn in 2019 to $12.8bn in 2020, with lockdowns and border closures affecting an estimated 122,000 full-time equivalent workers in the sector. “A federal insurance guarantee will plug this massive hole in the insurance market and help get our shows back on the road well into the future,” Hanson-Young said. “The live performance sector isn’t asking for a handout, it is asking for a product that isn’t available to them and one that is fit for purpose. “Tours traverse state borders, it is quite obvious a national approach to helping the industry is needed.” A spokesperson for the arts minister, Paul Fletcher, said he was examining the report. “As we have consistently said, it is decisions by state government health authorities which trigger the business losses faced by producers of arts and entertainment events,” Fletcher’s office said in a statement. “Therefore, it is state governments which are best placed to provide cover against this kind of risk.”Top story: ‘Completely sold out’ It’s the end of the week and we know it. Hello, I’m Warren Murray bringing you Friday’s news in brief. Senior Conservative MPs, regional leaders and industry figures have accused ministers of betraying the north with a delayed and downgraded £96bn rail plan. The Integrated Rail Plan sets out a scaling back of the Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR) project and the axing of the planned east Midlands to Leeds high-speed line, with HS2 trains instead running on existing upgraded routes. As recently as last month, Boris Johnson used his party conference speech to pledge that the government would build NPR, a commitment he made on becoming prime minister in 2019. However, the core route that northern leaders hoped for, a new high-speed line from Manchester to Leeds via Bradford, will not be built. Labour said the plan had “completely sold out” the north while Andrew Adonis, the former transport secretary who launched the HS2 project in 2009, said it was “a betrayal of the north”. Anti-HS2 groups, though, have welcomed the package, and environmental activists vowed to redouble protests against HS2. While people who were made to move out of HS2’s path, only to be told it’s not going that way now, are asking: can we have our homes back? * * * Modi ditches farming ‘black laws’ – Narendra Modi, the Indian PM, has announced he will repeal three contentious farm laws known as the “black laws” that prompted a year of protests and unrest. After the government refused to repeal the laws last year, hundreds of thousands of farmers marched to Delhi’s borders – met on the way with barricades, teargas and water cannon – and set up protest camps along highways into the capital. The farmers have remained at the Delhi borders ever since, maintaining one of the most sustained challenges to the Modi government, even through the harshness of winter, baking summer and brutal second wave of Covid-19. The protests turned violent in February when the farmers stormed into the centre of Delhi and briefly took over its historic Red Fort. Modi passed the laws in 2020 in a bid to overhaul India’s archaic agriculture sector. It employs about 60% of India’s workforce but is riddled with issues of poverty, debt and inefficiency. * * * ‘Terrible disaster’ – Emergency crews in western Canada have continued trying to reach about 18,000 people stranded by landslides and struggling to find food after devastating flooding. Communities are braced for more torrential rain on the way. The premier of British Columbia, John Horgan, appeared to fight back tears as he spoke on Thursday: “This has been a terrible, terrible disaster but I know this: as British Columbians, as Canadians, we stick together.” One person is confirmed dead in a landslide and with searchers still combing through the debris the number is almost certain to rise. Residents say the disaster exposed the vulnerability of small communities to natural disasters worsened by the climate crisis – in some areas, wildfires in the summer stripped the slopes of vegetation that would have slowed the flooding waters. * * * Suite getaway – It has emerged Boris Johnson declared £1,800 of hospitality from Heathrow on his recent largely free holiday to southern Spain. Johnson used the private Windsor suite at Heathrow’s Terminal 5 on 7 October, the latest update to the register of MPs’ interests shows. In Spain, Johnson and family stayed for free at a luxurious villa in Marbella belonging to the Goldsmith family. It rents commercially for about £25,000 a week. The stay was not put in the register of MPs’ interests, but instead the register of ministerial interests, which does not cite monetary values. Downing Street said this was correct “given the hospitality was provided by another minister”, Zac Goldsmith. However, there is speculation that Johnson is seeking to set a precedent that costs and obligations incurred as prime minister fall under the remit of Lord Geidt, the adviser on ministerial interests, who does not have the power to unilaterally investigate, rather than Kathryn Stone, the independent parliamentary commissioner for standards. * * * ‘Reuse, recycle rare earths’ – The UK must scale up recycling of materials for its low carbon industries or risk facing a critical shortage of key metals, a new report warns. Use of lithium, cobalt, silver and rare earth elements is set to soar. China controls 60% of global mine production and 40% of rare earth metal reserves, posing a supply chain risk. The thinktank Green Alliance said the UK should build up domestic recycling of such valuable materials. It says a rapid scaleup of their recycling would result in almost all critical raw material demand for electric vehicle batteries, wind turbines and solar panels being met from secondary materials by 2050. * * * Breakthrough drug for youngsters – The NHS is to introduce a revolutionary new treatment to tackle the leading genetic cause of death among babies and young children. About 1,500 patients in England with certain types of spinal muscular atrophy (SMA) are expected to benefit from risdiplam, after a recommendation from the health watchdog. The drug, also called Evrysdi and made by Roche, is a syrup that can be taken at home and is the first non-injectable treatment for the condition. Today in Focus podcast: Could Europe’s Covid surge come here? As the days get shorter and we huddle indoors, memories of 2020’s catastrophic winter are close at hand. Now a new surge of coronavirus cases is spreading across Europe. But as well as notes of caution, there are good reasons to hope that the UK will avoid the lows of last year – from lower hospitalisation rates to exciting treatments on the verge of approval. How optimistic should we be – and can we still go to Christmas parties? Lunchtime read: Bustin’ back better Ivan and Jason Reitman are resurrecting Ghostbusters together. Tears were inevitable when Hadley Freeman finally met the man behind her favourite film, and his son, who has made a belated second sequel. But few expected them to flow quite so freely. Sport The Women’s Tennis Association has said it is prepared to pull its tournaments out of China if there isn’t an adequate response to Peng Shuai’s allegation that she was sexually assaulted by China’s former vice-premier. Serena Williams has joined a chorus of concern over the wellbeing and whereabouts of Peng Shuai after her disappearance. There are doubts over the veracity of an email supposedly written by her retracting the allegations of sexual assault. Lewis Hamilton believes sportspeople are duty bound to speak out on human rights matters in the countries they visit as Qatar prepares to host its first Formula One Grand Prix this weekend. Cricket’s bruising week took yet another hit on Thursday night when the former England batsman Alex Hales admitted painting his face black for a New Year’s Eve party. Azeem Rafiq has apologised after it was revealed he had sent antisemitic messages to a fellow cricketer more than a decade ago. In Australia, Tim Paine has stepped down from his role as Test captain on the eve of the Ashes series after a historic Cricket Australia investigation into lewd text messages sent to a colleague surfaced. Paine said the investigation had exonerated him but he “deeply regretted” his actions: “I’m deeply sorry for the hurt and pain that I have caused to my wife, my family, and to the other party.” Courtney Lawes will captain England against South Africa on Saturday in the absence of the injured Owen Farrell while Joe Marchant will make a first appearance of the autumn on the right wing. Farrell is a doubt for the start of the Six Nations after it emerged the England captain requires surgery on his ankle. Sam Kerr secured a 1-0 Women’s Champions League win against Servette, who had Amandine Soulard sent off late, as Chelsea moved three points clear in Group A. The Rugby Football League has approved the game-wide introduction of mouthguards that could detect whether or not a player is at risk of a concussion or head trauma. And a coach found guilty of inappropriate behaviour towards athletes in his care has had his licence permanently withdrawn by UK Athletics. Business People in Serbia’s Jadar valley fear an environmental catastrophe as Rio Tinto leads the European push for self-sufficiency in battery technology by scouting for possible lithium deposits in the picturesque region. Poor results saw shares in the beleaguered Chinese tech firm Alibaba plunge 10% on the Hong Kong stock market, dragging down the wider index by 1.5%. The FTSE100 is set to rise 0.25% this morning though, while the pound slipped to $1.348 and €1.187. The papers The Guardian leads today with “‘Betrayal of the north’: fury over delayed and downgraded rail plan”. Our picture lead is Serena Williams joining the growing outcry in world tennis over the whereabouts of Peng Shuai, who has not been seen or heard from since making allegations of sexual assault against a former vice-premier of China. Also on the front: “Police stop and search up by 24% in one year”. There were 700,000 such interventions in a single year. The proportion that resulted in an arrest fell from 13% to 11%. Black people were seven times more likely to be stopped than white people, compared with nine times more likely the previous year. That “betrayal of the north” gets plenty of frontage. “HS2-faced” is what the Mirror calls the Tories. After political car crash imagery in some papers yesterday, today in the i we have “Train wreck: fury as PM ‘rips up’ rail plans for the North”. The Times splashes with “Patel blames EU for mass migration in Channel”, which we have covered here. The Express covers that in a more Expressy manner: “Priti’s fury” etc etc. The Telegraph’s lead is “Lockdowns return to Europe as virus surges” – the Robert Koch Institute (RKI) in Germany reported about 65,000 new infections on Thursday. The RKI chief warned of a “very bad Christmas season” if drastic measures are not taken. “Charles charity cash hit by shock new probe” – the Daily Mail says the charities watchdog is mounting a a “cash for honours” investigation centred on the movement of £500,000 in donations. The Financial Times sounds an alarm: “Fresh Turkey rate cut sends lira to new low and stokes inflation fears”. Sign up The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.com Sign up to Inside Saturday to get an exclusive behind the scenes look at the top features from our new magazine delivered to your inbox every weekendSight is a sense that’s easy to take for granted. But for Ian Wishart, access to eye care in Australia isn’t one-size-fits-all. Wishart is CEO of the Fred Hollows Foundation, named after the trailblazing ophthalmologist, who, in the 1970s, made it his mission to address the dramatic imbalance in eye health that has divided Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities from the rest of the country. It’s a legacy that continues to be central to the foundation today. “At the moment, if you lose your sight to the most common eye diseases you should be able to be treated as a public patient,” Wishart says. “But if you’re Indigenous and live remotely, your access to something as simple as a cataract surgery might be two, three or four years longer than if you are in a higher socioeconomic group. “A wealthier Australian may notice vision loss and go to a private specialist before they lose their ability to drive their car. But many Indigenous people can go years before they are screened. By then, they are almost blind – or may have been blind for several years.” Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults suffer from bilateral vision impairment and blindness at three times the rate of non-Indigenous adults, according to a 2020 report from the foundation, citing statistics from the 2016 National Eye Health Survey. And 38% of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander adults reported sight problems in 2018-19, according to figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics. Many Indigenous people can go years before they are screened for most common eye diseases “Ninety per cent of the problems they are suffering from are actually preventable or treatable,” Wishart says. Specsavers shares this commitment to making eye care more equitable. Over the past decade, the optical group has partnered with the Fred Hollows Foundation to support its work in providing eye health services to Indigenous communities. Initiatives include the Lions Outback Vision Van, a mobile clinic that provides ophthalmology care to patients in the north of Western Australia. Between April and June 2021, the van conducted 609 screenings, trained 33 people and carried out 290 treatments for diabetic retinopathy – a diabetes complication that can lead to vision loss. Cathy Rennie Matos, head of public relations for Specsavers, says: “The van does eye test screenings on board and can fast-track cataract surgeries. Our main focus over the past few years has been to support the Lions Outback Vision van, but we’re expanding from that and we’re looking to support programs in the Northern Territory, Queensland, New South Wales and South Australia.” Rennie Matos says Specsavers is also supporting a program, the Outback Eye Service, in Bourke, New South Wales, by helping fund an orthoptist who delivers much needed eye care to one of the largest Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander populations in the far west of the state. “It’s about how we create a sustainable model for eye care,” she says. The Lions Outback Vision Van Mobile clinics such as the Lions Outback Vision Van rely on Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisations (ACCHOs) to ensure eye care is culturally appropriate and that nurses are trained in community protocols. Wishart gives the example of a patient from the Anangu Pitjantjatjara Yankunytjatjara (APY) lands, in remote South Australia, who has to travel 10 hours to Alice Springs for cataract surgery. “Hospitals are incredibly scary places,” he says. “So ACCHOs are key to this. We have community liaison officers within the hospital. You have to make it comfortable and culturally safe.” Cultural safety is central to closing the eye care gap. But so is crossing cultural barriers and fostering a deep sense of connection. Since 2014, Specsavers has partnered with acclaimed artists and painters such as the late Langaliki, and Gumatj leader Peter Datjing, to design limited-edition frames. The initiative, which has raised more than $400,000, contributes $25 from every pair sold directly to the Foundation’s sight-restoring work with Indigenous communities, using art to sow the seeds for change. Rheanna Lotter is the latest artist that Specsavers has worked with on the initiative. Rheanna Lotter is the latest artist that Specsavers has worked with on the initiative. She is a renowned contemporary artist, a proud Yuin woman and the artistic force behind Unity, an artwork featuring striking circles and lines painted in red, yellow and ochre, that will adorn limited-edition Specsavers frames this November. She believes art can help bridge distances – both physical and otherwise. “Aboriginal art is so beautiful,” she says. “It’s not just on canvas, it’s not just in remote areas. Art is such a strong part [of] the way we tell stories and connect.” Lotter says empowering Indigenous communities to look after their eye health is also about rebuilding trust. It’s an approach that attracted her to the partnership with Specsavers and the foundation, along with the opportunity to use her art to close the gap in eye health, now and into the future. “I don’t trust easily and that is generational trauma that my mum and grandparents also went through,” she says. “But [I heard from] the Fred Hollows Foundation that they [engage] community elders to provide messages to the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Island community. It’s about empowering our community members to have a platform.” For Lotter, this is about making an impact that is lasting. “Slow growth is more important than rushing in to fix everything,” she smiles. Discover the Specsavers limited-edition collection in collaboration with the Fred Hollows Foundation.Two weeks ago, before travelling from America to Britain, I shared my plans with a couple of friends. Both made faces at mention of Britain. One expressed amazement that I would consider travelling to a country widely perceived to have given up on trying to stop Covid; the other made a remark about community safety. “I’m triple vaxxed,” I said, taken aback by her vehemence, but this didn’t wash. “Just don’t bring it back here,” she said, darkly. It is impossible to live abroad for any length of time – with the exception, perhaps, of moving to Gibraltar – and retain a sense of Britain as the centre of the universe, as a place so important it deserves the endless allowances it asks be made for it. Still, while I’m not under any illusions about my country’s shortcomings, it was strange to hear it referred to in the manner of the kid in class the others mock for spreading germs. Boris Johnson is ludicrous wherever you live, and no one in Britain seems able to settle on a mask policy. And yet the idea that, with international travel finally opening up again, it is unwise to the point of recklessness to visit the place triggered a tiny ping of defensiveness I had no idea was still in my system. We might suck in all sorts of ways – but nobody’s perfect. As it turns out, data from Visit Britain, the national tourist board, broadly supports the kneejerk negativity of my friends. In line with other European countries, visitor numbers in Britain plunged during the worst months of the pandemic – from more than 40 million people a year in 2019 to just over 11 million in 2020. The difference with its European neighbours, however, is that while France and Germany seem to be bouncing back as destinations – year on year, French visitor numbers are up 34%, and warmer countries such as Spain and Greece are almost back to pre-pandemic levels of tourism – Britain has, incredibly, attracted even fewer visitors. By the end of 2021, it is predicted that only 7.7 million people will have visited the country this year, a drop of over 80% on pre-pandemic 2019. On the website CNN Travel last week, a term first used for Britain by the New York Times last year, was dug up and reused: Plague Island. Seemingly, it’s not just Covid numbers putting off visitors, although the convoluted requirements for getting in and out of the country – the fact that, unlike those vaxxed in Britain, visitors vaccinated abroad may be required to self-isolate for 10 days if “pinged” by NHS Test and Trace – have given travelling to Britain a frisson of Russian roulette. Complicated rules around unvaccinated kids entering the country are only changing on 22 November, much later than in most European countries, and images of maskless people on packed tube trains, and a maskless prime minister everywhere he goes, have done a lot of damage to Britain’s image. There are other things, too. No one decides where to go on holiday on the basis of domestic policies like Brexit, but scare stories about supply chain issues and fuel shortages have probably depressed visitor numbers, too. Even without the pandemic, travel into Britain from Europe is harder these days, requiring a passport where formerly an ID card would do. There is a sense, viewed from a distance, that Britain is an ailing state, limping from one crisis to another, and definitely not somewhere you’d want to get stuck. Oddly, given my friends’ horror at my plan to visit Britain, the one anomaly in the downward spiral of tourists is visitors from America. According to Visit Britain, since the US reopened its borders to British people on 8 November, reciprocal travel from the US has spiked; flight reservations from America to Britain have jumped back up to over 60% of pre-pandemic levels. Letting Britons into the US, finally, has sent a signal to Americans that the place is slightly less plaguey than it was. There is also, perhaps, a persistent image of Christmas in Britain as desirable. This seems particularly perverse, given how cold, dark, drunken and never-ending the festive season is in Britain, although for visitors, the gloominess and threat of quarantine does suggest one unexploited marketing angle: Britain as the perfect destination for those nostalgic for the early pandemic. Emma Brockes is a Guardian columnistOne by one, the 20 engineers and technicians step up to receive their equipment before the briefing. They have come to the far north of Sweden from as far away as Mexico, the US, Saudi Arabia, China, Germany and Russia. “Welcome!” bellows Håkan Pålsson, their instructor. “We’re here to show you how to do curling, and then you’re going to go out on the ice and show us.” This is the fourth curling session for new arrivals organised by staff at Northvolt, a company whose car battery gigafactory is rising at breathtaking speed on the outskirts of Skellefteå, this old gold-mining city just 200km south of the Arctic Circle. The company, the city and the local Västerbotten county are doing everything they can to help arrivals get comfortable. This summer there was a foraging and wild cooking event for German engineers considering the move north. Locals are instructed to be friendly: “You are going to see more new faces in Skellefteå than ever before,” runs an encouraging post on the city website. “Their experience of Skellefteå will, to a large extent, depend on how good we are at welcoming them.” Most impressive of all is the 20-storey Sara Cultural Centre, which opened last month. One of the tallest wooden buildings in the world, it has two theatres, a gallery, a library and a luxury hotel. The reason for all this effort is simple. If Northvolt is going to succeed in its plans to build Europe’s biggest battery factory, it and its host city need to convince thousands of people to move to the edge of the Arctic Circle, to a region where snow cover is constant from November to April and where the winter sun shines for no more than four hours a day. The gigafactory is just the most advanced in a succession of green industrial megaprojects springing up all over Sweden’s far north, lured by cheap, renewable energy, vast tracts of undeveloped land and funding from the European Green Deal. Development locals compare it to Dubai or the Klondike gold rush. About 160km north in the city of Boden, H2 Green Steel starts work next year on the world’s first industrial-scale, fossil-free steel plant. Next door to that, Spain’s Fertiberia plans to spend €1bn on a giant electrolysis plant for green ammonia, which will be used to produce fertilisers. A further 200km north in the Arctic mining town of Gällivare, the mining company LKAB will next year embark on a £35bn, 20-year project to switch to fossil-free sponge iron, using hydrogen technology successfully trialled this year at the Hybrit steel plant in Luleå. Reverse migration What these projects are all desperately short of, more than money, renewable electricity, space or permits, is people. “The weakest link in the chain is the workforce,” says Lotta Finstorp, the governor of the local Norrbotten county and recent arrival from Stockholm. “If we can’t get people to move up here, we won’t be able to succeed with all these very necessary investments for the world.” Sweden’s government estimates that the new projects and their suppliers will create at least 20,000 jobs, with 20,000 extra public sector workers needed, and 10,000 to work in shops, cafes and the like. In total, Sweden’s two most northerly counties could gain 100,000 people in 15 years, boosting their population by a fifth, according to Peter Larsson, the man the Swedish national government has appointed to coordinate this transition. It’s a remarkable ambition given that not so long ago, unemployed people were being paid to move south for work. Larsson thinks the key to achieving reverse migration is to convince people “that this is the best place on earth to live”. For Liliana Celedon, a 28-year-old engineer from Mexico, it’s an easy sell. Skellefteå is about as exotic as it gets for someone from a sprawling, car-based city on the US border. “I’ve been hiking, swimming in the ocean, and just spontaneously being with nature,” she says. Outside the Skellefteå Arena, where the curling is happening, the first, slushy snow of the year has just started to fall, and she’s looking forward to downhill and cross-country skiing in the city centre. For Benjamin Lindén, from southern Sweden, curling is fun but culture a necessity. Unusually for someone in construction, he started his career as a theatre director, and the day before the curling, he was checking out some improvisational stage shows at the Sara Cultural Centre. “It’s an absolutely important part of my life to have [theatre] available,” he says. “I actually called the theatre before I came up here, because I wanted to know what they had. Now with the Cultural Centre I really think it will be a lot better.” Finstorp suspects it will be harder to appeal to southern Swedes, like Lindén, among whom northerners have a reputation for being obsessed with hunting, snowmobiles and snuff tobacco, and for being literally less than monosyllabic, dispensing even with the word “yes” in favour of a sharp intake of breath. Alistair Coley, a 25-year-old cell process engineer from Sunderland in the UK, has found making friends here surprisingly easy. “Everyone you meet does at least say ‘hello’,” he says. He arrived in February with his fiancee, Claudia, and their two cockapoos, Primrose and Albert. “They’re interested in what you’re doing, so I think it’s not necessarily the Swedish stereotype that you get in the north. They want you to be here.” They were in contact with a local couple before they left the UK, and have since been invited to regular meals and hikes. “We met them, weirdly enough, through the dogs’ Instagram accounts,” Coley says. Since then, they’ve gone inland and seen the northern lights, encountered wild reindeer out with their dogs, hung out on a dog beach on the Baltic Sea and experienced the Swedish midsummer celebration, replete with the traditional flower wreaths. Regional authorities are also trying to tempt locals to move home. Skellefteå, which serves as the gateway to Swedish Lapland, sends Christmas cards to everyone who has moved south over the past 10 years and hosts ice hockey and other events for migrants in Stockholm, Gothenburg andMalmö. . Swedish not essential The next step is to target the roughly 400,000 unemployed people living in less dynamic parts of Sweden. The employment minister, Eva Nordmark, has pledged to do “whatever it takes” to get people to move north, even tightening welfare rules to force relocation. In its offices across the country, Sweden’s employment service is selling the chance to take part in a “historic” green transformation. It has also launched a scheme called Relocate to target long-term unemployed people in Stockholm, Gothenburg and Malmö, part-funded by the EU Social Fund. Northvolt is looking in particular for immigrants to Sweden who have good English and a technical background, says Katarina Borstedt, the person responsible for finding the more than 3,000 people needed for the battery factory. “You don’t have to learn Swedish before you can work at Northvolt,” she says. The vast battery factory site is already humming with construction workers in hi-vis jackets and safety helmets, as the company races to produce its first cells by the end of this year. Once complete it will be able to make batteries for 1m cars a year. Most of those already at work at the plant have, for now, flown in on short contracts . “They come from all over the world, and are people attracted by these kinds of mega and giga projects,” says Fredrik Hedlund, who is managing the build. “If you look at the inside of the factory, that’s really international expertise.” Hedlund is a southerner who moved north, having sold his house in Lund, the previous week. His 16-year-old daughter started at the local technical high school in August. “Northvolt is an all-in project. This is not something you fly in and fly out of,” he says. “If you’re invested in something, and really want to make sure it works, you go there.” The vast grey boxes that have risen in this 200-hectare plot are just the start, he says, pointing to the forest edge close to a kilometre and a half away that will mark the full extent of the finished plant. The gigafactory, like H2 Green Steel to the north, will primarily supply the car industry 2,000km to the south. “The majority [of production] is going to go to the German automotive industry,” Hedlund says. Making a difference For many employees, the chance to be at the absolute forefront of the shift to a more sustainable future is reason enough to move. Coley, who was hired directly from Europe’s first car battery plant in Sunderland, shakes his head with admiration when he talks of Northvolt’s ambitions. Production will be powered entirely by green hydroelectric power for example, and a battery recycling plant on site is planned. “Other companies think they should get a pat on the back just for just providing batteries for electric cars, but there’s so much more than that,” he says. “Northvolt’s really trying to act sustainably from the energy perspective, and that’s important to me. It wasn’t about joining any battery business to make money, it was about coming here to make a difference.” There’s a similar “pioneer spirit” in nearby Boden, says the local mayor, Claes Nordmark, now work is about to begin on the new steel plant. When the Swedish military closed its Boden base in 1998, it lost 10% of its population in two years. In Skellefteå, the story was similar after a big copper smelter reduced its headcount from 3,000 to 800. Unemployment in Sweden’s two most northern counties fell only after unemployed people were paid to move south. At its lowest point, Skellefteå had 1,500 empty apartments, with some sold for a nominal price of one Swedish crown. Those one-crown flats are now selling for upwards of a million, while Skellefteå and Boden are racing to build thousands of new homes. The decades of decline may have paved the way for today’s successes. Boden and Skellefteå bought huge tracts of land and linked them to the mainline power grid, hoping to copy nextdoor Luleå, where Facebook opened its European datacentre in 2013. In what now looks a stroke of luck, both failed to win their hoped-for datacentres, leaving them with perfect, readymade sites for the new generation of green industrial megaprojects. Those tough years also explain why there is little opposition to the coming wave of labour migration. After years when young people, and particularly young women, have moved south, giving the north the oldest population in Sweden, everyone welcomes an influx of 20- to-40-year-olds, wherever they come from. “Something good, something different is happening,” says Pålsson, the 66-year-old curling instructor, after watching the new arrivals to Skellefteå tottering unsteadily on the ice. “Now we will have people from many countries coming to the city. That’s just good for us. We welcome them, and it’s very important to show what we can offer.”Pick of the week The Beatles: Get Back “There is a show to be had,” says John Lennon, “once we get over the nervousness.” The idea of a Beatle being nervous about a performance is almost inconceivable. But this tiny moment is typical of the casually revelatory nature of Peter Jackson’s startling three-part series on the making of the final Beatles album, Let It Be. With the help of footage rescued from a vault, the films pull off a seemingly impossible trick: rescuing the Beatles from their customary position, frozen at the peak of the pop canon, and repositioning them as a flesh-and-blood working band. Watching them interact – occasionally irritably but often with good humour – feels as close as we’ll ever come to deciphering their magic. Disney+, from Thursday 25 November *** True Story In this intense, twisty, seven-part series, comedian Kevin Hart is playing a character at least partially inspired by himself: superstar comedian (see what he did there?) The Kid. Over the course of a debauched night out with his sketchy older brother Carlton (Wesley Snipes), things turn both sour and blurry. With the criminal underworld involved and celebrity reputation-management not completely compatible with doing the right thing, might the unfolding scandal threaten his career, or even his life? Hart’s own life has had its ups and downs, but let’s hope it has never been quite this chaotic. Netflix, from Wednesday 24 November *** Nail Bar Boys Another of BBC Three’s cheerful, hyperactive slices of young British life. This time, a nail bar in Liverpool run by a posse of amiable, gawky British Vietnamese lads. “We’re like a boyband aren’t we?” says one, rather hopefully. But they absolutely aren’t and that’s part of their charm. Instead, a big chunk of their daily lives involves bemoaning their ongoing romantic struggles while flirting hopelessly with customers – Brandon, for example, spends some time telling a baffled punter about the voodoo curse holding him back. Slight but endearing stuff. BBC Three, from Sunday 21 November *** Selling Sunset As damp, drizzly autumn settles in, it’s time to escape to the sun-dappled Hollywood Hills for another season of selling homes and throwing shade. As ever, the estate agency aspect of this show is simply the very distant subtext for the endlessly melodramatic reality show antics. For season four, the cast has been refreshed: there’s Vanessa Villela, a Mexican American telenovela star and Emma Herman who is an entrepreneur but, perhaps more relevantly for entertainment purposes, has a bit of history with the existing cast. Expect fireworks. Netflix, from Wednesday 24 November *** Hanna A third and final season for this slick thriller about Hanna (the excellent Esme Creed-Miles), raised in a remote Polish forest and trained to be an assassin. The show’s appeal has always rested largely on the conflict between her unnerving professional expertise and ever-increasing emotional vulnerability as she chafes against the strangeness of her upbringing. This outing promises resolution as, with old nemesis Marissa Wiegler now onside, Hanna turns her attention to destroying her sinister handlers Utrax from within. Amazon Prime Video, from Wednesday 24 November *** Hawkeye Bow and arrows at the ready because the latest offering from Marvel sees Clint Barton (Jeremy Renner) join forces with his eventual replacement Kate Bishop (Hailee Steinfeld) for some festive hi-jinks. As Avengers fans will remember, Clint had a murderous wobble at the end of that series. Now, he’s attempting to pick up the pieces and get home to his folks for Christmas. But guess what? As a result of his vigilante spree, lots of very dangerous people want him killed, the scariest of whom might just be Florence Pugh’s deadly assassin Yelena. Disney+, from Wednesday 24 November *** ’Twas the Fight Before Christmas “I’m probably the only American to have been banned by a federal court from decorating for Christmas.” Jeremy Morris really likes Christmas. Possibly too much. Many of us will have had neighbours whose taste for tinsel has got slightly out of hand, but this alternately quirky, funny and dark documentary explores an obsession running out of control. When Morris’s taste for decorating his north Idaho home went nuclear, his neighbours objected; what followed tested the concept of goodwill to all men to destruction and beyond. Apple TV+, from Friday 26 NovemberStart The Tiger Inn, East Dean, near Eastbourne Distance 7½ miles Time 3½ hours Total ascent 370 metres Difficulty Easy to moderate Google map of the route Autumn bluster is in the air as I set off from the car park, with rain clouds roiling overhead and rooks exploding from the treetops like shrapnel. Down on the village green, the cosy Tiger Inn looks tempting, but I am saving its rewards for later. Until then, up on the open downs, with a stiff south-westerly straight off the sea, I may be in for a battering. The picturesque village of East Dean lies just off the A259, between Seaford and Eastbourne, and makes a perfect gateway to the Seven Sisters country park. If you don’t know the name, you’ll recognise the landscape from book covers and film backdrops, its rolling green hills and towering chalk cliffs suggesting some nostalgic notion of pastoral England. To the geologist, these cliffs reveal where the broad chalk band of the South Downs, laid down 80 million years ago, reaches the English Channel, only to be cheese-wired away by the relentless waves. The Sisters are peaks between ancient river valleys: Haven Brow, rising 77 metres above Cuckmere Haven at the western end, is the highest of the seven. For the naturalist, the surrounding grassland means special flora and fauna; for historians, it means Saxon churches, smugglers’ tales and iron age earthworks. This place is too well known to be anyone’s “best-kept secret”, but it never disappoints. The landscape is on such a grand scale that it easily absorbs the day trippers who beetle over its muscular contours. Each day brings new skies, each season new attractions, and there are enough trails that I can find a new route each time, with its own take on those stunning cliffs. Today, I head south from East Dean village green, following a no-through road (Went Way) to a gate, then crossing a damp field to a small wood. The track climbs through the trees, tunnelling towards an oval of light that promises a view beyond. I emerge to find the celebrated panorama laid out before me. Below and to the east is the dip of Birling Gap, with its hotel, cafe and beach, from where the cliff line rises again to the prominent Belle Tout lighthouse and on towards Beachy Head. Ahead lies the sea, all scudding cloud shadows and spotlight sunbeams. No rain so far. I press on over sheep-cropped sward and past wind-stunted hawthorns to a red-roofed barn, from where the track descends gently towards the cliffs. At a cluster of low scrub, where the path continues to Birling Gap, I head right, along the cliff top. I have now joined the 100-mile South Downs Way which would, had I the time and energy, take me all the way to Winchester. The cliff path is a switchback ride, the roar of the waves turning abruptly on and off as its undulations take me in and out of the wind. In summer, chalkhill blues and other butterflies dance over the flower-studded grass. Today, jackdaws ride the up-draughts and the odd wheatear flutters ahead, the last of many southbound migrants for which these cliffs mark a final departure point. I gaze seawards in hope of spotting a passing peregrine but keep well back from the edge: it’s a long way down. A third of the way along, I reach a flint-studded monument commemorating the 1926 purchase of the Crowlink Valley (for “the use and enjoyment of the nation”). From here, a shorter circuit leads back inland to East Dean, but I press on to complete the Sisters. After another 45 minutes of ups and downs, I’ve crested Haven Brow and am looking west across the floodplain and meander loops of the Cuckmere Valley. Above the river mouth, the famous Coastguard Cottages – also regulars on those film sets and book covers – cling precariously to the cliffs. A National Trust signpost on Haven Brow offers a choice of routes. Leaving the cliffs, I turn right along a gentler path inland. Down on the valley floor, I meet a paved track that leads north to the country park visitor centre (in an 18th-century barn, with tearoom and toilets). From here I could complete a longer return to East Dean through deep, dark Friston Forest, north of the A259. But I can’t get enough of those cliffs, so cut across on to a raised bank and follow the Cuckmere back towards the sea. This little loop around Cuckmere Haven is bird country. In a month or so, wigeon and other wintering wildfowl will be flocking to graze the salt marsh. Today there are little egrets working the riverbank and redshanks probing the tidal pools. Past visits have brought me kingfishers and, on one red-letter day, a wandering osprey. Reaching the beach, I tramp left across the shingle towards the foot of Haven Brow, its massive chalk buttress rearing defiantly above the waves. From here, a steep zigzag path cut into the hillside returns me to that NT signpost, where a kestrel now hangs motionless in the breeze. I set off east again, retracing my steps along the clifftop, with the low sun behind me now illuminating the panorama ahead. Reaching the last dip before the monument, I pass through a sheep gate into Crowlink Valley and cut back inland, for the last hour, which is a gentle one. My route follows a farm track north across fields to the hamlet of Crowlink – its houses hidden by the downs until you find yourself among them – then continues up a road to Friston Church, a building of Saxon origins opposite a picture-perfect pond that was listed in the Domesday Book. Across the churchyard, a gate opens on to Hobb’s Eares field and the final descent to East Dean. Rabbits scuttle for the hedges as I lengthen my stride, the Tiger Inn in sight. The pub This picturesque pub sits among the flint-walled cottages that surround East Dean’s village green. There is said to have been a hostelry here since the 12th century: the “tiger” bit is thought to refer to the three leopards crest of the de Dene family. The present structure dates from the 16th century, as evident in its oak beams. Local ales on tap include Harvey’s Sussex Best bitter (£5.50 a pint) and Longman Long Blonde (£4.40), while pub fare includes “catch of the day” from Newhaven, and a vegan “not-tiger burger” (£13.50). Book ahead in summer, when it’s busy with thirsty hikers and drinkers spill out on to the green. In winter, the low ceilings and blazing fire suggest the smugglers’ retreat that, according to legend, this once was. The rooms The pub has five en suite rooms upstairs (from £100 B&amp;B). It also has nine self-catering cottages around a walled garden behind the pub, sleeping between two and six (from £405 for a long weekend). For a unique alternative, on the cliff top a mile from the inn and a short walk from Birling Gap is the Belle Tout lighthouse (from £175 B&amp;B). It has six rooms and an extraordinary lounge with 360-degree vistas over the South Downs and the Channel.Step into any karaoke bar, and there’s a solid chance that the emotional climax of the evening will come from the brave soul who tackles You Oughta Know, the debut 1995 single by the Canadian singer-songwriter Alanis Morissette. The pop-rock song builds from serrated whisper to full, livid belt, a tour de force of uncut anger and sexual frankness that still scorches 25 years after it dominated music charts. Though still the most recognizable song, You Oughta Know is only one shade of the kaleidoscope of emotions on Jagged Little Pill, Morissette’s debut album from the same year – a commercial juggernaut and cultural touchstone for female angst that broke ceilings for such confessional pop stars as Taylor Swift, Lorde and Olivia Rodrigo. For many who came of age in the 1990s, Jagged Little Pill was a revelatory album, radical in its honesty and stunning in its ubiquity – the 12th best-selling album of all time, with 33m copies sold. Half of the track list, with lyrics at turns fiery and vulnerable, unsure and wise, became chart-toppers that still play in stores, on radio, and in a 2019 Broadway musical of the same name. And, as a new documentary argues, Jagged Little Pill was a piece of art born from a few searing years of disempowerment and exploitation in the music industry, a fortuitous production partnership, and the miraculous trust a 19-year-old songwriter put into her own vision despite numerous rejections. Jagged, directed by Alison Klayman and the latest installment in the HBO Music Box series created by Bill Simmons, is a film clearly born of love for the album, tracing its arc from its inspiration – specifically, frustration with the music industry and the men in it – to creation to its global chorus of fervent fans. The film’s celebration on Morissette’s talent – from early interviews and demos to concert footage to a taping, in lockdown, of a virtual performance of her new song Ablaze, four-year-old daughter Onyx on her hip – makes the black cloud hanging over the film’s HBO premiere all the more curious. Though the singer, now 47, participates in the film, opening up her archive and offering warm, candid and circumspect reflections on her time before and after the fame rocket, Morissette has since denounced the project. “I was lulled into a false sense of security and their salacious agenda became apparent immediately upon my seeing the first cut of the film,” she wrote in a statement before the film’s September premiere at the Toronto Film Festival, which she did not attend. “This is when I knew our visions were in fact painfully diverged. This was not the story I agreed to tell. I sit here now experiencing the full impact of having trusted someone who did not warrant being trusted.” According to Klayman, speaking via Zoom, the two had been on the same page at the project’s outset in 2019. Before Klayman visited Morissette and her family at their California home in July 2020 (which Morissette later called a “very vulnerable time” during her third postpartum depression), early phone conversations between the two ranged from the patriarchy at large, to focusing the film on the album, to “how the specifics of this story can really bring these bigger concepts to life”, she said, referring to #MeToo and Time’s Up. “This will be a story that through hearing it, we want people to think about these bigger ideas.” Jagged views the album’s legacy through the lens of the #MeToo movement, which brought a new vocabulary of sexual abuse and exploitation, and awareness of its endemicity in the music industry, into the mainstream. The 25th anniversary of the album, written predominantly when Morissette was 19 and released just after her 21st birthday, was “going to be different than the 10-year anniversary, or the 15-year, or even the 20-year, because so much has changed so fast in how we think about the recent past”, said Klayman. Jagged covers Morissette’s early aspirations to be a dance pop singer in her native Ottawa, Canada, where she released her first song at age 10, appeared on children’s television as an early teen and signed with Canadian music producer Leslie Howe at 15. Sitting cross-legged in a room lined with books, Morissette recalled that it was that age, 15, that Howe and producers at MCA Records Canada instructed her to lose weight and restricted her food, which “kickstarted a massive eating disorder journey” that she’s been “in active recovery” for “her whole life”. It was also when attention from men in the business turned from fawning to sexual. “I just thought it was my fault, because almost every single person that I would work with, there would be some turning point where the camera would go Dutch angle,” Morissette says in the film, referring to a style of film-making shot which suggests drama. “And I would just wait for it. Like OK, this won’t happen in the first week for this one, but it will happen.” The shift would “either end the relationship” or “there’d be just some big secret that we’d keep forever”. About two-thirds of the way through the film, Morissette expounds on these early sexual experiences, which she says she now views differently. “There’s a lot of shame around having any kind of victimization of any kind,” she says. “It took me years in therapy to even admit there had been any kind of victimization on my part. I would always say, you know, I was consenting, and then I’d be reminded like ‘Hey, you were 15. You’re not consenting at 15.’ Now I’m like, ‘Oh yeah, they’re all pedophiles. It’s all statutory rape.’” Morissette does not name any of her alleged abusers, but says her calls for help, or acknowledgment, went ignored in a music industry not ready to grapple with abuse in its ranks. “I did tell a few people and it kind of fell on deaf ears a little bit,” she says. “It would usually be a stand-up, walk-out-of-the-room moment. “The whole ‘why do women wait’ thing?” she adds. “Women don’t wait. Our culture doesn’t listen.” As Jagged points out from interviews with music contemporaries such as Shirley Manson, former band members who sheepishly admit they used proximity to her to lure women, and excerpts from reviews skeptical of Morissette’s talent, women faced an uphill battle in the music industry which doubted and degraded them time and again. It is unclear what Morissette specifically objects to in the film, which she wrote in her statement “includes implications and facts that are simply not true”. Asked if she knew what implications and falsehoods Morissette was referring to, Klayman shook her head. The singer’s statement ahead of the premiere “was definitely disappointing, definitely didn’t match what, you know, what’s in the film”, she said. “I think it’s really hard to have a movie made about you by someone else.” “My hope is that she would feel the love and support and celebration that I know and now is proven is what this film inspires,” Klayman continued. “I just really appreciated that the film is something that really reflects all of our meaningful conversations. The film really stands, and I hope it brings audiences to help her feel that support and love.” Klayman, whose previous films have confronted the Chinese government (over artist and dissident Ai Weiwei) and Trump associate Steve Bannon, said she has not spoken to Morissette since the film’s Tiff premiere, and stands by the picture as the “reframing” of “a true individual work of art”. “It was so wildly popular and in the mainstream, it did get a little bit seen as like, ‘oh, this was concocted by the record label’ type of a thing,” she said. “What I love is that it’s really actually a story of someone who wasn’t being welcomed and championed by the record labels. “It really was for, going in, making this for herself, with a partner [producer Glen Ballard] who saw her as an artist, and they approached it as artists doing a personal work. And then because of that, it hit so hard, because it wasn’t concocted.” Such evidence can inspire other artists, she added, “so for me, [Morissette’s reaction] doesn’t change anything about the story that’s being shared in the film.” Jagged is available on HBO now with a UK date to be announcedThe Victorian crossbench MP Andy Meddick’s daughter has alleged she was the victim of an assault in Melbourne’s inner north on Thursday night. In a post on social media, Meddick’s daughter Kielan alleged she was attacked for being “political”. She alleged the man who attacked her chased her down the street, throwing a spray can at her head, before she was able to get into a nearby venue for assistance. Victoria police said in a statement Kielan had been spray painting over a poster when she was approached by the man at around 11pm when the pair got into an argument. “The pair had an argument before the woman threw the spray can towards the man as she attempted to leave the scene,” a spokesperson said. “The man followed the woman and threw the spray can which struck her in the back of the head.” The spokesperson said the man left the scene as staff at a nearby venue helped the woman before she went to hospital to be treated for minor injuries, adding anyone with information should contact Crime Stoppers. In a statement on Friday, Meddick, an Animal Justice party MP, said his “worst fears have turned into reality”. “Last night, my beautiful daughter Kielan was attacked on the street. I was with her in hospital until the early hours,” he said. “My deepest gratitude is with those nearby who helped her when she was most in need, and to the wonderful carers and health workers who have treated her since. “She will be OK – but it will take time.” Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning In recent weeks, Meddick and his family have been subject to death threats, and have had protesters turn up to their house over the Victorian government’s controversial pandemic powers legislation, which will replace the existing state of emergency to determine the rules and restrictions in the pandemic. Meddick is one of three key crossbenchers who forced amendments to the bill this week in exchange for support for its passage through the Legislative Council. Meddick said he believed the attack could be linked to his role as an MP and the positions he has taken on the pandemic response. “I do also ask that people understand and respect the fact that comments, insults, intimidation and incitement can all have very real and absolutely devastating consequences,” he said. Meddick declined to provide any further comment, but said police were investigating the incident. Guardian Australia has sought comment from Victoria police. Andrews tweeted violence in any form has no place in Victoria. “These actions are extreme, and no matter why it happened – this behaviour must be condemned and never, ever excused,” he said. Protesters gathered in their thousands on the streets of Melbourne last weekend to call on the parliament to “kill the bill”. The calls for violence among some in the protests have escalated significantly in the last few weeks. Some were seen this week brandishing prop gallows and nooses, in which an effigy of the premier, Daniel Andrews, was placed. The Age reported counter-terrorism officials charged a man who allegedly encouraged anti-lockdown protesters to bring firearms to parliament and execute Andrews. The state opposition has come under criticism for some of its members appearing at the protest over the weekend, but following reports of the violent elements of the protests, leader Matthew Guy has said no members of his party will be attending any more. Andrews told Nine’s Today show on Friday it had taken too long for some to call out the violence and threats from those protesting against the legislation. “It’s taken too long for people to just to be straight, and sometimes they haven’t been straight yet,” he said. “They’re sending all sorts of mixed messages and that’s dangerous. That’s dangerous. Do we want to see somebody actually getting hurt? Yeah, that’s not leadership. It’s very different to leadership.” Andrews took aim at the prime minister, Scott Morrison, over his comments that governments need to step back and stop controlling people’s lives. The premier accused the PM of “chasing through doublespeak the votes of extremists or their preferences.” Andrews said his relationship with the PM will be “a lot better when he stops double speaking to extremists”. Morrison on Friday was quick to condemn the alleged attack on Meddick’s daughter, tweeting it was “not on”. “It has no place in Australia. I join with all Australians in unequivocally condemning these actions,” he said. He told reporters earlier in the day he could not have been clearer in his condemnations. “I couldn’t have been clearer about denunciating the violence and the threats and the intimidation. They have no place in Australia’s public policy debate whatsoever, whatsoever.” Jewish leaders have also condemned references to Nazi Germany in the debate over the bill. The pandemic powers bill was expected to pass this week with the support of the three crossbenchers, but has been delayed after the former Labor minister Adem Somyurek returned to parliament to vote against the bill, stating it could lead to a “tyranny to rule by decree” and did not have enough checks and balances to keep the leader of the day accountable. Somyurek’s vote means the result would be tied and the legislation cannot pass. One of the crossbench MPs who had not supported the legislation, the Transport Matters party leader, Rod Barton, told the ABC on Friday others on the crossbench were “very, very close” to a united position on the bill. “All of us understand that the government does need some of these powers, but they just can’t have unfettered powers.”Earlier this year Dave Eggers announced that the US hardback of his latest novel, The Every, would not be distributed via Amazon, presumably recognising that it would be absurd to boost the fortunes of the omnipotent online retailer while at the same time setting out to satirise it mercilessly. “I don’t like bullies,” he told the New York Times. “Amazon has been kicking sand in the face of independent bookstores for decades now.” But no novelist who actually wants their book to sell can avoid Amazon for long, and Eggers’s boycott contained some fine print: unlike the hardback, the US paperback and ebook versions of The Every will be available on the US website, and there will be no restrictions on selling the UK editions. The Every’s thesis is that big tech represents a 21st-century form of totalitarianism to which resistance can only ever be symbolic, and therefore futile. One might well wonder whether this half-hearted boycott was designed to prove that point. The novel is a follow-up to Eggers’s 2013 dystopian satire, The Circle, in which Mae Holland joined the eponymous social media company, a mashup of Facebook and Google, and rose through its ranks. It opens after the Circle has acquired “an e-commerce behemoth named after a South American jungle” and rebranded itself as the Every – “hinting as it did at ubiquity and equality”. This time, our heroine is Delaney Wells, who joins the company with the goal of finishing its “malignant reign on earth”. She plans to destroy it from the inside by seeding ideas so repellent that rational people will surely turn away in droves. “Humanity,” she reasons, “will finally turn away from the endless violations of decency, privacy, monopoly, the consolidation of wealth and power and control.” One of Delaney’s most diabolical suggestions is Friendy, an app that measures the trustworthiness of one’s friends by analysing facial expressions, eye contact and vocal intonations, assigning a numerical value to the quality of the friendship: “Think of how much more genuine and authentic our friendships could be if we just apply the right metrics to them.” But other ideas begin to proliferate, among them the introduction of a “beauty metric” for “paintings, music, poetry or any art form” and an app called HappyNow? designed to “answer, in real time, whether the user was happy”. Not even the development of sinister surveillance technology, HereMe (a Big Brother version of Alexa), designed to pre-empt abusive behaviour in the home by eavesdropping for key words, is considered a step too far. Eggers sets out an Orwellian vision of a near future in which big tech has “transformed proud and free animals – humans – and made them into endlessly acquiescent dots on screens”. The Every is housed on a California campus with “the look of a hastily assembled film set”. The wholesale adoption of Lycra (“every curve and bulge articulated”) is a running gag that symbolises the abandonment of individuality. Large screens propagate “Every” ideology: “Sharing Is Caring”; “Secrets Are Lies”; “The World Wants to Be Watched”. Employees, known as Everyones, are burned out from unrelenting surveillance in the guise of self-improvement apps that monitor everything from physical activity to political correctness. Consumers sacrifice privacy on the altar of an endless accumulation of apps. All of this should paint a terrifying picture, but it doesn’t (though I will concede that the possibility of eye-tracking technology that prevents you skimming War and Peace is genuinely scary). The problem is that none of the characters is given anything resembling a personality, let alone an arc – except for the purpose of tracking when they start to give in to the Every’s ethos. There seem to be no inner lives. Not only are the characters subordinated to the plot, but they are subsumed entirely by the novel’s polemic, so there’s nothing at stake. The Every’s other problem is that in the wake of big tech’s own self-parodying behaviour – Amazon’s anti-union scandals, the Elon Musk-Jeff Bezos space race, Facebook’s rebranding as Meta and launch of the Metaverse – satire begins to feel redundant. (Meta surely proved this with those October launch videos that launched a thousand memes.) Eggers is a gifted writer who couldn’t write a bad novel; even if this isn’t a great one, it contains several funny sequences threaded together with skewer-sharp sentences: “Everything God offered – answers, clarity, miracles, baby names – the internet does better … The one question that could not be answered, until now, is Am I good?” And it does administer a sharp Juvenalian lampooning of big-tech venality, though this would be far more successful were it not also so lengthy. During Delaney’s probation period, an Everyone says: “No book should be over 500 pages, and if it is over 500 pages, we found the absolute limit to anyone’s tolerance is 577.” This kind of self-conscious metafictional wink is an Eggers hallmark, but here it had the distracting effect of reminding me that there were still 370 pages to go to reach his self-allotted 577, which made the novel feel 370 pages too long. The result of all this is that The Every is often entertaining, but not effective. It issues an urgent injunction to save humanity without ever really evoking the kind of humanity that you’d remember after turning the final page – the kind that may be the only weapon we have in the fight against big-tech totalitarianism. Early on, when Delaney ponders possible ways to destroy the Every from the outside, her friend Wes deadpans: “Maybe one of us writes a novel.” What a shame, then, that this novel feels like a damp squib. • The Every is published by Hamish Hamilton (£12.99). To support the Guardian and the Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.Supporters of Hamas could face up to 14 years in jail under plans to be announced on Friday by Priti Patel. The home secretary said the organisation will be proscribed by the government under the Terrorism Act. It means anyone who expresses support for Hamas, flies their flag or arranges meetings for the organisation will be in breach of the law. Patel hopes to push through the change in parliament next week in a move she says will help to combat antisemitism. She told reporters in Washington DC: “We’ve taken the view that we can no longer disaggregate the sort of military and political side. “It’s based upon a wide range of intelligence, information and also links to terrorism. The severity of that speaks for itself.” Until now, the UK has banned only its military wing – the Izz ad-Din al-Qassam Brigades. Patel will make the announcement in a speech on security in Washington on Friday. She will say it is a vital step towards protecting the Jewish community. “Hamas is fundamentally and rabidly antisemitic,” she is to say. “Antisemitism is an enduring evil which I will never tolerate. Jewish people routinely feel unsafe – at school, in the streets, when they worship, in their homes, and online. “This step will strengthen the case against anyone who waves a Hamas flag in the United Kingdom, an act that is bound to make Jewish people feel unsafe.” Hamas has already been designated an outlawed terrorist organisation by the US, Canada and the EU, meaning that its assets can be seized and its members jailed. Founded in 1987, Hamas holds a majority in the parliament of the Palestinian Authority and is the largest of several Palestinian militant Islamic groups. Jeremy Corbyn, the former Labour leader, described Hamas as friends in 2009 although he later said that he regretted using the term. Its name is an Arabic acronym for the Islamic Resistance Movement, and it was formed after the beginning of the first Palestinian intifada, or uprising, against Israel’s occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Under its charter, it is committed to the destruction of Israel. Hamas’s 1988 charter defines Palestine – including present-day Israel – as Islamic land and it rules out any permanent peace with the Jewish state. The document also repeatedly makes attacks on Jews as a people, drawing charges that the movement is antisemitic. In 2017, a new policy document stopped short of recognising Israel, but formally accepted the creation of an interim Palestinian state in Gaza, the West Bank and East Jerusalem. The document also said that Hamas’s struggle is with “occupying Zionist aggressors”, not Jews. Patel told reporters on Thursday night that proscribing Hamas would send a “very, very strong message to any individual that thinks that it’s OK to be a supporter of an organisation such as that”. In her speech in Washington, where she has been visiting senior members of Joe Biden’s administration, Patel is expected to say: “Hamas has significant terrorist capability, including access to extensive and sophisticated weaponry, as well as terrorist training facilities, and it has long been involved in significant terrorist violence. “But the current listing of Hamas creates an artificial distinction between various parts of the organisation – it is right that the listing is updated to reflect this. “This is an important step, especially for the Jewish community. If we tolerate extremism, it will erode the rock of security.”Trailblazer, record holder and multiple winner, Michèle Mouton drove her way to success as a woman in an overwhelmingly masculine environment. Much as her name may not be familiar nowadays, she remains an inspiration and force for change in motorsport a full 40 years after her heyday in the World Rally Championship (WRC). Today, appropriately, the men she bested recognise her achievements. The 70-year-old prefers to look forward rather than dwell on the past. Her work as the president of the FIA women in motorsport commission is her passion but Mouton is happy to revisit another era, indeed almost another lifetime as her racing career is celebrated in the film Queen of Speed, released on Sky on Saturday. It is a marvellous documentary, focusing on the fearsome, high-speed and often terrifying Group B era of rallying in the early 80s when Mouton went up against the best drivers in the world and beat them at their own game. The film is a reminder of what a different age it was, exemplified in the spectacularly sexist car ads it gleefully re-runs. They reflect the attitude within a male-dominated sport. The suggestion she was chosen only because of who she was sleeping with, that her cars or engines were altered for an advantage and when that was disproved, that they were simply so superior anyone could win in them. Yet for Mouton the brickbats meant nothing. Men’s opinions would not define her, she raced because she loved it. “I didn’t mind, I knew what I was doing and who I was sleeping with,” she says with a bright laugh. “I never needed, or wanted or thought I had to justify myself in anything. I did all that for myself. Not to be the only woman in their world. What has always been important was to prove to myself that I was able to do it and to reach their level but it was for me, not for them. I just wanted to do the same, that’s all.” The Frenchwoman succeeded brilliantly and in doing so silenced the critics. “Mouton is never shown any quarter by her male rivals, nor does she ask any, for she is a rally driver among rally drivers,” wrote Motorsport Magazine in 1981. Mouton remains the only woman to have won rounds of the WRC. She came within a whisker of taking the title in 1982, alongside her co-driver Fabrizia Pons, when she raced on through family tragedy only for bad luck to deny her shot at winning. She grew up in Grasse, where her parents grew jasmine and roses for the local perfume industry, and was not faintly interested in motorsport until a friend asked her to co-drive in the 1973 Monte Carlo rally, sparking something. Her father offered to back her for a year to drive competitively to see if anything would come from it and she excelled. It turned out Mouton loved motor racing. When Audi had offered her the chance to drive their new Quattro in 1981 – the all-wheel drive car that would change rallying – she jumped at the chance. The German manufacturer doubtless had one eye on the PR value of a female driver but Mouton was only interested in proving what she could do behind the wheel. The ultimate winner of that year’s championship Ari Vatanen observed: “The day I will be beaten by a woman I will stop racing.” At the San Remo rally that year Mouton duly did so. Vatanen did not retire. The victory was a huge sensation and made Mouton a very public figure. In the early 1980s rallying rivalled Formula One in popularity. Huge crowds flocked to the events, lining the roads. The footage in the film is a vivid reminder of those times. Of the speeds and the danger and not just for those in the cars. Fans stood inches from them, they waited mid-track to take pictures before throwing themselves out of the way. They tried to touch the bodywork as the cars hurtled past and Audi mechanics would have to remove parts of fingers from Mouton’s car. In 1982 she proved beyond doubt that she had earned that respect. She won three rallies in Portugal, Greece and Brazil. By the penultimate event, the Ivory Coast rally, she was in second place in the championship, seven points behind the Opel driver and 1980 champion, Walter Röhrl. Röhrl was another who had dismissed Mouton, caustically stating that at the time you could put a monkey in the Audi and it would win. Mouton was, of course, also beating her Audi teammate at the time, Hannu Mikkola, no monkey and no slouch as WRC champion in 1983 and who was driving identical machinery. A win would reduce Röhrl’s lead to two points and the WRC scoring system meant that Mouton could take the title with third at the final round even if Röhrl won. Just before the event, however, her father died. She wanted to pull out but her mother said she should race on as that was what he wanted. Reluctantly she did so and pulled out a huge lead of over one hour on Röhrl, only to lose it all through a sequence of mechanical problems: a new gearbox and fuel injector had to be fitted, there was a broken radiator and driveshaft and at one point her car refused to start. Desperate to make the time back, she pushed too hard and crashed twice. The second time beyond repair. Her title bid was over yet it was as nothing to the loss of her father. “I didn’t mind about the championship, it was no comparison,” she says. “I tried, we tried everything and it didn’t work, that’s all. That’s life. You cannot win all the time. I lost so much compared to the competition.” It was the high point of her rallying career. She did race on for a further four years and again made her mark in becoming the first and still only woman to win and set a new record time in the formidable Pikes Peak hill climb event in the US. Even there the organisers tried to slow her down by impeding her start for alleged rule infringements. It only motivated her more. In 1986 Mouton retired to start a family. She kept her hand in with occasional forays into driving but found a real calling in becoming the first president of the women in motorsport commission in 2010. Enthusiastically embracing the challenge, she focuses on bringing girls into the sport at a grassroots level. Röhrl now describes Mouton as “a pioneer who will never be forgotten” and Vatanen offers similar praise in the film to the woman he says “had awoken the rally world”. Vindication then, and her place in history is assured, but it means little to the woman whose piercing eyes bear the same striking sense of purpose today as they do peering out of her helmet on celluloid from the eighties. The film itself ends on what feels an almost melancholy note as Mouton reveals all her trophies are boxed up and gathering dust in a shed in her garden but she smiles when it is mentioned. Silverware was never the point, being the best she could be, gender be damned, was all that mattered. “I was not thinking about glory or to be famous,” she says. “I did something good, I did something well. What was important for me was to do it and to do it well. For me it’s not something you have to show. I did it for me.”Zero hour is approaching in Dubai. Magnus Carlsen and Ian Nepomniachtchi start their 14-game match for the world championship next week, with the opening ceremony on Wednesday and game one on Friday. A $2m prize fund, split 60-40, is at stake, plus the personal, business and national aspirations of the contenders. Carlsen can strengthen his claim to be the all-time greatest ahead of Garry Kasparov and Bobby Fischer, while Nepo (as he is usually called, and whose first name is pronounced Jan) can be the talisman who creates a new version of the departed Soviet chess empire and its decades of 20th century Russian dominance. If the classical section finishes 7-7, the result will be settled by tiebreak speed games. Nepo is 31, while Carlsen will reach that age on 30 November, the day of their fourth game. The pair have been rivals since they first met in world under-12 competitions. Nepo did well then, before Carlsen surged ahead in his teens while the Russian’s reputation was “gifted but erratic”. In the past few years Nepo has gained a new focus as a harder working and more consistent player with a dedicated ambition to reach the top. Carlsen is a prohibitive 1-4 in the betting, although the prevailing grandmaster opinion is that the true odds are more like 60-40. Nepo has been a difficult opponent for the champion, whose match performances have been underwhelming compared to his many tournament victories. Both his 2016 match against Sergey Karjakin and his 2018 series against Fabiano Caruana were tied 6-6 in classical games before Carlsen proved too strong in the speed tie-breaks. Russia’s hegemony, which started as long ago as 1945 with a crushing radio match victory over the USA, continued for the entire Soviet period with the brief exception of Fischer in 1970-72, and ended only when Vlad Kramnik lost the crown in 2007. Success for Nepo would be perceived in Moscow as a major step to reviving lost glories. Carlsen believes that classical games, lasting four hours or more, are outmoded because of their too frequent draws and their low entertainment value for the tens of thousands of online fans worldwide who now watch major matches. He would prefer the default time limit to be rapid, two hours or less, fast enough for continuous action yet slow enough to be explained by commentators. In a pre-match interview with New in Chess, Carlsen said that he regularly contemplates not defending the title, and will talk about that again after the match. Any separatist move by the Meltwater Champions Tour organised by the expanding Play Magnus Group could risk direct confrontation with Fide. The carefully laid plans of both camps for a winning future look increasingly endangered by a new and rapidly rising threat. The ratings surge of 18-year-old Alireza Firouzja, the Crown Prince and the heir apparent to the global throne, is fuelling the growing enthusiasm of chess fans worldwide for a Carlsen v Firouzja showdown. Firouzja jumped to world No3 in the live ratings as the former Iranian swept to a 6.5/7 total on his debut for France in the European team championship at Catez, Slovenia. His elegant queen sacrifice against Baadur Jobava on Friday evening induced the Georgian to resign immediately and took Firouzja to just 0.1 of a rating point behind China’s Ding Liren. It gives the teenager every chance of becoming world No 2 in the final two rounds on Saturday and Sunday (2pm start, live and free to watch online). Firouzja is playing with an ease and confidence which evokes memories of similar late teen surges by Fischer, Garry Kasparov and Carlsen. He is now just 1.1 rating points from matching a feat achieved by Carlsen in 2009, reaching 2800 at 18, and could well do it this weekend.. Firouzja’s overall rating is still 56 points behind Carlsen’s current 2855, but at his present rate of progress the Norwegian’s all-time age record of becoming world No 1 at 19 years and two months is coming into sight. Firouzja’s fourth-round win in the Euroteams is worth a look due to his startling, even shocking, concept at moves 23 and 24. With his long castled king guarded by pawns at a2 and b2, and the black pawns pushing forward at b5 and a5 backed by Black’s queen and rooks on the c and b files, Firouzja plays 23 b4! and 24 a4! aiming at a technically won endgame. Not exposing your castled king when the opponent’s major pieces are massing for attack is such basic advice that most players would not even consider advancing White’s a and b pawns. England men continue to struggle at the Euroteams. After six of the nine rounds, the No 5 seeded open team were only on 7/12, despite playing all their matches against countries ranked below No 20. England drew 2-2 with Romania in Friday’s seventh round as Gawain Jones won but the England No 1, Michael Adams, was checkmated by the 20-year-old talent Bogdan-Daniel Deac. A positive is that the team’s youngest player Ravi Haria, 22, qualified as a grandmaster. England women, seeded a lowly 24th out of 31, lost their first five matches but fought back on Friday with a crushing 3.5-0.5 win against Iceland. Away from Carlsen, Nepo, and Firouzja, the chess.com online speed championship, a knockout of 16 elite GMs, is providing free entertainment for audiences of up to 20,000. Matches follow a traditional format of 90 minutes of 5+1 blitz (five minutes for the game plus one second per move increment), 60 minutes of 3+1 blitz and 30 minutes of 1+1 bullet. The standout clash so far has been the five-time US champion Hikaru Nakamura’s 22-10 win against the eight-time Russian champion Peter Svidler, featured in this week’s puzzle and decided by an 11-1 bullet score. The top three bullet players used to be Carlsen, Firouzja and Nakamura, but Carlsen no longer plays on chess.com because the Play Magnus Group owns the rival chess24.com site, while the world champion himself prefers to bullet on lichess.org under his handle of Dr Nykterstein. Firouzja has abandoned speed chess, at least for a while, as the 18-year-old strives to reach world No 2 over-the-board. Nakamura’s only defeat in four speed championships has been by Carlsen in the 2017 final. His surprise use of the Orangutan 1 b2-b4 in five of the 3+1 games caused Svidler problems. The Orangutan got its picturesque name when the GMs at New York 1924 visited the zoo. Savielly Tartakower took a fancy to the ape, and dedicated his next game to it. The opening’s name in Russia is the Sokolsky, after the Belarus master whose book about it showed the dangers for Black of allowing the gambit 1...e5 2 Bb2 f6 3 e4 Bxb4 4 Bc4. Svidler mostly followed the current preference for 1...e5 2 Bb2 Bxb4 3 Bxe5 Nf6, although it looks odd to exchange a flank pawn for a central pawn so soon.. White’s new plan is 4 c3 Ba5/e7 5 g3, which Carlsen used earlier this year against Anish Giri. Carlsen alias Dr Nykterstein has continued to defy traditional methods of preparing for a world title match by playing one-minute bullet sessions lasting several hours. Fatigue could affect the second half of the match, but a 7.5-5.5 Carlsen win appears a reasonable forecast. 3790: It’s mate in five by 1...N2h3+! 2 Nxh3 (2 gxf3 Bd4+ is similar) Bd4+ 3 Nf2 (3 Kf1 Rd1 mate) Rd1+ 4 Bf1 Ne2+ 5 Kh1 Rxf1 mate.One of John Maynard Keynes’s most famous claims is that financial markets are driven by “animal spirits”. But Keynes’s reasoning is less well known. The danger of financial markets, he argued, is that traders aren’t focused just on the price and quality of goods themselves, but also on the behaviour of the other traders. Unlike markets for consumer goods or commodities, financial markets circulate things of no intrinsic value: pieces of paper that are expected to rise or fall in price, but largely because everybody else expects them to. Under such circumstances, herd behaviour and emotions become decisive. The result is volatility – not just when things go wrong, but as a normal feature of such markets. Bubbles are inevitable, and bubbles inevitably burst. In societies as dominated by finance as ours, this logic permeates well beyond the markets for bonds and equities. Housing is perhaps the most prominent and divisive case of “animal spirits” invading an area outside the sphere of finance itself. But as the Belgian social theorist Michel Feher has argued, many aspects of our social and personal lives are now treated like financial assets. As individuals we actively nurture our reputations, online and off, in the hope of winning investment, if not necessarily in a monetary sense then in the form of attention and positive ratings. These are all forms of “credit” (literally “belief”) of one sort or another. The volatility of “animal spirits” was perfectly demonstrated by the 2017 Fyre festival (told in a 2019 Netflix documentary), one of the great morality tales of our age. An entrepreneur convinced “influencers” to generate online buzz surrounding an island music festival he was planning, but neglected to organise basic facilities or headline acts. Once the first guests actually arrived on the island, the vibe took a turn for the worse when a single disgusting photograph of a cheese sandwich in a polystyrene box went viral. As the consequences of Tory sleaze finally eat into Boris Johnson’s polling lead, such examples may offer clues into something that has long been hard to fathom: how does the Johnson era end? It’s possible that if Johnson’s stock becomes marked a “sell”, rather than a “buy”, things could collapse rapidly. Might the Andrea Leadsom amendment, tabled to defend Owen Paterson, turn out to be the “cheese sandwich” of the Boris festival? The fallout has certainly been spectacular. Johnson’s political stock resembles a financial asset in a number of ways. First, he is of no intrinsic value. That he has no aptitude for or interest in governing was known before the pandemic, but took on a fatal dimension in March 2020, at the cost of many thousands of lives. He lacks any consistent political vision or ideology, and runs scared of difficult decisions, beyond following whichever advice he received last. We know that he is also hedonistic and lazy, hence the constant holidays. Given all of this, his compulsive lying is not even his worst trait as a leader. All of which raises the obvious question of how he found himself in such a job in the first place. This is the second way in which Johnson resembles a financial asset: his value is founded on the fact that his supporters are all watching one another as much as him. Like a dotcom company circa 1999, he is someone to get behind, so long as everyone else is behind him – but especially the media. Johnson was originally an artefact of the papers for which he worked, from the Times via the Spectator to the Telegraph. Have I Got News For You made him a household face and name beyond the reaches of the conservative press (a fact that the former’s presenters have never acknowledged). He is in many ways a PR trick. Of course, media profile is far from worthless in today’s political climate, but its value ultimately comes down to the capacity to coordinate and control public attention. In his blog explaining the 2016 referendum outcome, Dominic Cummings recognised the unique role of Johnson, but specifically as a means of steering the media: “Without Boris, Farage would have been a much more prominent face on TV during the crucial final weeks, probably the most prominent face. (We had to use Boris as leverage with the BBC to keep Farage off and even then they nearly screwed us as ITV did.) It is extremely plausible that this would have lost us over 600,000 vital middle-class votes.” Being recognisable and entertaining, Johnson provides a focal point; and because everyone knows this, it is then possible to rally people around him, rather as people might meet near a famous landmark. Indeed, his whole political career (whether in Westminster, London or the country at large) has depended almost entirely on his outsized levels of public recognition and willingness to exploit it. But financial assets also suffer a major deficiency: an absence of investor loyalty. No doubt Johnson has close friends scattered around the higher reaches of the media and the Conservative party, but it is hard to identify any “Johnsonites”, given how little he stands for beyond himself. As a celebrity, he is better suited to attracting fans than allies. The recent tightening of the polls and negative headlines surrounding corruption may not represent a bursting of the Boris bubble, but they do clarify how little Johnson has to fall back on, should the press turn truly hostile. Cummings presumably flatters himself that, like some hedge-fund wizard, he started shorting the stock at just the right moment. It’s always a mistake to underestimate Johnson’s tenacity and hunger for power, but a political opportunist can scarcely expect anything more than opportunistic support. It’s likely that once one set of “investors” pulls out (such as the Murdoch press), many others will flee. The fallout could be embarrassing, though not for Johnson himself, who will return to a life of parties, holidays and cracking risque jokes for money. Instead, the shame that he’s incapable of feeling will be shared among all those who collectively agreed to put him in power. Once it’s finished, what the Johnson era will have illuminated is the complete vacuum of moral purpose or judgment at the heart of the Conservative party, establishment newspapers and individuals (including Cummings) who used him as their vehicle. Some refused to invest at the outset. The resignation of Johnson’s own brother Jo from the cabinet in September 2019 was as clear a red flag as one could imagine. Many others will make excuses for their support and rewrite the past. But the depressing fact remains that, for the time being, columnists, MPs, editors and voters are mainly on board because everyone else is. As Chuck Prince, then CEO of Citibank, famously said in July 2007, three weeks before the start of the credit crunch: “As long as the music plays, you’ve got to get up and dance. We’re still dancing”. William Davies is a sociologist and political economist. His latest book is This is Not Normal: The Collapse of Liberal BritainA New Zealand man resisting deportation on the basis he has been culturally adopted as Aboriginal has won an order freeing him from immigration detention. On Friday the federal court ruled the former home affairs minister Peter Dutton “failed to give any degree of consideration” to Shayne Montgomery’s claim of Aboriginality, ordering the government to reconsider his visa cancellation. But despite the order for Montgomery to be released from detention, his future is still uncertain as the decision not to restore his visa can simply be remade after consideration of his Aboriginality. In February 2020 the high court ruled that Aboriginal Australians cannot be aliens and cannot be deported, in the landmark Love and Thoms decision the commonwealth is now seeking to overturn. Montgomery has applied to the high court seeking to extend the category of “non-citizen, non-alien” to people customarily adopted as Aboriginal even if they have no Aboriginal biological descent. Before that aspect of the case is heard in 2022, the federal court was first asked to rule on Montgomery’s claim of procedural defects in Dutton’s decision in May 2020 not to restore his visa. According to court documents, Montgomery was born in 1981 in New Zealand before coming to Australia in 1997 to live with his mother and stepfather. But after Montgomery was convicted of a non-violent aggravated burglary in March 2018, the Australian government cancelled his visa. He was taken to immigration detention after his release from prison on 21 February 2019. Montgomery argued that because he has been culturally adopted by the Mununjali people he is Aboriginal, despite not being biologically descended from any Indigenous person. Montgomery’s evidence of his Aboriginality includes his initiation on Stradbroke Island; being recognised by a Mununjali woman, Gamma Merle, and her family as their “son”; and his feeling of belonging and that his “spirit guides and ancestors are Aboriginal”. Sign up to receive an email with the top stories from Guardian Australia every morning Montgomery argued that Dutton had failed to give “proper, genuine and realistic consideration” to what he had said about his Aboriginality and “the consequences of this status on the impact of his removal”. Justice Sarah Derrington found that Dutton had acknowledged representations about Montgomery’s Aboriginality “in considering the strength of his ties to the community”, but made no finding about his submission that he is an Aboriginal Australian. “There is no indication in the minister’s reasons that the minister gave any, or any real consideration, to the submission that Mr Montgomery was an Aboriginal Australian and that the decision in Love did not foreclose such a conclusion,” she said. By failing to “give any degree of consideration” to the claim, Dutton committed a jurisdictional error, she said. Derrington noted the commonwealth had accepted in the case that Montgomery “both identifies as an Aboriginal Australian and has been accepted by a traditional Aboriginal group as a member of that group”. The judge noted that Montgomery has received Abstudy, a commonwealth social security benefit “directed specifically to Aboriginal people”. In those circumstances, the judge found that the suspicion held by Montgomery’s detaining officer that he is not an Aboriginal Australian was “not reasonable”, and he was therefore entitled to an order releasing him from immigration detention. In his decision, Dutton had acknowledged Montgomery’s seven-year-old daughter, Wyntah-Willow, would be negatively affected by his deportation. At the hearing in October, Montgomery’s lawyers argued Dutton had hidden his reasons behind “bland” understatement, showing insufficient appreciation that Wyntah-Willow would be effectively orphaned. Derrington said although Dutton’s conclusion was “expressed blandly”, Montgomery had failed to show any representation Dutton hadn’t considered. The judge found that Montgomery’s “only real complaint” was that insufficient weight had been given to their interests, but that was a matter for the minister not the court to decide. Derrington rejected Montgomery’s argument that it was “legally unreasonable” for Dutton to conclude that if he were to reoffend the Australian community could be exposed to harm. A spokesperson for the Department of Home Affairs told Guardian Australia it doesn’t comment on individual cases for privacy reasons, but was aware of the judgment. “The department is considering the implications of the decision and will consider all options, including an appeal or making a new decision,” the spokesperson said. “It would be inappropriate to comment further at this time.”Bloodmoon: I commences with the sound of piano notes and a distorted croon from frontman Jacob Bannon. Instantly, it’s in a different hemisphere from anything else Converge have done. After all, this is the rabble whose defining statement is Jane Doe: an attack that, 20 years after its release, remains the nastiest metalcore album ever. Bannon screamed so hard on it that you could hear the microphone struggling; Kurt Ballou’s guitars rang with tortured squeals and the rhythm section thrashed faster than a machine gun. Now, on their long-awaited collaboration with dark rocker Chelsea Wolfe (plus her writing partner Ben Chisolm and Cave In’s Stephen Brodsky), Converge’s rampage deadens to a crawl, sacrificing speed for a slower and more melodic, yet heavier battering. Opener Blood Moon captivates as Bannon and Wolfe exchange verses to hypnotic effect, the gentleness serving to amplify the explosion of post-metal that follows. As much as bands from Cult of Luna to the Ocean have employed this crescendoing model for decades, this is still characteristically Converge. If anything, Ballou feels unchained; he continues to strain his instrument into anguish on Lord of Liars, only for Scorpion’s Sting to find room for a tasteful blues solo. Wolfe’s penchant for downbeat melancholia also repeatedly shines through. Her influence is strongest on Coil: an acoustic-cum-choral-rock single that’s as grandiose as it is heartbreaking. That said, Bloodmoon: I never feels like a compromise. Rather, it does exactly what a crossover should, excelling in ways that would have been impossible had either party gone it alone.Retail sales in Great Britain rose for the first time in six months in October as consumers started their Christmas shopping earlier than usual to avoid missing out if there was a shortage of goods. The total volume of goods bought rose by 0.8% last month, according to the Office for National Statistics, compared with flat sales in September, driven by a rise in spending on toys and clothes. Economists had forecast a smaller rise in sales of 0.5%. Retailers reported that early Christmas trading had boosted clothing store sales to within only 0.5% of pre-pandemic levels, while secondhand stores, toy shops and sports equipment stores also benefited from a scramble to avoid disappointment amid the global supply chain disruption. The rise in October followed five months of no growth in the longest spending slump since 1996 after the easing of coronavirus restrictions this summer. Food store sales volumes fell by 0.3% on the month, although they remain 3.4% above pre-pandemic levels. With the return of more people to town and city centres, online sales as a proportion of overall retail sales fell to 27.3%, the lowest level since the start of the pandemic. However, it remains significantly higher than pre-Covid, suggesting a permanent shift to higher levels of internet shopping after the pandemic. British households are facing rising inflationary pressures, which are pushing up the cost of goods and services, driven by higher energy prices, in a development expected to squeeze consumer spending in the coming months. Household energy bills are expected to continue to rise, while benefit cuts and planned tax rises from the government will further erode consumers’ disposable income. Helen Dickinson, the chief executive of the British Retail Consortium, said the sector was putting in a gargantuan effort to ensure food and gifts were ready for Christmas but that the supply chain disruption and staff shortages were pushing up costs and creating some gaps on the shelves. “Retailers are prioritising Christmas essentials, and many have laid out their festive offerings a little earlier to ensure everyone has time to buy treats and decorations before the big day,” she said. With a rise in spending earlier than usual, retailers are hopeful that demand will continue through the coming months. “However, challenges remain, with higher prices looming and many households facing rising energy bills,” Dickinson added. Separate figures from the ONS showed the government borrowed more than expected in October despite the end of the furlough scheme a month earlier and as cuts to universal credit were imposed. The government’s budget deficit – the gap between spending and income – was estimated to be £18.8bn in October, only £200m lower than the same month last year when borrowing hit a record high for the month amid the fallout from Covid-19. With a stronger performance in the public finances throughout most of this year, City economists had forecast borrowing of £13.8bn. However, higher levels of inflation and increased spending linked to the government’s Covid-19 vaccination programme led to a weaker performance than expected in October. Against a backdrop of rising inflationary pressure, debt interest payments rose from £4.8bn in September to £5.6bn in October alongside an increase in the retail price index measure of inflation, which pushed up payments on index-linked debt. Public sector borrowing for the financial year to October was estimated at £127.3bn, more than £100bn lower than the same point last year, although still the second-highest year-to-date borrowing figure on records dating back to 1993. The chancellor, Rishi Sunak, said the government had supported businesses and households throughout the pandemic but this had left the country with a higher level of national debt. “It is right that we now strengthen our public finances for future generations – so at the budget last month I set out new fiscal rules which will keep debt on a sustainable path in the years to come,” he said.Ok, Friday is almost over so we are going to shut this blog down. We’ve had big stories from politics, Covid and cricket. Lets recap the big ones: SA premier Steven Marshall refused to dismiss his deputy premier and attorney general Vickie Chapman after the parliament passed a vote of no confidence against her. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews condemned Morrison’s comments on protesters, saying he was “double speaking to extremists”. NSW recorded 216 new Covid-19 cases and three deaths while Victoria recorded 1,273 new Covid-19 cases and eight deaths, NT recorded two and none for Qld. Police pumped a creek in search for William Tyrrell. SA announced it would open its border next Tuesday. New Zealand reported 198 new local Covid-19 cases. Rapid antigen Covid testing announced for NSW primary schools. Daughter of Victorian crossbench MP allegedly attacked on the streets. Tim Paine resigned over text messages. Indian prime minister repealed controversial agricultural laws. It was big day, and I am going to have (a very moderate) drink now. Until tomorrow – go well team Guardian. From AAP: Debate on whether people with mental health conditions should be required to actively seek consent has continued as NSW parliament considers an overhaul of sexual assault laws. The draft law creates a requirement of “affirmative consent” – meaning people have to say or do something to find out whether their partner consents to a sexual activity, or they could be guilty of sexual assault. The bill says the affirmative consent requirement does not apply if a person accused of sexual assault was suffering from a cognitive or mental health impairment at the time, if that was a cause of the failure to get consent. They would still have to believe the other person was consenting. Attorney general Mark Speakman on Thursday evening said the definitions were developed with forensic mental health experts and consistent with other criminal laws. “This is not a ‘get out of jail free’ card – an offender with a cognitive impairment or mental health impairment can still be convicted if all elements of the case are established beyond reasonable doubt,” Mr Speakman said. Labor, the Greens and One Nation are pushing for changes to the exception, which was debated in the upper house on Friday. A Greens amendment would tweak the bill to provide that the impairment must be “the” cause – rather than “a” cause – of the failure to seek consent. Labor wants it be a “substantial cause”. If One Nation gets its way, a person would have to show they have a “substantial” cognitive impairment before they could fall within the exception. From AAP: A disgraced West Australian public servant who stole more than $27 million from the state and spent lavishly on his obsession with racehorses has been jailed for at least 10 years. Paul Whyte, 58, admitted masterminding what the WA Corruption and Crime Commission has described as Australia’s biggest corruption by a public servant. The former high-flyer appeared in the supreme court on Friday via videolink from custody, dressed in prison greens, after pleading guilty to 564 corruption and property laundering charges. Justice Joseph McGrath sentenced him to 12 years in prison, describing his offending as a “gross breach of trust” which diverted funds from the most disadvantaged members of the community to fund an extravagant lifestyle. Whyte will be eligible for parole after serving 10 years. “Your offending was not a single act of stealing but a well-planned and executed theft from the community over an extraordinarily long period,” Justice McGrath said. Tasmania is offering prizes, including iPads, to 12- to 18-year-olds who get the Covid vaccine. Premier Peter Gutwein announced a blitz targeting the age group, which has concerningly low vaccine rates. “If you’re aged 12 to 18 and have had a first or second dose of the vaccine by the 24th, you will be in a draw with a chance to win an iPad and iPhone or an Apple watch,” Gutwein said. There will be 50 prizes up for grabs. On the Apple Isle, 84% of Tasmanians over 16 are fully vaccinated, and 92% have had one dose. But in the 12-15 age group, only 50% are fully vaccinated and 68% have had one dose. Businesses in Melbourne are shutting their doors tomorrow because of the protest Police searching for the remains of missing boy William Tyrrell have finished the fifth day of search activity, laying tarpaulin over the search area to protect it from potential rain. On Friday, there were few developments in Kendall - the town four hours north of Sydney where William went missing from in 2014. In the morning, police pumped a creek next to the area of bushland they were searching, and found a small piece of light blue cloth about 8cm long. It was taken in an evidence bag and sent to a police lab in Sydney to be analysed, however its significance to the investigation is unclear. Forensic teams will return tomorrow as part of the search that will explore two nearby stretches of the bushland. Australian Cricketers’ Association has put out a statement in relation to the resignation of Tim Paine Police have combed bushland, drained a creek and excluded a concrete slab from investigations on the fifth day of a renewed search for the remains of missing three-year-old William Tyrrell. Officers searched an area of bush a kilometre from where the boy disappeared in Kendall on the mid north coast, digging up dirt and draining a shallow creek of water on Friday morning. The AMA has released a position statement calling for an end to discrimination against people who are LGBTQIA+ in the healthcare system, including patients and healthcare workers. AMA president Dr Omar Khorshid said the position statement included a call for all state and territory governments to ban coercive “conversion” practices. “Conversion practices are a blatant example of the discrimination faced by LGBTQIA+ people in Australia and have no place in our society. Currently only Victoria, the ACT and Queensland have legislation in place banning conversion,” Khorshid said. Khorshid said being LGBTQIA+ was normal, healthy, and representative of the diversity in human sexuality, gender identity, and sex characteristics. “Many people who are LGBTQIA+ in Australia live happy and healthy lives. However, many experience unacceptable health inequities.” He said as well as calling for a ban on conversion therapy the position statement included recommendations to the federal government to: support mainstream health services to increase cultural safety for people who are LGBTQIA+; fund high-quality research on the health outcomes and experiences of people who are LGBTQIA+; enhance access to beneficial gender-affirming treatment; and add sensitive, evidence-based questions on gender, sexual orientation, and intersex variations to the Australian Census. “The medical profession should affirm, support and provide care for people who are LGBTQIA+,” he said. The Morrison government has rejected a call by the Greens and Labor to provide Australia’s live performance sector with an insurance guarantee to guard against future cancellations and border closures due to Covid. On Friday a report resulting from an inquiry into the feasibility of a new insurance scheme for the performing arts sector was tabled in parliament. And we’ve got more rain for SA on the way... Chief Guardian Australia blog boss Matilda Boseley was just speaking on Afternoon Briefing. PK asked her if the attack on Meddick’s daughter (which is still being investigated by police) signalled heightened tensions in Melbourne over the pandemic bill. This is what she had to say: I think after the US insurrection, we’ve all kind of realised that we live in a slightly different world than we thought we live in. The rules have shifted, and I think hopefully, assuming that this is what happened (that it was politically motivated) maybe this can be the wake-up call for Australian politicians – that this is possible in Australia and this is something that we genuinely have to consider. Politicians need to be taking a really strong united stance on it. Victorian Liberal leader Matthew Guy has joined MPs from all sides of politics in condemning the attack against Meddick’s daughter. From AAP: Australia needs to step up on climate change or face the financial and investment consequences, the country’s top economic bureaucrat has warned. “There may be aspects that do not align with Australia’s national interest,” treasury secretary Steven Kennedy told a briefing on Friday. “We do not have to like what’s happening but we do have to be engaged and involved.” He acknowledged powerful forces are now at play in sustainable investment, disclosure and international capital flows. “Australia will need to take further steps to meet these expectations,” he said at the event hosted by the Centre for Policy Development and research body ClimateWorks. Macquarie Group chief executive Shemara Wikramanayake said clarity is needed for collaboration between government and business. “Ultimately what the private sector needs is for the public sector to set the priorities and the targets,” she said. “Sadly climate change is upon us and we are having extreme weather events, melting of the glaciers, rising sea levels, so there are a lot of communities who are going to be impacted.” What this blog needs right now is First Dog on the Moon. And oh... look... Australia is failing to meet its own plastic reduction targets, with just 16% of plastic recovered last year despite more than half of packaging found to be easily recyclable, a new report shows. The latest progress report released by the Australian Packaging Covenant Organisation (Apco) found plastic recycling has flatlined since a voluntary plan was implemented in 2017. Victorian premier Daniel Andrews has also posted on Twitter, saying his “thoughts and wishes” are with Andy Meddick’s daughter. From AAP: A rise in sexual assaults linked with online dating apps has led to Queensland police matching with Tinder in a world first safety campaign. Police commissioner Katarina Carroll says the unique collaboration will provide a safety net for Queenslanders after they swipe right. Over eight weeks, Queensland users of the app will receive tips to increase awareness on dates as well as reporting and support options. “What we saw is a clear increase in reporting of online dating and sexual offending,” Carroll said. “We thought let’s go straight to the source and start having a great discussion on how we make this platform safer for everyone.” Carroll said Queensland police decided “enough was enough” after a jump in assaults in the state. Three rapes linked with online app dates had been reported in Queensland in 2008, a figure that rose to 49 by 2019. The commissioner said sexual assaults were “under-reported” in Queensland due to the perceived stigma of using dating apps. But she hoped the collaboration would encourage victims to reach out, saying it would help stop perpetrators who were usually repeat offenders. And while we’re on the weather in NSW ... here is the video from the BoM. New South Wales is bracing for more potential flooding with heavy rainfall expected to lash much of the east coast over the weekend and possible thunderstorms predicted to hit Sydney. The city is expected to see up to 50mm of rain on Sunday alone, with rain and thunderstorms also forecast for Saturday and Friday afternoon. Afghan and Australian rights groups have warned the deteriorating situation in Afghanistan must not be allowed to disrupt or delay Australia’s plan to compensate victims of alleged war crimes. A key recommendation of the Brereton report, released exactly one year ago, was that the Australian government provide redress to the families of victims, without waiting for prosecutions to conclude. On Twitter, the PM has commented on the attack on Andy Meddick’s daughter. In the weeks before Australia’s most populous state of New South Wales emerged from a 106-day lockdown in October, a surge of Covid cases seemed certain to coincide with the easing of restrictions. Experts predicted infections would rise and hospitals braced for a spate of new admissions. But instead, the opposite happened. Daily Covid cases have dropped and – more than a month after exiting lockdown – the numbers continue to fall. In other news, here are some photos of politicians in the wild as a timely reminder today is Ausmusic T-shirt day. I’ll be honest, I didn’t peg Tanya Plibersek as an Amyl and the Sniffers fan but I love to be surprised. Cricket Tasmania has confirmed the allegations against Paine were from a former employee. They only came to Cricket Tasmania’s attention in 2018 when formal charges of theft were laid against that employee. Those charges are still pending. Huge news. Farmers have been camping at Delhi’s border for the past year protesting for the repeal of the laws. Prime minister Narendra Modi called the reforms, which loosen rules around sale, pricing and storage of farm produce a “watershed moment” for agriculture in India. But farmers have said the laws would force them into poverty rather than increasing productivity and improving incomes. The board of Cricket Australia has released a statement confirming Paine will be available for selection in the upcoming Ashes series. Back to Paine, and it does seem worth reflecting for a moment on the fact Cricket Australia made the decision to back him to become captain in 2018, a year after they became aware the text exchanges happened. In Paine’s own words: At the time, the exchange was the subject of a thorough CA Integrity Unit investigation, throughout which I fully participated in and openly participated in. That investigation and a Cricket Tasmania HR investigation at the same time found that there had been no breach of the Cricket Australia Code of Conduct. It will be interesting to see how the move was justified at the time. Back to the developing story in Victoria, and Andy Meddick’s daughter Kielan confirmed on social media last night she was chased and subsequently attacked for being “political”. Paine said he will: “Remain a committed member of the Australian cricket team, and look forward with anticipation to what is a huge Ashes tour.” Paine says he loved his role as captain. It’s been the greatest privilege of my sporting life to lead the Australian men’s test team. I’m grateful for the support of my teammates and proud of what we’ve been able to achieve together. To them, I ask for their understanding and forgiveness. To Australian cricket fans – deeply sorry that my past behaviour has impacted our game on the eve of the Ashes. For the disappointment, I have caused to fans and the entire cricket community, I apologise. I’ve been blessed with a wonderful, loving and supportive family, and it breaks my heart to know how much I’ve let them down ... They have always stood by me, been my most loyal fans, and I’m indebted to them for their support. Paine: I spoke to my wife and family at the time and am enormously grateful for their forgiveness and support. We thought this incident was behind us and that I could focus entirely on the team, as I have done for the last three or four years. However, I recently became aware that this private text exchange was going to become public. On reflection, my actions in 2017 do not meet the standard of an Australian cricket captain, or the wider community. I’m deeply sorry for the hurt and pain that I have caused to my wife, my family, and to the other party. I’m sorry for any damage that this does to the reputation of our sport. And I believe that it is the right decision for me to stand down as captain, effective immediately. I do not want this to become an unwelcome disruption to the team ahead of what is a huge Ashes series. Test captain Tim Paine has announced he will resign amid an investigation by Cricket Australia into texts he allegedly sent a woman in 2017. It’s an incredibly difficult decision, but the right one for me, my family, and cricket. As background on my decision, nearly four years ago, I was involved in a text exchange with a then colleague. At the time, the exchange was the subject of a thorough CA Integrity Unit investigation, throughout which I fully participated in and openly participated in. That investigation and a Cricket Tasmania HR investigation at the same time found that there had been no breach of the Cricket Australia Code of Conduct. Although exonerated, I deeply regretted this incident at the time, and still do today. Test captain Tim Paine is about to hold a press conference in Hobart about his future. More information on Meddick’s daughter. Animal Justice Party MP Andy Meddick has released a statement saying his daughter was attacked and taken to hospital last night. The PMs has been boosted... Four months after losing her mother to Covid-19, Kathy Bourinaris received a call from her mother’s nursing home offering her a tour. Staff at St Basil’s Home for the Aged wanted to know if Fotini Atzarakis was still interested in respite care and the family was invited to look around the Fawkner facility. In New South Wales, Muslim leaders have written to Dominic Perrottet, the premier, angry at a failure to pass new protections from racial vilification. The NSW parliament last week voted down a Labor bill for greater protections from racial vilification, which was supported by the Greens. Groups including All Together Now, the Australian Muslim Advocacy Network, the Australian Muslim Women’s Centre for Human Rights, and various state Islamic societies say that leaves them with no protections against harassment or vilification. They say the state’s existing racial vilification laws have been found by courts not to cover Muslims. The letter to Perrottet warns Muslims are increasingly targeted by white nationalists. The atrocity of the Christchurch terror attack continues to reverberate in the Australian Muslim community. From any perspective, the scale of the atrocity was unprecedented in Australian or New Zealand history in the loss of life and how those lives were taken. The terrorist was a young man from NSW. An appropriate response would be to prevent such harm from happening again. Yet more than two years on, Muslims have no protection against discrimination or vilification in NSW. And that’s it for the NT presser – clearly, the health authorities are very concerned it has been spreading silently. The big message to Territorians right now – get tested, get tested, and some of you should get tested again. Dr Charles Pain has given a rundown on the wastewater situation: This community now has signalled a positive test. That has required us now to go into that community and to do a widespread testing and widespread vaccination. Please cooperate with that. If anybody has got symptoms in that community, please also identify yourselves so that you can be tested. Gunner is asking people who have previously got tested because they have been at an exposure site to get tested again. There is another group of people in Katherine who we’re asking to come forward for a test in the next few days. We know that people can test negative for Delta initially, only for it to pop up a few days later. If you were previously a contact from an exposure site and tested in the past few weeks, we’re asking you to get tested again.” Gunner said the only way to get through this is to get tested. “I know that the lines are long – I’m sorry about that. But there is no way around it. I need you to make the testing lines longer. Get tested. “If you have been to an exposure site, get tested. If you have any of the symptoms I talked about at the start of the week and I’ll repeat them again, even if they’re mild symptoms get tested.” Gunner said the Territory might be only a few days short of total disaster. The original source of the Katherine and Robinson River outbreak is the woman from Queensland who had been in Victoria without telling us. But in a sense, that just makes this mystery even stranger because we still don’t know how it went from that small first cluster to no cases for nine days, and then a second cluster that came from the first. There is a very real possibility that there are people in Katherine who have Covid and either don’t know it or don’t want to know. And those people have then spread it into the community. If that is what’s actually happened, best-case scenario – we got lucky that it hasn’t spread any further than what we have caught so far. Worst-case scenario, this has been silently spreading for a week and we’re a day or two away from discovering a disaster. Gunner said they have found Covid in the wastewater in Binjari Aboriginal community, 15 minutes from Katherine. “This community is within the Katherine lockdown area. There are about 200 residents in this community. A rapid assessment team has been deployed there this morning and they’re supported by the Aboriginal health service. “It is our intention to test every single person in the community today and we’ll also get more people vaccinated there today.” Gunner: “There was 2,891 tests processed in the Territory in the past 24 hours with three positive. The two new cases in the cluster plus an international arrival at Howard Springs, which was reported last night. “We expanded our testing capacity in Katherine yesterday and 713 tests were taken in Katherine. We were advised that he close contacts number down to373. There are 13 left to locate. Just so everyone is left and aware, this is a Territory-wide issue.” Gunner: “I just want to confirm that the waste water results for all areas outside of Katherine and Howard Springs have come back negative overnight, including negative in Borroloola. “This is good news. However, there is sill uncertainty about this outbreak.” Let’s go back to the NT where Gunner has been speaking: “There have been two new positive cases in the Katherine cluster detected overnight. This takes the cluster to 25 confirmed cases. The new cases are a 33-year-old non-Aboriginal male, and a 59-year-old Aboriginal female. “The male is a health worker who initially had contact with an earlier positive case as part of the work. He’d already been classified as a close contact. He is, I believe, the first health worker in the Territory to be tested positive for Covid-19. “The man also has other health issues has been transported to Royal Darwin Hospital for treatment. “The woman is an associate of one of the positive households but had not been previously identified as a casual contest. She took a Covid test because of her symptoms. I don’t have her vaccination status at this time.” Looks like NZ journos weren’t given warning about the trade meeting between our two countries today. The Northern Territory has recorded two new cases of Covid, one of which is a healthcare worker, chief minister Michael Gunner said. The cluster in the NT now stands at 25 confirmed cases. And I have this NSW public health alert about raw pacific oysters from Coffin Bay in SA. NSW Health and the NSW Food Authority are investigating an outbreak of Vibrio parahaemolyticus infections linked to the consumption of raw Pacific oysters from Coffin Bay in South Australia. Epidemiologist and acting director of NSW Health’s enteric investigation branch, Keira Glasgow, urged people across NSW to stop consuming oysters from the Coffin Bay region of South Australia at this time. “NSW Health is aware of at least 15 people who have been diagnosed with Vibrio parahaemolyticus infection this month,” Glasgow said. “Those who have been interviewed have reported recently eating raw Pacific oysters, which have been traced back to the Coffin Bay region of South Australia. “Preliminary laboratory investigation suggests a link to cases identified in other states and territories.” For those curious, but too scared to Google – symptoms are not pleasant and include: diarrhoea, abdominal cramp, nausea, vomiting, fever and/or headache. As the full moon rises on Friday night it won’t be as lovely and bright as usual – but it will be fascinating. Across most of Australia the moon will be partially shrouded in Earth’s shadow, so it will undergo a partial lunar eclipse as it rises. A lunar eclipse happens roughly every six months somewhere on Earth. For most of the year, the moon’s orbit takes it above or below Earth’s shadow but, during an eclipse, the full moon travels through it. From AAP: Queensland could reach 80% Covid-19 vaccination coverage as early as 6 December, as the state government continues a war of words with the federal government over mandates. The latest figures show 83.62 % of eligible Queenslanders have had one jab and 72.9% are fully vaccinated. Once the 80% target is hit quarantine will be scrapped for all fully vaccinated domestic travellers from virus hotspots who provide a negative PCR test. Deputy chief health officer Peter Aitken says at the current pace the state could be 80% fully vaccinated well before 17 December and perhaps as early as 6 December. “It’s a projection so it could be anything between the sixth and the 12th of December, depending on how the vaccination rates go,” he told reporters on Friday. At 80%, unvaccinated people will also be banned from pubs, cafes and restaurants to cinemas, theatres and stadiums. From AAP: Rapid antigen home testing kits will be rolled out to NSW primary schools in a bid to minimise the time children and teachers spend isolating when they are a close contact of a Covid-19 case. The NSW education minister, Sarah Mitchell, said the tests would help students and staff return to the classroom earlier when schools have positive cases. NSW Health has advised that close contacts of Covid cases can return to school after seven days, provided they receive a negative PCR test result on day seven of their exposure date and consistent negative rapid antigen test results from day eight to day 14. Many primary school students – who are too young to be vaccinated – have been forced back to home schooling while isolating for a fortnight when there is a Covid case at school. After months of learning from home the situation has frustrated parents and children after a return to face-to-face teaching for term four. Forensic teams searching for the remains of missing boy William Tyrrell have found a further piece of material in dense bushland, however its significance to the investigation is unclear. At about 11.30am on Friday – the fifth day of the revived search for William – police found a piece of cloth after pumping a creek next to a patch of bushland they have been sifting through this week. The cloth was light blue in colour and about 8cm long and rectangular in shape. Police photographed the location the cloth was found and placed it in a brown evidence bag. It will now be taken to a lab in Sydney to be forensically tested. Its significance to the investigation is unclear. On Wednesday, police also found a thread of fabric, which was red and initially compared to the Spiderman costume William was wearing when he disappeared from his foster grandmother’s home in Kendall in 2014. It is understood that police later formed the view the thread found on Wednesday was not of significance to the investigation, however it is also being analysed in Sydney. Hello gang! First – a big thanks to Matilda (if you haven’t already, go and watch her TikTok on the VIC pandemic bill – it’s a ripper). What a morning it’s been. I am going to take you through the rest of Friday’s news. First up, I want to point you towards this piece by Brigid Delaney, who muses on how house prices are getting in the way of us living our best lives: With that, I shall hand you over to the amazing Cait Kelly who will see off the week of news with you. Love you! Bye! New Zealand has recorded 198 new cases of Covid-19 in the community, across eight regions, bringing the total in the current outbreak to 6532 cases. A weak positive test has also been recorded in Wellington, and investigations are under way to ascertain if it is an historical case, or the person is in the early stages of the virus. Of Friday’s cases, 46 are outside of Auckland – 30 in Waikato, five in Northland, six in the Bay of Plenty, two in Lakes, and one each in MidCentral, Wairarapa and Canterbury. There are 76 people in hospital, and six in intensive care. The ministry of health says Auckland district health board is on track to reach 90% double vaccination today, making it the first region in the country to hit the milestone. Of the total eligible population over 12 years old, 91% have now had at least one dose of the Pfizer vaccine, and 82% are fully inoculated. Marshall closes the media conference by reaffirming that South Australia is “good to go on Tuesday next week” for the borders reopening. Now, speaking of the SA border announcement, it is a little confusing, but as far as I can tell here is what the new border rules are: From Tuesday the same border rules will apply to all of Australia. The conditions of entry are as follows: You must be double vaccinated, under 12 or have a medical exemption. You must complete an entry check before travelling. Your LGA must have a double vaccination rate about 80% If your LGA has a vaccination rate of 80%-90%, you must test negative before travelling. If your LGA has a vaccination rate above 90%, you must get a Covid-19 test within 72 hours of arriving. Now, this isn’t just a critique of Steven Marshall – as every single incumbent politician under the sun is doing this week – but gosh “my message is to go get vaccinated” is being used as a crutch when asked questions they don’t want to answer. Marshall: South Australians care about keeping our state safe, care about the jobs, not one person asked about what’s going on in the state parliament .... they are concerned about their lives, their jobs, their futures, they are looking very bright. My strong message is to go and get vaccinated. Marshall has reduced the parliamentary committee fining his deputy premier, planning minister and attorney general, Vickie Chapman, and a vote of no confidence being passed again her, to “political shenanigans”, which is ... bold. My focus today is on health, your focus is on the political shenanigans in parliament. The people of South Australia want to see South Australia do well. They want to see those borders open ... and that we are delivering. Marshall’s line on the Chapman situation this morning appears to be “well Labor did it too” Reporter: How can the government continue to operate if something is found to have misled the government? Marshall: You couldn’t script this kind of hypocrisy before. There was a clear no-confidence vote against Ian Hunter. He was defended and was voted to stay parliament. Reporter: How can South Australians have confidence that our government can run appropriately if somebody can be found to mislead the house? Marshall: I will make the point that we continue to pass legislation yesterday and are getting on with what is important to the people of South Australia, opening up borders, keeping our economy moving in the right direction and keeping South Australia safe. That is what I am focused on and I will leave the Labor party and some members of the crossbench that want to play political games, I don’t think anybody in South Australia cares about that*. What they want is for our economy to continue to move ahead. We have more people employed in South Australia than ever before in the history of South Australia. That is my job. Keeping employment height and making sure we can keep our state safe. *Fact Check: lots of people in South Australia care about this. OK, on to the Vickie Chapman situation, which you can get up to speed on here, and SA premier Steven Marshall has been asked if he intends to ask the deputy premier for her resignation. Absolutely not. I have made myself extraordinary clear on the issue of Vickie Chapman for weeks and weeks and weeks. She has 100% support. Reporter: Is it appropriate for the governor to be called in? Marshall: The governor takes advice from the executive council and me as the premier and I won’t be issuing any advice to remove Vickie Chapman. She does an outstanding job in South Australia. She enjoys my 100% support. Reporter: If you are not going to say to remove, what advice is she going to get? Marshall: I am not going to provide any advice in regards to Vickie Chapman. Her excellency does an outstanding job, she was a former high-ranking diplomat. She is adequately to our consideration of many strategic issues. Vickie Chapman is not one of them. Byron Bay will not be included in this SA border reopening just yet, as they have not reached the 80% double vaccination rate. Marshall: But Byron Bay is below 80 and sitting at around 78- 79. They could get there by Tuesday, which would be great. But all the others are somewhere between 80%-100%. Some have very high vaccination base. That won’t be a requirement for testing the people coming from those LGAs that have got above 90%. That’s why we have this check-in app that will make very simple for people. However, to enter South Australia you must be double vaccinated, fill out an entry check, and you must be coming from an LGA with a double vaccination rate above 80% (I’m just trying to clarify for you if this is for the 16 and over, or 12 and over vaccination level.) Marshall: If you’re in an LGA between 80% and 90%, you have to do a test before you go and, when you are arriving, when it is 90%, a large proportion of the country, you will have to do the test within 72 hours. Reporter: Is that just people from NSW and Victoria that will have to apply for an exemption? Marshall: All states will have to use the entry check. We are allowing people to come in from some states without any vaccination but that stops as of Tuesday. Next week, it is wonderful right across the country. If you want to come to South Australia, you have to be fully vaccinated. That goes for South Australians wanting to leave the state and to come back in, they need to be double vaccinated. The SA premier is speaking now, but before we get to the whole “my deputy premier has just had a vote of no confidence passed against her” thing, Steven Marshall has some BIG news about the borders; they will be opening to all states, including Victoria and NSW, from Tuesday. The good news is, all of Victoria is now above 80% and all of New South Wales apart from one LGA is now also above that 80% vaccination rate. Only the Byron Bay LGA remains below the 80%, they are just a below 80%, we hope they get to the 80%, but this has caused enormous frustration for people who haven’t been sure regarding whether they can come in from next Tuesday or not. The good news is that’s all been clarified now and, as of next Tuesday, we are good to go, those borders will, and people will be able to come into South Australia. We’re the first jurisdiction in the entire country that is Covid free and lifting borders. There are some risks associated and that is what we are putting these speed humps in the way of the disease taking hold in South Australia. We are doing that because we want to see those vaccination rates climb higher and as we said before, we are keen to get that to 90% as quickly as possible. That offers the ultimate protection for our state. Morrison has declined to comment on the disappearance of Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai, who has not been heard from publicly since she alleged on social media that a former vice-premier of China, Zhang Gaoli, had sexually assaulted her. Morrison: I’ve seen some reports on that. I can’t make any further comment on it on the basis that I haven’t received any additional briefings from our agencies on these matters so I don’t think that it would be helpful to add any commentary on that when I’m not familiar with all of the details. But those reports are, of course, anyone in that situation, based on superficially on the reports that we’ve seen, that would be a cause for concern. You can read more about the unfolding Shuai situation below: On that note, NSW actually even decided to move some freedoms for vaccinated people forward in exchange for pushing back the date that unvaccinated residents could enjoy the same set of rules. Here is Dominic Perrottet’s response to a reporter pointing out that Victorians are now enjoying more freedoms than their NSW counterparts. Perrottet: We can compare this and compare that. Ultimately, we’ve always been here in NSW about leading the way. The reality is that there are very little restrictions or very little difference between two square metres and no limit. As the prime minister said – I don’t like restrictions as much as anyone else. I want to get government out of the way. We primarily believe in freedom and that is a core part of Liberal party philosophy and we had to put restrictions in to keep our people safe. Everyone has done an amazing job, particularly in NSW, in going out, getting vaccinated and now we can open up. We’ve led the way on bringing back schools. I’m not going to get compared to Victoria when they’ve had more days in lockdown than probably anywhere else in the world. What we’ve done in NSW is get the balance right. We haven’t always got it right. It’s difficult to make some of these decisions. But we’ll continue to lead, particularly on Chris’s question in relation to schools. We’re looking at that. We want to make that as easy as possible and we want to get government out of the way. And by December 15, in this state, almost every single restriction will be lifted. The kinda awkward thing about this press conference is Scott Morrison is condemning (Labor) state governments over the continued use of Covid-19 restrictions and laws that differentiate the vaccinated from the unvaccinated. But here’s the thing, he is standing next to NSW premier Dominic Perrottet whose state ALSO has many of those same laws, and in fact, as of this morning, has slightly stricter laws than Victoria. Reporter: States like NSW and Victoria still have some restrictions on the unvaccinated but we have the highest vaccination rates in the country. Do you support restricting the unvaccinated for some time? Morrison: What I particularly welcome here in NSWs, and I welcome it also in Victoria, is that they’re setting dates for when government steps back. I think that’s fair and reasonable. They have to make decisions in accordance with their public health interests. But they’ve got to be able to, as they have done here in NSW, given business and Australians the clear signal that this is not something that they want to continue doing. And this has to come to an end and governments have to step back. Governments have to start letting go of all of the controls on people’s lives. And I know, particularly the Labor party likes interfering in people’s lives. They like putting up people’s taxes. They like governments controlling with more regulation. I get all that! That’s what they do. That’s not what we like to do. And so there’s a difference of view in that. A reporter has asked the prime minister if he, like many Australians, have “had a gutful” if anti-vaxxers. Morrison: I am the prime minister that actually recommended that we should introduce mandatory vaccines for aged care workers. And I’ve got to tell you – it took me some months, some months, as you’ll recall, for all the state governments to back me in on that and put in the mandatory vaccines for the aged care workers. For many months, I was saying go out there and get the AstraZeneca vaccine. I wasn’t the one talking down the AstraZeneca vaccine. Others were doing that. I was standing up for the vaccination program and Australia, today, has one of the highest rates of vaccination anywhere in the world. But we didn’t have to do it by bribing people. We didn’t have to do it by saying that we’re going to pay you to do it. And our position on mandatory vaccines extended only to those who are working in the health sector – particularly those working with the most vulnerable of Australians – in aged care, in disability, working in emergency wards. That’s where we said that the mandatory should be in place. We said in the rest of the economy, that should be up for businesses to decide. It’s their business and they can decide these issues. We don’t think that government should be telling them who should come in and out of their business. Reporters continue to press the prime minister on his views on the Victorian protests. Reporter: And putting gallows in front of the Victorian state parliament? Morrison: And that’s appalling. Reporter: So you have sympathy for their frustration but not their actions, is that what you’re saying? Morrison: I think that you’re making an assumption that the frustration that Australians feel is only limited to a small group of people who have engaged in violence and threats and intimidation and have worked against the vaccination program. I have no sympathy with that agenda. But for the broader view of Australians who have done the right thing and got vaccinated, and want to come together again and want their lives back and want governments to stop telling what to do and them stepping forward in their own future. That’s the cause I have sympathy with. Reporter: Is it fair to say that you have sympathy? Morrison: I have sympathies for Australians who have had a gutful of governments telling what to do over the last two years and I think that they have been very clear on keeping their side of the deal. And they’ve kept their side of the deal in getting vaccinated ... here in New South Wales, and in Victoria, where I welcome, absolutely, of course, the restoration of the freedoms that have been put there today for Victorians. I think that’s fantastic. That’s what should be happening. Australians have done their part. It’s now time for them to be able to step forward with their lives and for governments to step back out of their lives. That’s what Liberals believe. That’s what Nationals believe. I know the Labor party has a different view about that. And they will seek to attack us on these issues. That’s fine. That’s politics. Reporter: Why did you express sympathy for the protesters? Morrison: As I said, I completely and totally and continue to denunciate any violence, any threat, any intimidation. And any suggestion that I have not done that is completely false. I have been completely clear on that issue. What I’m also very clear about is our national plan. What I’m also very clear about is it’s important that governments keeps their side of the deal. Reporter: Do you have sympathy for the demonstrators? Morrison: I don’t have sympathy for violence. I don’t have sympathy for intimidation or threats whatsoever. And on those issue, then, of course not. And as I have encouraged people not to participate in that, including those who would number themselves among Liberal party ranks. I said absolutely they shouldn’t be participating in any violence – and any suggestion that I would is blatantly absurd. Morrison has defended his comment’s yesterday saying he “couldn’t have been clearer”* on denouncing threats of violence, before again reaffirming the need for state premier’s to relax restrictions for the unvaccinated. I was very clear yesterday in denounciating [sic] any violence, threats or intimidation. That is a plight against anyone. And we have absolutely no truck with that whatsoever. I couldn’t have been clearer about denounciating [sic] the violence and the threats and the intimidation. They have no place in Australia’s public policy debate whatsoever. Whatsoever. I have consistently said all the way through that there is a deal with Australians. And that deal with Australians, we said, and particularly as we saw here in New South Wales – we said “Come forward and get vaccinated”. Victorians did that. In the ACT, they’ve done that. And in Queensland and Western Australia, we’re increasingly seeing that. And I said, when we get vaccinated, when we hit those marks that have been set by the scientific experts at 80%, that’s when Australians expect governments to step back and for them to step forward. And that is my government’s view. I’m going to keep the deal with Australians. I’ve been saying this consistently ever since I put the national plan together and got all of the states and territories to agree with it and we’re going to keep going with that plan. Australians have earned that. They’ve kept their part of the deal. I ensure you that I intend to keep mine. *Fact check: He probably could have been clearer. OK, there is LOTS of airport talk happening at this joint Scott Morrison/Dominic Perrottet press conference, so I might duck back in once journalists start on questions about Morrison’s controversial comments yesterday. Morrison: I welcome the fact that just like here in New South Wales, in Victoria, they are walking into some new freedoms today. And I want to congratulate the people of Victoria for pushing through, for getting vaccinated, for keeping their side of the deal, and ensuring that now, they are walking into the fact that this Christmas, they can all get around the same table. And on New Year’s Eve just like here in New South Wales, they’ll be celebrating going into a 2022 that is going to secure Australia’s economic recovery under the sound economic management that our government is well known for. Victoria’s deputy opposition leader, Peter Walsh, has released an extremely low key statement in response to the government’s deferral of the pandemic bill. The Victorian government yesterday passed a motion to postpone the vote after attorney-general Jaclyn Symes called for it to be made an urgent bill on Tuesday. Walsh said it was a “desperate” decision to shut down debate: It comes two days after the Labor government went against normal procedure to use an urgency provision to force the start of debate. Daniel Andrews is willing ride roughshod over the parliament and democratic processes. The premier is attempting to deliver himself a blank cheque to lock people down, shut businesses and bring communities to a standstill ... Labor’s bill also attempts to enshrine in legislation that the premier of the day doesn’t need to be transparent or accountable to the parliament, with no mechanism for oversight on decisions made after a pandemic is declared. This legislation will hand the government greater powers and greater control over Victorians. It must be defeated. The Coalition has vowed to repeal the bill if elected next year. If no version of the bill is passed by 15 December, the state of emergency will lapse, potentially placing the government in a situation where they won’t be able to enforce public health orders like mask-wearing and quarantine. Scott Morrison, decked out in high-vis and hard hat, is speaking from the western Sydney airport construction site, and has once again hammered home the need for Australia to enter its Covid-normal era. People who are working here, to create the future not just of western Sydney but Australia’s future, right here in western Sydney. The Australian economy is taking off. That’s what’s happening as we come out of this pandemic. We can’t take our economic recovery for granted. We have to secure that economic recovery. Australians have pushed through in this pandemic. Australians have kept up their side of the deal. We have had one of the lowest fatality rates through Covid of almost any country in the world. We have had one of the strongest economic performances through the pandemic of any developed advanced economy in the world. I particularly want to congratulate those in New South Wales and Victoria and the ACT. We have one of the highest vaccination rates of any country in the world. Now, Australians have pushed through to achieve this. And now, what we have to do is secure that economic recovery. That’s what’s at stake. Wow. I have whiplash! Now the prime minister is speaking from another press conference in NSW! Albanese: The PM wants to claim credit at times for vaccination rates but oppose all the measures that have been in place to lift those vaccination rates. The prime minister of course failed to secure enough supply of vaccines, and then has gone about engaging in the word games he played yesterday. The prime minister needs to clearly and unequivocally condemn the threats of violence that have been made by demonstrators. They have no place in Australian political life. They have no place in the context whereby a range of ministers who I have spoken to, and premiers, have had to shut offices and have security upgraded. Can I say this as well, in the wake of the murder of a British MP, I certainly had discussions with the appropriate government ministers about security for members of parliament. It is beyond comprehension that the prime minister seems incapable of putting forward a clear and unequivocal condemnation of the threats without then seeking to qualify that condemnation. This Albanese speech is very much a laundry list of Morrison’s recent (and not so recent) scandals: And I ask people to think about this. When women marched on Canberra for the March for Justice as a result of issues relating to Brittany Higgins and the alleged assault of a staff member of the government in a ministerial office, the prime minister spoke about March for Justice by standing up in parliament and saying it was lucky they were not met with bullets. When people marched on the Victorian parliament with gallows, threatening people ... he spoke about how he understands people’s frustration. I ask people to think about that, and whether that represents the leadership that this country needs. This prime minister also spoke about choice. Well, it is a bit rich coming from a guy who went to Cobargo after the bushfires that devastated this community here in the Blue Mountains as well and forced people to shake his hand. This is a government that has mandated and had compulsion over a range of issues in industrial relations across the board, and a government that continues to have that approach on a range of issues. The truth is that state governments have continued to place restrictions, Liberal and Labor, across the country, to keep residents in their states and territories safe. I haven’t been critical of any of those state governments, including the restrictions that have been placed on people here in NSW. Anthony Albanese is speaking from NSW now, condemning Scott Morrison’s lukewarm condemnation of the threats of violence from Victorian protesters. What I find extraordinary is the prime minister’s performance yesterday. The prime minister yesterday failed to unequivocally condemn the violent and extreme statements that we have seen outside the Victorian parliament that consisted of explicit threats against Premier Andrews and other ministers in the Victorian government that included people going along with gallows, speaking about hanging people, and wanting to see people on the end of a noose. When he made some statements saying that was inappropriate, but then went on to speak about people’s frustrations, he only put the second bit up on his Facebook post. Thereby eliminating any criticism of this activity. Police forensic teams searching for the remains of William Tyrrell are pumping a small creek near bushland and a home they have been focusing on as part of their revived search for the missing boy. On the fifth day of the new search, police have pumped a creek just off Batar Creek Road in Kendall – the town on the mid north coast of New South Wales where then three-year-old William went missing from his foster grandmother’s home in 2014. Police will search the creek bed today for evidence, and will also continue searching a larger patch of bushland about 1km from the Kendall home. While teams used specialist ground penetrating radar technology to search under concrete in the homes garage on Thursday, and looked in the garden earlier in the week, police are now focussing their search efforts on nearby bushland. Rural Fire service volunteers are helping police clear trees, and together with forensic specialists, cadaver dogs, excavators and electronic sifting machines, detectives are searching for any evidence related to William’s disappearance. Dozens of officials are working on the search on Friday, with tarpaulin laid over the ground overnight to protect the area from rain. The investigation is now understood to be considering whether William might have died after falling from the balcony of the foster grandmother’s house. No Covid for Queensland party people! Finance minister Simon Birmingham has told Sky News that he “wouldn’t be surprised” if Labor state premiers and the leader of the opposition had coordinated their attacks on the prime minister via group chat. No one has been convicted or fined under laws passed soon after the Christchurch shootings aimed at preventing depictions of terror attacks being distributed online, authorities admit, but they say the threat of prosecution has helped reduce such content. After the massacre of 50 Muslim worshippers in New Zealand, which was live-streamed on Facebook and shared across the internet in March 2019, the Australian government quickly passed the Sharing of Abhorrent Violent Material (AVM) bill. The law created new offences for content service providers and hosting services for failing to notify the Australian federal police about, or fail to expeditiously remove, videos depicting “abhorrent violent conduct”. That conduct is defined as videos depicting terrorist acts, murders, attempted murders, torture, rape or kidnapping. You can read the full report below: Former deputy chief medical officer Dr Nick Coatsworth has come under fire this morning for tweeting that “the saddest thing about the [prop] gallows” that were displayed by protesters outside the Victorian house of parliament was that is allowed those in support of the “bad legislation” to deflect away from actually debating the pandemic powers bill. An investigation into the disappearance of a three-year-old boy, who spent days lost and alone in rugged bushland before he was discovered metres from his rural NSW home, has chalked the incident up as “misadventure”, reports AAP. Anthony “AJ” Elfalak, who has autism and is non-verbal, went missing from his family’s sprawling property at Putty about 11.45am on 3 September. More than 130 people scoured the property, with volunteers helping police on foot and on dirt bikes. The boy was spotted sitting in a puddle drinking muddy water from a creek on 6 September after surviving three nights in the bush in temperatures as low as 3C. His relieved family, who feared he had been abducted, were amazed to find he had only minor injuries such as scrapes, nappy rash, and ant bites. Police at the time said they would continue to investigate the incident, with NSW police superintendent Tracy Chapman saying: “I know everyone has lots of questions.” In a statement on Friday, a NSW police spokesperson said the probe had concluded after two months. The incident has been determined to be as a result of misadventure. Most remaining Covid restrictions in Victoria have now been removed for those who are fully vaccinated, with the state about to hit its 90% vaccinated target. Just about all restrictions will come off, including capacity and density requirements in a wide variety of venues, but only for those who are fully vaccinated. Josh Taylor breaks down what the rules will look like in Victoria from Friday. More from the backdoors of Victorian parliament: The Sheffield Shield cricket match between Victoria and NSW, due to start today, has been delayed after a Victorian player possibly tested positive to Covid-19. A spokesperson for Cricket Australia said player Will Sutherland has returned an inconclusive Covid-19 test which “requires further analysis”. The Victorian side is isolating until more is known. Victoria is once again in excess of 1,000 daily cases with 1,273 new infections recorded overnight. Sadly eight people with Covid-19 have died in the latest reporting period. Former Liberal leader John Hewson has joined Labor veteran Barry Jones to endorse a social media-focused advocacy campaign targeting Scott Morrison’s record on integrity matters and climate action in the lead-up to the federal election. Hewson says the voluntary not-for-profit organisation, the Truth and Integrity project, has some crossover with Climate 200 – an organisation supporting independent candidates focused on the climate crisis to challenge Liberal incumbents in their urban heartland – and with the “voices” community groups modelled on the successful 2013 campaign of independent Cathy McGowan. The integrity project, modelled in part on the Lincoln project in the United States, will not field political candidates, but will target its advocacy through content produced for social media. One of the people involved in the campaign is Australian film producer Bob Weis. You can read the full report below: NSW has recorded 216 new Covid-19 cases in the latest reporting period. Sadly three people infected with Covid-19 have died. Here’s a Friday thought bubble: Financial markets and the weather are often treated very separately, and yet they are inextricably linked. For one thing, computing power has increasingly replaced manual estimations of what’s coming made by people (usually men) with pencils. Every day news bulletins tell us how the Dow ended or the Australian dollar is trading, and yet few of us are actively trading in either (especially when Covid trapped us in our nations). Weather typically has a much greater influence on how we are going to live our lives today and plan for the weekend, for instance, than financial details that usually precede the meteorological take for the day. And weather – particularly the accumulation of it that we know as climate – has critical impacts on our ability to go about our normal lives, access water in the right amounts, avoid heatwaves and grow our food. That extreme events are going to increase in intensity, duration and frequency because we are energising our atmosphere with greenhouse gases should only increase our interest in weather, and how it will affect our lives and our economies. So this morning, for instance, if you live in eastern Australia and particularly in NSW, the weather should be of extra interest. We’ve had months of relatively wet weather over large parts of inland Australia, particularly in NSW. It didn’t take a big rain event to cause major flooding on the Lachlan River, for instance, and there’s more to come this weekend, and a few days later. You can read more about it here: What struck me, among other things is the Burrendong Dam, a major dam west of Sydney, is sitting at 129% as of Thursday. Also of interest is Warragamba, Sydney’s main dam (about 80% of the city’s total capacity – an unusually high ratio) is at 100% too and authorities are using their minimal capability to lower the height by about 1m to create “airspace” ahead of the weekend rain. Now, the big rain may go further south, and miss Warragamba’s catchment. But the difference between 50 and 100mm over the rain days could mean a small spill or a bit of a bigger one. We’re not looking at a repeat of March’s floods around Sydney, but with a wetter than usual summer predicted, dam operators are going to be taking every chance to create “airspace” when they can. Anyway, back to the markets. Nothing much happened overnight, no major news, and no big stats expected in Australia, China or the US. As you were. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, has also been on Sunrise this morning, where he was asked if he felt the prime minister’s comments were “giving anti-vaxxers free rein” as others have suggested. “I have not come on your program this morning to have an argument with the prime minister,” Andrews said, about to have an argument with the prime minister. “But I will say this”: He is right to say that we [the government] have been in people’s lives. We have had lockdowns, we have had to do some extraordinary things. This is a one in 100-year event. Why did we have lockdowns? Because we did not have a vaccine. Who forgot to order the vaccine? It wasn’t state premiers. I do not need to be lectured by Scott Morrison about these issues. When Victorians stick together, we can achieve anything. And that is what we have done. 90+ percent double dose. It is a bit rich from the prime minister from Sydney and all too often for Sydney* to be lecturing people about freedom. We have done the hard yards because there was not a vaccine. If there have been a vaccine earlier, when the virus came from Sydney this year, we would not have had needed to lock down. Anyway, it is not about quarrels between politicians and I do not have time to be arguing with the prime minster. And frankly, I don’t want anything, whether it is violent extremism or doublespeak from the prime minister, I don’t want that to take away from the amazing thing Victorians have done. *Oooooft! You know things are getting serious when “Sydney” is used as a derogatory term. If you are keen to figure out what all this uproar in Victoria over the pandemic powers bill is actually about, can I suggest our Guardian TikTok explainer to get you up to speed. All the basics in 122 seconds! The Victoria premier has accused the prime minister of “double-speaking to extremists” after Scott Morrison stated yesterday that he “understood the frustrations” of the protesters in Victoria, despite some demonstrations including a prop gallows and threats to hang Daniel Andrews. (The prime minister did condemn the threats of violence, but many felt he did not go far enough.) On the Today show the premier was asked by Karl Stefanovic: Have you had to increase security and is your family OK? Andrews: Look, my family is OK. They are used to some of the difficult part of this job but this job is a great great honour. This is job is challenging, this is a one in 100 year event. I am not about to go through the double speak. If others choose to do that, that is on them. Stefanovic: That is a fair slight at the PM chasing those votes. Andrews: I’m here to be as frank and as clear as I possibly can, be as I hope you’d credit me every time I come on your show, Karl. I am not here to treat you like you’re French, mate. I am here to say it like I know it to be. Host Allison Langdon: How is your relationship with the prime minister at the moment, premier? Andrews: It will be a lot better when he stops double speaking to extremists. OK, jumping back to South Australia where opposition leader Peter Malinauskas has condemned the premier’s decision not to dismiss his deputy premier and attorney general Vicky Chapman after the parliament passed a vote of no confidence against her. Malinauskas told ABC News Breakfast that this was “a truly extraordinary state of affairs, if not a constitutional crisis”. It’s an incredibly unfortunate state of affairs in South Australia where premier Steven Marshall has decided to almost literally tear up the rulebook of convention that’s been established over hundreds of years of the Westminster system of government and ignore the parliament’s will [for him to] ask Vickie Chapman to resign her position at deputy premier. There’s been a motion of no confidence passed in the deputy premier. This is unprecedented. Everybody seems to be putting their fingers in their ears and pretending nothing has happened, particularly the premier himself. This means that today or some point in the next few days, there is everybody possibility that her excellency, the governor, is likely to be put in the rather awkward position that she receives advice that the parliament has lost confidence in Vickie Chapman but at the same time being told by the premier that she has done nothing wrong. It’s a truly extraordinary state of affairs, if not a constitutional crisis. Andrews has been asked if he accepts and understands the frustrations being expressed over the new proposed pandemic power legislation. What I accept and what I’ve always defended and been a very strong supporter of is people’s right to protest. But if it’s not peaceful, it’s not protest and it’s something very different. We have seen extremists, rabid anti-vaxxer and others making all sorts of threats, threats against me, my wife and my kids. That is not my focus, this is about every family’s safety and that’s why we have to work together and that’s what Victorians have done. But you have to call it out. When you see this sort of appalling behaviour, nothing is less democratic than driving around – wheeling around a set of gallows out the front of Parliament House. That’s wrong. And it should be called out. Not just for my family, for every family. If Victorians were listening to these rabid extremist anti-vaxxers, then we wouldn’t be standing here today talking about the fact that 90% of Victorians have done what I say is the right thing, got vaccinated. We are not divided by this issue. We are united by it. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews. is also out and about this morning and has hit back at the prime minister’s comments that he understood the frustrations on the (sometimes threatening) protesters in Victoria and the suggestion that premiers should be stepping back from people’s lives. On the Today show, Andrews was asked if he thinks those comments from the PM were a “dig” at him. It’s not a matter of having a dig at state governments. You are having a dig at hard-working people who have got vaccinated. We have had to do lockdowns, as the prime minister said, we had to be in people’s lives because there were no vaccines. And who forgot to order the vaccines? It wasn’t the state governments, so it’s a bit rich to get lectures and it’s rich to take the attention away from every person who deserves it –and that everyone who deserves it – and that everyone who has been vaccinated. They should be the focus today and every day. Victoria’s shadow treasurer, David Davis, has come under fire for last week addressing anti-pandemic powers bill protesters, which have since taken on more violent and threatening rhetoric. He has gone on ABC radio this morning to discuss his position on the demonstrations. MPs have got to be able to engage with their community and people from every walk of life. We can’t be in a position where you can’t talk to people. We’re in a position where some of the demonstrators have gone too far and we’ve been critical of those steps ... But right across the nation ... there are many people who are very unhappy with the mismanagement of the pandemic. The parliament is asserting itself, saying no, we’re actually going to take back control from Daniel Andrews and we’re going to put him on a very short leash because he can’t be left in a position where he can exercise these powers. In case you missed it yesterday, the South Australian parliament passed a motion of no confidence in the deputy premier, Vickie Chapman, for misleading statements over her refusal of a Kangaroo Island development application, reports Max Opray from AAP. With 23 MPs voting in favour and 22 against, the vote marks the first time in South Australian history a no-confidence motion has been passed in the lower house against a minister. The motion secured the support of four crossbenchers, with former Liberal MP Fraser Ellis abstaining from the vote. Labor MP Stephen Mullighan moved the motion, declaring that Chapman “must resign” after an inquiry found she repeatedly misled parliament about conflicts of interest. She now is tainted, she now has a proven reputation for misleading this house, and we can no longer have confidence in her for this reason. Labor MP Andrea Michaels earlier tabled the parliamentary committee’s final report into Ms Chapman’s rejection in August of a $40m timber port on Kangaroo Island, describing her denials of conflicts of interest as “Trumpesque at best”. Blatant denialism of objective evidence and plain truth does the attorney-general no favour. Premier Steven Marshall spoke against the motion, pointing to a dissenting report by Liberal MPs that cleared Chapman. A lot of bluff, a lot of bluster from those opposite, but no cognisant argument that would support this motion. [Chapman] enjoys my 100% confidence. The parliamentary committee found Chapman, who is planning minister and attorney general, should be suspended from parliament for nine days and make a public apology. Chapman and her family have long held property on Kangaroo Island, but she told the committee she had no personal interest in any business or industry. The report highlighted Chapman’s denial of a pecuniary interest when rejecting the timber port, given it would have led to increased truck movements near a property she owned that was being used periodically as an Airbnb. The committee also found Chapman had misled parliament by falsely claiming “there is no proposed route past [Kangaroo Island mayor Michael Pengilly’s] house for loads of trucks”, when in fact the route passed next to the property of the mayor, who is a close personal friend of the attorney-general. Representing Chapman, Frances Nelson QC had argued the idea that “trucks passing proximate to a property owned by her is somehow influencing her decision is again simply ludicrous”. Michaels said Nelson’s submission sought “to promote the attorney general’s private agenda at best”. Chapman’s rejection of the port came despite her department ruling the project could go ahead after an assessment found any environmental concerns could be managed. The committee was made up of two Labor MPs including Michaels, two Liberal MPs, and one independent, in Sam Duluk. The Liberals dissented. The committee also recommended legislative reforms be considered to address the fact a single decision maker was responsible for deciding the fate of a major development. In a dissenting statement, the committee’s Liberal MPs Peter Treloar and Matt Cowdrey rejected the findings of the report, arguing the department’s overturned recommendation was “finely balanced” and the attorney general complied with the ministerial code of conduct at all times. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, has dismissed the acting Chinese ambassador’s comments as “inflammatory” and “so silly it’s funny”. China’s acting ambassador to Australia, Wang Xining, told Guardian Australia the Aukus nuclear-powered submarine plan would result in Australia being branded as a “sabre wielder” rather than a “peace defender”. Wang also called on Australian politicians to “refrain from doing anything that’s destructive to our relationship” after Dutton signalled Australia would be likely to participate if the US came to Taiwan’s aid in a conflict with China. Dutton was asked to respond those aspects of the comments during the defence minister’s weekly appearance on Nine’s Today show this morning. He described the comments as inflammatory and said: We don’t see it from any other ambassador here in Australia. It’s quite remarkable. It’s not just in Australia, it’s in India, Japan, in most other countries in the world, this type of diplomacy, this provocative sort of comical statements – it’s so silly it’s funny. I think the acting ambassador is reading off a script from the Communist Party. I think most Australians see through the non-productive nature of the comments and they should be dismissed in that same vein. Read the full story here: Ummmmm so a warning to WA drivers this morning, if you are travelling along the Kwinana Freeway please watch out for ... *checks notes* ... horses? Yep, here is the warning I’ve just received from WA police. There are currently a number of horses on the Kwinana Freeway between Karnup Road and Mundijong Road in Baldivis. Police and owners from a local property are in attendance and attempting to retrieve the horses. Peter Dutton has placed the blame for Queensland’s slow vaccination uptake on the premier, who was a vocal critic of the suggestion that young people should take Astra-Zeneca early in the rollout. Here are his comments on the Today show this morning: The reason we are behind most other states in the country is because the premier went out and bagged AstraZeneca at a time when other premiers, including Labor premiers, weren’t. That’s what undermined us from the start and we’ve been well behind the pack for many months. Nothing to do with the comments of the prime minister over the last 24 hours. The prime minister has stated a perfectly reasonable position. You cannot segregate even a small part of Australian society and we want people to get vaccinated. He’s been very clear about that. But equally, you could say the premiers who have got a policy of a mandatory vaccination for every Queenslander or every Western Australian, at some stage if you’ve got that policy you’ve got to allow people to come back into society, you want them to be vaccinated, but there’s a small portion who will make a decision not to be. Yesterday the prime minister came under fire for two things. First, many felt that he did not go anywhere near far enough in his condemnation of the violent rhetoric coming out of the Victorian anti-pandemic powers bill protests; even going as far as to say that while there is no place in Australia for threatening the life of the Victorian premier he understood some of the protesters’ frustrations and said the government should take a step back from people’s lives. Secondly, he took aim at states with wide-ranging vaccinated economy laws, suggesting that, at 80%, an unvaccinated person in Brisbane should be allowed to get a cup of coffee. This has garnered significant pushback from the Labor, the Queensland premier and Western Australia’s Mark McGowan, with the prime minister accused of “dog-whistling” to anti-vax groups to garner support. The defence minister, Peter Dutton, has appeared on the Today show this morning and has been asked about his boss’s comments. And, oh no, he has busted out the “S-word”, “segregation”. Well, I wouldn’t buy the rhetoric of Mark McGowan or Annastacia Palaszczuk. I think the prime minister has made a perfectly sensible remark here. That is, that the states in the plan they’ve signed up to, the commitment they gave to the country is when we got to 80% double vaccination rate we would go back to having to live with this. That is the reality of where we are. For the premiers to say there’s a small portion, even though we don’t agree with their decision not to be vaccinated, a small proportion of society will never be able to go to a coffee shop or restaurant again but Annastacia Palaszczuk says they can go to Coles but not Bunnings, I just think you cannot segregate a part of the community, even if you disagree with the decision they’ve made and we are moving into a phase now where we have to live with this virus too. Good morning everyone and welcome to Friday! We finally made it! It’s Matilda Boseley here and let’s start the day talking about the new freedoms millions of Victorians awoke to this morning. Almost all of the state’s remaining Covid restrictions lifted just before midnight overnight, as the state quickly approaches 90% full vaccination for those aged 12 and over. There are no Covid-19 density limits for cafes, bars, restaurants or any other retail or hospitality setting. Dancefloors are back in action and the only limiting factor for how many people you can have over to your home is how popular you are. Non-essential retail has also joined the state’s vaccinated economy, banning unvaccinated and partially vaccinated people from visiting those shops unless they are aged under 12 years and two months or have a valid exemption. But the mask mandate isn’t completely gone just yet. While they will no longer be required for customers visiting hospitality venues, workers must continue wearing them. Masks will not be needed in workplaces such as offices but will be required in primary schools, health, aged care or justice settings. They must also be worn on public transport, ride-shares or taxis, and will remain for a few more weeks in retail. On the New South Wales mid north coast, the search for the remains of missing three-year-old William Tyrrell is entering its fifth day, as rain threatens to hamper search efforts, with showers and possible thunderstorms are forecast. On Thursday, Australian federal police officers brought in ground penetrating radar to scan a concrete slab at the Kendall property that belonged to the boy’s foster grandmother. William disappeared from the property seven years ago, but the slab was laid after that. However, the ABC reports that the slab has since been cleared. With that why don’t we jump into the day?Pick of the week Steve Jobs “Completely incompatible with anything.” What is true of the Apple Macintosh is also true of its designer, Steve Jobs, in Danny Boyle’s fascinating 2015 biopic of the computer magnate. Structured around three product launches – 1984 (Macintosh), 1988 (the NeXTcube, anyone?) and 1998 (iMac) – it exposes the insufferable yet visionary nature of Jobs through Aaron Sorkin’s rat-a-tat script and walk-and-talk dialogue. Michael Fassbender plays him with the right balance of self-preening and self-loathing, and Kate Winslet is also excellent as marketing executive Joanna Hoffman, acting as Jobs’s occasional conscience as he alienates friends, colleagues and his daughter. Sunday 21 November, Amazon Prime Video *** The Queen of Spades Director Thorold Dickinson only came on board this 1949 adaptation of a Pushkin story with five days’ notice, but you wouldn’t guess it from the meshing of its sumptuous design, expressionist camerawork and melodramatic acting. A supernatural period drama set in 1806 St Petersburg, it stars Anton Walbrook as a lowly army engineer who believes frail, old aristocrat Edith Evans knows the secret to winning a card game, and he’ll do anything to get it, including seducing her naive companion (Yvonne Mitchell). Saturday 20 November, 2.15pm, Talking Pictures TV *** Mad Max Although the second in the series has the edge in terms of junkyard vehicle design and carnage, George Miller’s 1979 original (at the time, the most profitable film ever made)set the template – and provided Mel Gibson with his star-making break. In a near-future Australia where society is on the verge of collapse, Gibson’s leather-clad cop pursues a murderous biker gang through the outback, at great personal cost. The Australian new wave would produce better films but none with such an enduring global impact. The first two sequels follow on Tuesday and Wednesday. Monday 22 November, 9pm, ITV4 *** Maurice EM Forster refused to publish the novel during his lifetime due to its then controversial depiction of homosexuality, and it was not until 1987 that James Ivory and Ismail Merchant managed to make this finely crafted film adaptation. Another of the director-producer duo’s opulent studies of the upper middle-class – all country houses and comfortable living – it follows the sexual awakening of James Wilby’s Maurice, initially falling in love with fellow Cambridge student Clive (Hugh Grant) but then struggling with his feelings, and their illegal status. Tuesday 23 November, 11.10pm, Film4 *** Bruised Halle Berry makes her directorial debut in this largely compelling drama, doubling up as its lead. She plays Jackie Justice, an alcoholic former UFC fighter who is drawn back into the mixed martial arts cage when she has to take care of the son she abandoned. Personal redemption through sporting success isn’t the most original of angles but this is clearly a passion project for Berry, and she keeps the mood downbeat and gritty, particularly in the fight scenes, which are convincingly brutal. Wednesday 24 November, Netflix *** Silent Running Douglas Trumbull’s 1972 sci-fi fable is – as you’d expect from the special effects master behind 2001: A Space Odyssey – a pleasure to just gaze at, but at the film’s heart is an environmental message that has survived its counterculture origins to become relevant today. Bruce Dern plays Freeman Lowell, a botanist on a spaceship that contains a biodome full of samples of Earth’s near-extinct plant life. When the order comes to destroy the dome, Lowell rebels (“They can’t blow up this forest!”), enlisting his three little robot helpers to ensure the survival of his precious green domain. Wednesday 24 November, 1pm, Horror Channel *** All the President’s Men Remember a time when the US president would resign over his misdemeanours in office? Alan J Pakula’s fact-based 1976 film now has a distinct nostalgic tinge to it, as Washington Post reporters Carl Bernstein (Dustin Hoffman) and Bob Woodward (Robert Redford) probe a break-in at Democrat party headquarters and the subsequent cover-up of their involvement by Richard Nixon’s White House. An all-too-rare cinematic representation of journalists as honest and diligent, expressed via the twists and turns of a first-rate thriller. Thursday 25 November, 10pm, BBC FourTragic is the only word to describe the downfall of Henry Ruggs III. The young wide receiver had dedicated his football career to Roderic Scott, his best friend who died in a car accident during high school. Ruggs honored his friend while announcing his college football commitment to Alabama in a heart-rending video partially filmed at Scott’s grave site. For it all to end with the 22-year-old killing a young woman in an early morning car crash while driving at speeds of up to 156 mph under the influence of alcohol makes you want to scream. The NFL and his now former team, the Las Vegas Raiders, surely warned him about how easy it is to get sucked into just such a nightmare during their mandatory rookie orientation sessions. But before the critics could pile on and spin Ruggs – who faces up to 46 years in jail –into yet another allegory of the perils of athletic entitlement, Derek Carr stepped into the firing line. Speaking to reporters at Las Vegas’ team facility, the Raiders quarterback choked up. He offered his condolences to the families involved, confessed the situation “broke my wife and I’s heart,” and blamed himself. (“I do sit back and think … did I not let him know that I’d be there for him at 3am?” he mused.) But no statement was quite as striking as Carr pledging his continued support for Ruggs. “He needs people to love him right now,” the quarterback said. “If no one else will do it, I’ll do it.” To say the Raiders season has been star-crossed takes some spunk in a city where luck is famously fickle. Still: just days after the release of Ruggs, who was seemingly on the verge of a career breakout, a video of cornerback Damon Arnette making death threats while waving a firearm surfaced on social media, prompting the team to cut him. And of course all of this started in October after the team’s head coach, Jon Gruden, resigned after emails in which he used racist, misogynistic and homophobic language became public. (Late last week Gruden said he plans to sue the NFL over the release of the emails.) It’s been a traumatic time for the other players on the team, the bulk of them innocent bystanders. Yet you can’t help but wonder how much worse for them it would be if the Raiders didn’t have Carr holding them together. And while his arm strength for that job remains beyond doubt – Carr rates among the NFL’s leaders in passing yards and completion percentage – it’s his character that stands out most. Given the way the season has spiraled, many ultra-competitive athletes like Carr – an eighth-year pro who seems as if he’s been playing to keep his job for the past three seasons – would have felt bitter or even hostile toward anyone who hampered their sporting success. But when the Gruden bombshell rocked him, Carr was quick to gather himself and say of the coach who openly flirted with the idea of drafting players to replace him in 2019, “I love the man [but] you hate the sin.” And lest you think Carr is having it both ways or, worse, just saying what he thinks folks want to hear, it’s good bet he’s rooting for Gruden’s lawsuit, too. “If we just started opening up everybody’s private emails and texts, people will start sweating a bit,” said Carr, who was building a home next door to the coach and paid Gruden a visit shortly after news of his departure broke. “Hopefully not too many, but maybe that’s what they should do for all coaches and GMs and owners from now on. You got to open up everything and see what happens.” After Ruggs threw his life away and with it a downfield connection that was just starting to develop between him and the QB, Carr was agonizing about the human toll of the crash rather than the sporting one. “I walked by and saw Henry’s locker today, and for whatever reason that got me,” Carr revealed. “Like, he’s not gonna be there. Not because he’s fast. Not because of what he could do for me. But because of the person that he is, and because I love him.” Indeed, it’s easy to see Carr as NFL’s patron saint of nuanced compassion. What’s more, he doesn’t hesitate to credit his unwavering sense of empathy to profound Christian faith and takes seriously his standing as a role model for devotion in action. But unlike other athletes who are forceful about spreading the gospel and perform their Christianity in public, or alienating others who don’t believe or live as they do, Carr reveals the power in understatement. And, unlike other athletes who have been hostile to the idea of sharing a locker room with a gay player, he dismissed anyone who might consider rejecting his Raiders teammate Carl Nassib, who earlier this year became the first active NFL player to come out. “We’re a family when we come in this building. We better treat him like such. And so, from my point of view, it’s been good,” said Carr. Nor does Carr make a big production of Tebowing before kickoff or offering thoughts and prayers or otherwise exerting any misguided sense of moral superiority. No, Carr just concedes, straight up, that life is complicated but he still has love to give and is sincere about how that dissonance can be emotionally paralysing at times. For a guy who makes his reputation with one arm, it’s an especially nifty two-hander in the age of cancel culture. Carr sets an enviable leadership standard. You might not agree with his religious beliefs or stomach his forgiveness for Ruggs and Gruden. But there’s a reason why his conviction is something to admire and, perhaps, even aspire to. And that’s because this pirate patron saint still somehow manages to come off as human no matter how minor or major the tragedy.Another day, another assault by this government on the very voters who gave it such a stonking majority. The change in social care subsidies in England, sneaked out under the shield of their own sleaze scandal, is a finely targeted strike on older, less affluent homeowners living in northern English seats. These are the very people Boris Johnson now likes to claim as his own. His manifesto promise, repeated time and again, was that people would not lose their homes through the unlucky “bolt from the blue” of needing care in old age. Well, now they will. With a new manipulation of the figures that create an £86,000 cap on care costs, the Treasury claws back some of its high cost – but all of it taken from those with less valuable assets. On the same day, another missile lands on his target voters: the northern rail promises hit the buffers – forget Bradford, forget Leeds. How reckless that in such a short time two key “red wall” promises Johnson made in 2019 have become serious electoral liabilities. All the attention has been on who should pay for social care, and how much. But that should be a sideshow, as it doesn’t touch the real catastrophe: lack of care, low standards and blocked NHS beds. Instead, Johnson only made a manifesto pledge on “catastrophic” costs to homeowners, because how much people leave in inheritances is a powerfully emotive electoral issue: inheritance tax is the most unpopular, by far. That’s why it raises too little, after decades of wildly escalating property values. The real crisis is the 1.5 million people denied enough care, people who would have received it in 2010, according to Age Concern. Frail people being left at home alone without support, as care is increasingly rationed, is the real “catastrophe”. So is the low quality of care: with 15-minute home visits, and the inadequacies in service provision found in Care Quality Commission inspections. The King’s Fund says many of these services never improve. Difficulty in recruiting staff may make improvement even harder. Wasn’t this all “fixed” with the £12bn national insurance rise – the increase the Conservatives called the health and social care levy? Despite that unfair NI burden on working-age people, only £5.4bn is destined for social care over the next three years, and £3.7bn of that is needed by councils, to cover the cost of the £86,000 care cap and extend the means test. After that’s taken into account, local authorities have only a 1.8% annual increase in spending power to cover each year’s rapidly accelerating number of the elderly and disabled people needing care, according to Simon Bottery, the King’s Fund’s social care analyst. Meanwhile, as the NHS crisis grows, Amanda Pritchard, the head of NHS England, joined the chorus of pleas this week from within the NHS for more social care provision. The lack of NHS beds, many occupied by people waiting for social care, causes blockages in A&amp;E, and the pile-up of ambulances we have seen outside hospitals. How many NHS beds are blocked? Conveniently, last year the government paused counting and publishing those figures. Remember that “oven-ready plan”? There is no social care plan, only a homeowners’ inheritance plan. There is no plan to reorganise the shambolic patchwork of care providers; so many understaffed, while others are in debt to private equity firms. With 100,000 vacancies in the sector, and the number growing, the Tories have no care workforce plan. We need a national care service, with pay and career paths integrated with the NHS. Here’s the political problem. Social care consumes more than 40% of English local authority spending, yet only 2% of their voters use it at any one time. Everyone hopes not to need it, few understand its fiendish complexity, but everyone with any assets now knows they risk paying out £86,000, plus £200 a week in living costs. That threat concerns many more voters than may ever pay it, which is why all the money has gone on saving inheritances, not on care. But what political ineptitude from Johnson to upset the very people he was supposed to soothe. Emotions about inheritance are not amenable to reason. The best plan was in Labour’s 2010 manifesto, and was designed to pool risk for everyone: the proposal was that everyone with assets would put in a relatively low lump sum upon retirement (about £20,000 in cash, or a lien on a property), and then everyone would receive decent free care if and when they needed it. The Tories killed it off as a “death tax”. But they have never put forward a plan for paying for social care – and there isn’t one now. Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnistThe health secretary, Sajid Javid, is facing questions over share options he continues to hold in the hi-tech US company he worked for until rejoining the cabinet in June – and which operates in the healthcare sector. Javid was paid the equivalent of £150,000 a year by C3.ai, a California firm specialising in artificial intelligence (AI), from October last year until he was given the job of health secretary. As part of his remuneration package, he was also given “an option for 666.7 shares per month”. According to the health secretary’s current entry in the register of MPs’ interests, he continues to hold these options, which he reports have a market value of approximately £45,000. The deputy Labour leader, Angela Rayner, has written to the prime minister’s ethics adviser, Lord Geidt, to ask him whether this represents a conflict of interest. “In September, the secretary of state’s department announced that the use of AI would shorten waiting lists in our NHS,” she wrote, suggesting the idea the Department of Health could spend taxpayers’ money on AI “could clearly be perceived as beneficial to an AI company”. The ministerial code states that “ministers must scrupulously avoid any danger of an actual or perceived conflict of interest between their ministerial position and their private financial interest”. Employee share options usually allow the recipient to buy a set number of shares at a predetermined price, sometimes on a particular future date. Their value fluctuates with the company’s share price, so they are used to give staff an interest in the company’s value appreciating. Details of when Javid’s options can be cashed in have not been published. C3.ai is a California-based tech firm which floated on the New York Stock Exchange in December 2020. Among nine industry sectors listed on its website, it includes “healthcare” and “government”. It has a UK subsidiary, and is now recruiting sales and marketing staff in the UK. Javid advised the firm on “the global economy, geo-politics and market opportunities”. The NHS was already increasing spending on AI before Javid arrived in post, but he recently highlighted its potential role in tackling health injustices. “Technology, particularly AI, can be an incredible force for good. It can save valuable clinician time and help provide faster, more accurate diagnosis, so patients can access the care they need as quickly as possible,” he said. “It can also help us better understand racial differences so we can train our workforce to look for different symptoms or complicating factors, diagnose faster, and tailor treatments.” Javid held the post at C3.ai alongside another advisory role, with US bank JP Morgan from August 2020 to June 2021, for which he was also paid the equivalent of £150,000 a year. He took up that role six months after resigning as chancellor. Javid previously worked for JP Morgan before entering parliament. Both of these jobs were cleared with the independent Advisory Committee on Business Appointments, which vets jobs for former ministers. A spokesperson for the Department of Health and Social Care (DHSC) said: “The secretary of state has acted in line with the ministerial code and has properly declared these share options in the usual way.” Aides suggested he had begun the process of divesting himself of the options when he became health secretary, but that the process was difficult because the market for share options is not very liquid. Javid unexpectedly became health secretary in June, when Matt Hancock resigned after being caught on camera in a clinch with Gina Coladangelo, a longtime friend who had been brought on to the DHSC’s payroll.Publishers are getting ready to celebrate the centenary of 1922, the year the world emerged from war and pandemic to become recognisably modern. It was then that James Joyce’s Ulysses and TS Eliot’s The Waste Land were published, the USSR and the BBC were established and Tutankhamun’s tomb was discovered. If this last example seems slight by comparison, it is worth remembering that the craze for Egyptian hieroglyphics fed directly into art deco, the visual style that is synonymous with the “roaring 20s” to this day. Nick Rennison has sensibly got in early, bringing out his Scenes from a Turbulent Year while other authors and publishers are still putting the finishing touches to their manuscripts. In this enjoyable slice of popular history, he assembles a month-by-month almanac, including all the most notable moments from science, politics, art and culture. It makes for some unlikely associations. So, for example, January 1922 saw the second trial of Hollywood comedy actor Fatty Arbuckle for rape and manslaughter, the first successful treatment of diabetics with insulin, the death of Ernest Shackleton in Antarctica and Edith Sitwell’s debut performance of Façade to William Walton’s score. (“Drivel,” snorted the critics of a work that would become a much-loved standard throughout the 20th century). Rennison lingers long enough on each entry to draw out its full resonance. So, for example, he explains why Shackleton’s death failed to bring about the popular outpouring of grief that had met the demise of his fellow explorer Captain Scott in 1912. The difference was that war had intervened, and the idea of plucky Englishmen going out to do risky things no longer carried the same thrill or pathos. It was simply one more sadness to add to all the others. Enormous fun is had with the scorn heaped on new literary works that would in time be recognised as gamechangers. Joyce’s Ulysses, with its stream of consciousness narrative and its sexual frankness, struck many critics with horror when it was first published in book form. The man from the Daily Express thundered that “our first impression is that of sheer disgust” and went on to imply that his second and third impression wasn’t much better either. Even Virginia Woolf, whom you might expect to be sympathetic to Joyce’s project of literary modernism, sniffed that the whole thing reminded her of “a queasy undergraduate scratching his pimples”. Rennison makes it clear that this book has been put together during the pandemic, which means he is reliant on existing printed and online sources. Still, there’s a certain pleasure to be had in knowing that Lord Mountbatten, married in July, called the beautiful Edwina’s breasts “Mutt” and “Jeff” or that the death of Alexander Graham Bell in August was met with all telephones in the US falling silent for a full minute. There is also a sobering lesson to be learned from the fact that the reporter from the New York Times felt confident telling his readers that a speech given by an obscure German agitator called Adolf Hitler clearly exaggerated the young man’s hatred of Jews in order to drum up popular support. In private life, the reporter suggested, Hitler’s antisemitism was “not so genuine or violent as it sounded”. • 1922: Scenes from a Turbulent Year by Nick Rennison is published by Oldcastle Books (£12.99). To support the Guardian and Observer order your copy at guardianbookshop.com Delivery charges may apply.While propping up the bar at a gaudy sex club on Mars, a rakish bounty hunter improbably named Spike Spiegel (John Cho) locks eyes with his current target: a murderous, anxious thief. The self-amused hero has an ice-cool opening line ready to go. “We can do this the easy way, or the fun way,” purrs Spiegel. The outcome involves a frantic foot chase, a rooftop fight and a memorable moment with a gigantic provocative billboard. Doing things “the fun way” seems to have been the mission statement for this live-action adaptation of a 1998 Japanese anime series, made with the blessing of its original creator Shinichirō Watanabe. But even if you were unaware of Cowboy Bebop’s animated origins it might not take long to twig that this 10-part series was inspired by an exuberant cartoon. The 2021 version is a fast-talking, visually amped-up space western that feels stylised and swaggering to near saturation, powered by the same jazz freakout soundtrack that helped make the original an enduring cult hit. It is set in a vibrant but messy sci-fi future, precariously built on top of the technological and pop-culture clutter of now. An unspecified disaster on Earth has pushed humankind out into the local cosmos, creating a new galactic frontier. There are space station casinos and gleaming cyberpunk cities but also countless rickety towns and dusty outposts on far-flung moons (the series was shot in New Zealand and often looks appropriately otherworldly). An excess of outlaws and ne’er-do-wells in these hardscrabble places has made bounty hunting a popular occupation. Freelance “cowboys” bring in villains – dead or alive – for a reward, just like in the old west. Spiegel is a gifted sharpshooter and martial arts master. His imposing partner Jet Black (Mustafa Shakir) is a tough-as-nails former cop with a metal arm. By rights, they should be elite bounty hunters. Yet, owing to bad luck and questionable personal decisions, the pair are constantly on the back foot. They struggle to keep their heads above water even before sharp-tongued rival Faye Valentine (Daniella Pineda) gatecrashes their clunky amphibious spaceship, the Bebop. Perhaps because of hunger, the mood on board the Bebop is usually irritable or sarcastic. The verbal fencing among the trio is almost manic – the ship’s breakout space even has a sitcom-ready scuffed yellow couch. But all three voyagers also have painful secrets that threaten to overwhelm the present. Spike has a complicated history with ashen-haired gang- enforcer Vicious (Alex Hassell) and songbird moll Julia (Elena Satine). Most episodes involve the Bebop crew chasing down larger-than-life criminals – including hardline eco-terrorists, killer clowns and a deranged bomber in an oversized teddy bear mask – with the prospect of a confrontation between the laconic Spike and the cruel Vicious bubbling just below the surface. Maintaining such a heightened, madcap tone is a high-wire act that relies on the charisma of the three leads. Shakir, formerly a menacing heavy in Netflix’s Luke Cage series, is gruff but convincingly big-hearted as the ex-cop who dotes over a daughter he rarely sees. Pineda’s Faye is an entertainingly dismissive motormouth who reveals emotional depths as the season unfolds. Both have excellent chemistry with Cho, an actor who radiated decency as Sulu in the recent Star Trek movies and uptightness in the Harold and Kumar franchise, but has rarely been given the chance to play the coolest person in the room. Here, he finds an insouciant, playful groove, and the commitment of his physical performance goes beyond hand-to-hand combat training. He has also mastered Spike’s languid anime gait, hands parked in the pockets of an angular blue suit that would not look out of place on a Duran Duran album cover. There is a fine tradition of futuristic shows inventing swear words, notably Battlestar Galactica’s “frak” and Firefly’s “gorram”. Cowboy Bebop sticks to more familiar curses. Such unvarnished swearing and occasional scenes of nudity mean that despite the poppy colours and energetic action, this is not a series that the whole family can watch (unlike The Mandalorian, that other tale of hunting bounties and forming ad hoc families on the fringes of civilisation). But it all adds up to an enjoyable feeling of anything-goes delirium. At a time when popular sci-fi has gone gritty and self-consciously “dark”, the caffeinated fever dream of Cowboy Bebop feels like a loving distillation of the original and a breath of fresh air. Cowboy Bebop is on Netflix from 19 November; the original anime can be streamed on Netflix, Amazon Prime and All 4In lockdown, the Chicago-based artist and composer Olivia Block began taking psychedelic mushrooms and listening with intent as a way to guide her composition. She used these sessions as both a music-making strategy and as a form of meditation on the pandemic: “The mushrooms helped me to listen somatically, pulling my ears towards low tonal patterns and the warped sounds of a broken Mellotron,” she said, describing the process as “an attempt to translate my emotions about this surreal and strange historical moment into sound”. However, the resulting album, Innocent Passage in the Territorial Sea, is not obviously psychedelic, but a deeply immersive ocean of sound, with watery, enveloping drones that ripple with a liquid tremolo and create patterns behind the eyes. During the same period, Block was reading Anna Kavan’s strange and snowy postapocalyptic fairytale Ice, and it helped frame the album as a soundtrack to the unmade film of this eerie novella. There’s possibly a whimsical link to be made here between mycelial networks – where fungi are connected to one another in underground systems – and the processing networks in synthesisers. More interesting is the way the layering of tones creates aural hallucinations, whereby an electronic tone conjures first singers, then a carillon of bells, making you do a double take as to its source material. It is music that anchors you – if my sea metaphor hasn’t gone too far – by encouraging you to picture what’s being played. Even without psychedelics the album has the power to produce vivid images in the mind’s eye when listened to at volume in a darkened room. It stands out among pandemic records because it is not escapist or cathartic, but looks to centre our psyches through listening. Also out this month Duval Timothy &amp; Rosie Lowe’s gorgeous new album, Son, comes from a shared love of choral music, where voices coalesce naturally into an abstract sort of storytelling. In parts, it reminds me of the narrative textures of Solange’s A Seat at the Table; in others, it’s like an evensong concert in a family kitchen. The instrument-building half of Indonesian duo Senyawa, Wukir Suryadi, has released an album of rhythmic and percussive pieces. Menolak Tunduk is ritual industrial music, made from electronic hardware and his self-built instruments. Finally, dream a little dream of hills and valleys via the pleasing software synth landscapes of Osaka-based Futoshi Moriyama, on his new album Yūtai-ridatsu ± (Plus-minus). This column’s regular author, John Lewis, is awayIt has been, says Tasneem Alonzo with a sigh, “really stressful”. She is the joint managing director of her family’s food business, EHL Ingredients, which imports and blends spices and seasonings for food manufacturers and wholesalers, along with nuts, fruit and dried legumes. As with much of the UK’s food production industry, workers from EU countries played a vital role in her company. In her warehouse, Alonzo employed a number of Polish, Romanian and Bulgarian people. “We lost quite a few, who went back home, and trying to replace good staff has been really difficult,” she says. “It puts more pressure on the existing staff. We have to do overtime and you just have to divide the work.” The business has managed to replace some staff, but there are still vacancies and it remains hard to fill them. She is keen to emphasise that it is not about EU workers being better than British ones – “we have some amazing British workers” – but even though she’s had to increase wages to attract people, she’s still struggling to get the right staff. Working in a spice warehouse is not an easy job, she says – staff have to understand allergens, blending spices can be messy and the smell can be strong. “We get lots of applications for jobs, but people don’t turn up for interviews, or turn up but don’t actually want the job.” There has always been an element of that, she says, “but it’s got a lot worse. I think that [the sector] should be paying more, but sometimes it’s not even about paying more – people just don’t want to do those jobs, because they’re hard.” Clare Bottle, chief executive of the UK Warehousing Association, estimates that there nearly 440,000 people work in warehousing. “We’re short of tens of thousands,” she says. While there has been a lot of publicity about a lack of HGV drivers, more than twice as many warehouse forklift truck drivers as HGV drivers were EU nationals, she adds. Some members of the association have had to increase pay by up to 30% to attract new staff; demand at this time of year is traditionally high as retailers prepare for Black Friday and Christmas. Such factors are “especially marked this year”, says Bottle, “because there’s been an increase in e-commerce, and the work required in a warehouse, to pack goods to dispatch to a consumer’s home, is more labour-intensive than sending goods to a retail outlet. A lot of that short-term temporary labour would [previously have been done by] people who are EU nationals.” It’s not just a lack of warehouse employees that has affected Alonzo’s business, but also the national shortage of drivers. “These are the knock-on effects,” says Alonzo. “Just this week, there was stock in the UK, but they can’t get a lorry driver to bring it from the port over to us in Manchester.” Her company used to run a reliable next-day delivery service. “We can’t do that as much now because the hauliers haven’t got enough drivers to pick up the stock. We’re a really fast-paced company and we’re used to turning things around quickly, getting the stock in quickly, getting products delivered quickly, and it’s just had an effect on all aspects of the business.” Alonzo says it would make a “massive” difference if she were able to recruit from the EU again – “Or have people from the EU who want to apply, and make it an easy process to get a job and get in.” A temporary visa scheme would help “the whole of the UK food industry”. But she points to the low number of fuel-tanker drivers who applied for the government’s emergency visa scheme during the petrol crisis – reportedly only 27. “I don’t know if [a temporary scheme would] make a difference now, because people have not felt welcome.” Despite the “pressure in paperwork – red tape and extra costs on products”, she says, her business is coping thanks to some loyal staff, hard work and long hours. “We’ve done it, we’re doing well.”I first met Florence Price (1887-1953) and Margaret Bonds (1913-1972) in the autumn of 2009. I was an undergraduate exchange student at McGill University in Montreal, and as I sat in my professor’s early 20th-century music course and learned of the lives and music ofthese two Black female composers, it became clear these meetings were meant to happen. Price was born in Little Rock, Arkansas. Her parents nurtured her musical gifts from a young age and she studied at the New England Conservatory in Boston. After a short return to the south, during which time Price witnessed increased racial violence towards African Americans, she moved to Chicago in the late 1920s. On 15 June 1933, the Chicago Symphony Orchestra premiered her Symphony No 1 in E minor, making her the first Black woman composer to gain national recognition. At that same concert, the 20-year-old Chicago-born pianist Margaret Bonds became the first Black solo instrumentalist to perform with that orchestra when she played John Alden Carpenter’s Concertino for Piano and Orchestra. Bonds was, much like her mentor and friend Price, a child prodigy. I think of her as a daughter of the Black Chicago renaissance: an era of cultural rebirth, social transformation and rich artistic expression that unfolded through the first half of the 20th century. I learned about it much later as I made Price and her Chicago network of Black female composers the subject of my PhD. But as a student, oblivious to the details of Price’s and Bonds’ lives, it was their music that drew me in. Like Price and Bonds, I had also been playing the piano since the age of three. But unlike them, I did not share the experience of listening to, studying under, and collaborating with Black composers and performers from such an early age. I it had been inculcated in me to see classical music through a narrow lens that rendered the contributions of Black women entirely absent. My music education proceeded from there and left me looking into a world in which I felt I could never truly belong. This was my norm. Black women did not exist there. Each history seminar, theory class and piano lesson affirmed this apparent reality. Being the only girl of African descent in the music classroom implied that I should not exist there, either. I knew I wanted to pursue music history and piano performance, but I had little sense of my place in either realm. But, on hearing the broad and bold opening E minor chord of Price’s Fantasie Nègre No 1, my purpose and further potential sounded into existence. The shimmering cascade of notes that followed descended into a lower melody that belonged to the Negro spiritual Sinner, Please Don’t Let This Harvest Pass. The tune was unfamiliar, but I immediately recognised its poignancy as a song of the enslaved. I was awash in Price’s musical palette of classical colourings and Black folkloric hues. Bonds’ Troubled Water captivated me with a bass line that ebbed and flowed mysteriously across the opening bars, before surfacing a melody from the Negro spiritual Wade in the Water. I knew the song’s metaphorical resonance for the enslaved seeking escape along the Underground Railroad, and I knew of its ties to the Bible story of baby Moses hidden in the reeds by the Nile. Soulful overtones and historical undercurrents converged in Troubled Water in a way that left me transfixed. The lasting impressions of Price’s and Bonds’ music were the reason why my doctorate was a mix of written work and public performance. It was impossible to leave this music unheard beyond my academic circles. I began to depart from the canonic giants who had once dominated my repertoire to focus more on my interpretations of lesser-known works. And it was around this time that the Czech composer Vítězslava Kaprálová (1915-1940) came into my life. I was 26 years old when I first heard her Sonata Appassionata, only eight years older than she had been when she wrote this emotionally complex and harmonically kaleidoscopic work, and only one year older than she was when she died from tuberculosis. As a fan of the Czech modernist Bohuslav Martinů, I had simply been curious to know if there were any women in his creative circle. And following an unsophisticated online search comprising the words “Martinů”, “woman” and “composer,” I found her. As had been the case with Price and Bonds, I was yet to learn of Kaprálová’s life story, but the music told me so much about who she was and, unexpectedly, ignited a new fire within me. Kaprálová achieved so much in such a short space of time: she was the first woman to study conducting and composition at the Brno Conservatory; the first female conductor of the Czech Philharmonic; one of the first women to conduct the BBC Symphony Orchestra; and she had an impressively robust catalogue of works to her name, from orchestral pieces to intimate songs. Bringing her music into my repertoire spurred me to come to terms with the vulnerability I felt as a concert pianist. My performances of Price’s and Bonds’ music had always been encased in my research and in the stories of my musical upbringing that I felt comfortable sharing. But playing Kaprálová’s music felt akin to telling the parts of my personal story that I often struggle to put into words. The energy in her music made me feel the depth of my own aliveness, which is something I knew I needed to bring to my performances as a concert pianist, regardless of the repertoire. I will perform Price’s Fantasie Nègre, Bonds’ Troubled Water and Kaprálová’s Sonata Appassionata at my Barbican debut on 24 November. As the first pianist to play these works in the UK, I am aware that many in the audience will be meeting these composers for the first time. Additionally, as a historian who primarily leads with written research, I know that many in the audience will be meeting me as a concert pianist for the first time, too. It makes sense then that I introduce myself alongside the three 20th-century trailblazers who helped me find my voice. My Barbican programme is a testimony to how Price, Bonds, and Kaprálová have lived on through their music. But the parts of their legacies that I cherish the most are how, almost a century later, they continue to inspire new ways for us to live in the world today. And they compel us to share that aliveness, that existence, with one another. • Samantha Ege performs at Milton Court, Barbican, London on 24 November.Promises to upgrade links for the north and Midlands have not been broken by the government in its scaled-back rail plan for the region, the transport secretary, Grant Shapps, has insisted, in the face of a storm of cross-party criticism from leaders in northern England. The Integrated Rail Plan, published on Thursday, set out a scaling back of the Northern Powerhouse Rail (NPR) project and the axing of the planned east Midlands to Leeds high-speed line, with HS2 trains instead running on existing upgraded routes. Conservative MPs were among furious critics in the Commons on Thursday, with Huw Merriman, who chairs the transport select committee, suggested Johnson was “selling perpetual sunlight and then leaving it to others to explain the arrival of moonlight”. On Friday morning, the Labour leader, Keir Starmer, said the scaled-back plans “betrayed people in the north” and were a “second-class option”. Responding to the criticism on Sky News, Shapps said: “This will have been the only time in history when massively improving everybody’s rail services would have been counted as a betrayal. It’s a strange approach.” Asked on Sky News why promises he made on the NPR project and eastern leg of HS2 were not being fulfilled, Shapps appeared to suggest that both projects were going ahead. “They are absolutely being fulfilled,” he said. “First of all, we are producing that around 30-minute journey from Manchester to Leeds, or to give you another example, Manchester to Liverpool in 35 minutes, so we’re giving that interconnectivity, that connection that you might have in the south, in the north.” He added: “When it comes to HS2, we are going to deliver HS2 trains, [we are looking at] the best way to do that into Leeds. “The plan for HS2 was conceived 15 years and more ago. What we want to do is make sure it actually integrates with these plans for Northern Powerhouse Rail which we are building. That is the line that goes across, including high speed rail, which will make those dramatic time differences.” Shapps said £96bn was being pumped into the plan and insisted that the “eastern leg will be developed”. He added: “The only disconnect are some of the complaints from, I have to say, largely Labour leaders, who are completely misleading people.” He said if critics looked at the list of journey times within the plans, they and their residents would see that “they will be able to get around a lot faster from virtually every place to virtually every place”. Challenged that “largely Labour leaders” are complaining, Shapps was told of criticism from Conservative MPs, including Merriman. Shapps said some of those quoted were long-term opponents of HS2, and added they were being “partially quoted” and had shown support for some aspects of the plan. Appearing on BBC Radio 5 live, Starmer said: “The government has ripped up those promises and betrayed people in the north. I was in Bradford yesterday and the anger is palpable. “People feel very strongly that promises have been made to them and they have just been ripped up. The idea that ‘levelling up’ is anything more than a slogan has absolutely blown away by what happened yesterday. “The whole point of HS2 was a high-speed line going up including to Leeds. The whole point of the promise of Northern Powerhouse Rail was a new line going from Manchester to Leeds. “Trying to upgrade what you have got is a second-class option for the north.” The HS2 high-speed rail network will run to Manchester, it was confirmed, but the eastern leg will end at an existing east Midlands station rather than going from Birmingham to Leeds. A further stretch will be built west and east of Manchester from Warrington to Marsden but the TransPennine route at the heart of the proposed NPR scheme will rely on upgrades and electrification rather than a new line.The disappearance of the Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai has dominated international news in recent days, but inside China there is barely a whisper. Peng – the former doubles World No 1 – has not been heard from in more than two weeks, since she posted a lengthy statement to Weibo accusing the country’s former vice-premier, Zhang Gaoli, of sexually assaulting her. In the 2 November post, Peng said she and Zhang, now 75, had for several years had an on-off extramarital “relationship”. Peng said Zhang had stopped contacting her after he rose in the ranks of the Communist party, but then about three years ago invited her to play tennis with him and his wife and then sexually assaulted her in his house. The post disappeared in less than half an hour, comments were disabled on her account, references to her removed from China’s internet, and even the most innocuously related keywords such as “tennis” were censored on social media. The Guardian found some references in private WeChat circles, including tennis-themed illustrations, some with the words “I hope she is safe” and others containing QR codes linking to Padlet, a digital noticeboard board, for people to post their own messages. “You are brave Peng Shui. I hope you’re safe and sound and thank you for raising your voice and sharing your story,” said one. Other posts showed photos of tennis balls with Chinese characters written on them that spelt out “Peng Shuai, hang in there”. Attempts to access the board inside China without a VPN returned an error message and said the site contained illegal content, which had been reported. Without concerted effort, some risk and a good VPN, learning about Peng’s case in China is largely impossible. The government will say nothing, and state media has reported nothing. Chinese access to foreign media is strictly controlled: CNN said on Friday its local feed was cut every time they mentioned the case. The Guardian is among numerous foreign outlets that are blocked entirely. The only formal mention by Chinese media has been an apparently ham-fisted attempt by the state-run English language broadcaster, CGTN. On Wednesday it published on Twitter a screenshot of text it claimed was an email Peng sent to the head of the WTA, Steve Simon, saying she was fine and withdrawing her allegations. The purported email was quickly dismissed: the screenshot had no dateline, subject field or addresses, and contained a visible cursor. It was not published in Chinese or anywhere in China, despite the obvious interest and concern among those who saw her viral post before it was deleted. The idea that CGTN might have badly concocted a fake email was seen as somewhat laughable but also chilling. Observers noted the language in the text was similar to previous forced confessions and statements by dissidents in the past – many of which were broadcast by CGTN. Peng’s “email” was in stark contrast to her original post. “While one rings hollow, the other has a resounding ring of authenticity,” wrote Fergus Ryan for the Strategist blog published by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute. Peng is not a dissident. The 35-year-old is one of China’s most recognisable sporting stars who has been lauded by the government. Now, she is also the latest and most high-profile #MeToo case in a country where the movement has struggled to gain traction in the face of strict censorship, an opaque justice system, and social and political hostility. No public accusation has been levelled against a senior official of the Chinese Communist party before, let alone one as high-ranking as Zhang was, having sat on the CCP’s highest ruling body, the seven-member politburo standing committee. In a sign of just how sensitive the subject is, Hu Xijin, the firebrand editor of the state media tabloid, the Global Times, tweeted in English that he believed nothing had happened to Peng but seemed unable to mention her allegations, instead referring to it as “the thing people talked about”. He made no statement on his Chinese accounts. As the furore continues to build outside China over Peng’s welfare and whereabouts, with the Women’s Tennis Association and other organisations demanding an investigation, and a growing list of tennis and sporting stars calling for answers, inside the country it is like nothing has happened.The UK is having a bumper year for mushrooms due to the warm, damp weather, says scientists, with an increase in the number of rare and unusual species identified. Members of the public have been sending in unusual samples from their gardens to experts at Kew Gardens and the Royal Horticultural Society after a glut of fungi this year, and scientists say such booms will become more common as Britain’s climate changes to become warmer and wetter. Lee Davies, Kew’s fungarium curator, said: “This year has been particularly busy for people seeing fungi and sending them in to us. “If climate change means warmer and wetter summers, we are going to get fantastic years for weird and wonderful fungi fruiting in people’s gardens like this one.” One mushroom of particular interest is the rare orchard toothcrust, and for the first time Kew has been given a good, fresh sample. “It’s a rare fungus as it likes old traditional orchards, it likes fruit trees and those are quite rare these days,” said Davies. “We had a lady who’d had a fungus growing on an apple tree in her garden. She sent us photos and we thought it could be that. She sent us in a piece, and our mycologists have confirmed that’s what it is.” Scientists are taking mushroom samples from the public to sequence their DNA in the hope of finding new species and making discoveries about rare fungi. Davies is encouraging gardeners to post samples of unusual fungi to Kew so their genomes can be studied. “We are going to do DNA sequencing on it, so we have a good full genome sequence for this species, as it is relatively rare, and it’s unusual to have a nice fresh specimen. There’s a big push being funded to get every single species of animal, plant and fungus in Britain sequenced, to understand the genomes of every living thing in Britain so we know what things are, it allows us to study the genomes and these organisms. “We could make new and novel medicines from this or discover new species. Fungi are really good for that: you can collect 10 specimens from what you think are the same species, but you sequence the DNA and find out you have multiple different species.” The Royal Horticultural Society has been inundated with inquiries from the public about strange fungi, up 76% from last year. The team at RHS Garden Bridgewater near Salford have found a rare and protected tiered tooth fungi this year that is normally found in southern England. Jassy Drakulic, its fungi expert, said that the changing climate would mean that interesting fungi would grow in different areas – but also warned gardeners might get more pests attacking their plants. She explained: “Fungal ranges will change, and so will the trees and plants and the dead material they produce, which will encourage different fungi to thrive in different areas, and the range of warm-loving fungi will be increased. “Some patterns of climate change that we have been seeing with macrofungi already over recent years includes the jelly-ear (Auricularia auricula judae), which previously only fruited on elder but now is seen appearing on many different types of wood.” She also warned that some fungi that could damage other plants would be boosted by the changing climate. “We expect that dry summers in the south will make honey fungus a bigger problem for gardeners as drought-stressed plants are less able to defend themselves against root rot caused by Armillaria species,” she said. “Some fungi that used to only fruit in the autumn, like sulphur tuft, now also fruit in the spring, so some of these timing changes are not just by a few weeks but whole seasons. It would then make sense that this could have impacts on the other wildlife that depend on these fungi for food and habitats.” The RHS is showcasing the strange fungi that have grown at their Harlow Carr site, and inviting members of the public to come and see the different types, including the shaggy inkcap, bright red fly agarics, and a crop of orange spectacular rustgills.Bipartisan legislation introduced this week in Congress would ban PFAS “forever chemicals” in US food packaging and significantly reduce exposure to the highly toxic compounds, supporters say, but its passage is far from certain as a fight with industry allies in the Senate looms. PFAS are a class of compounds that are used across dozens of industries to make products resistant to water, heat, stains and grease. The chemicals are especially common in food packaging because they repel grease and liquid, which prevents paper products from disintegrating. They get their nickname because of their immense longevity in the environment. “We cannot continue to be poisoned by these chemicals,” said Michigan Democratic congresswoman Debbie Dingell, who introduced the bill in the House. “Chemical manufacturers are going to try to get senators to stop PFAS from being banned, but there’s enough data that shows that it’s a threat to people … so we need to do something.” Researchers have found PFAS are frequently used in sandwich wrappers, paper straws, baking papers, carryout containers and molded fiber products like “clam shells”. The chemicals have been detected in products from a range of businesses, including fast food restaurants like McDonald’s, Subway and Chipotle; grocery chains like Whole Foods; and independent restaurants and grocers that use packaging products marketed as “green”. PFAS are also commonly applied to nonstick aluminum wrap and in bulk plastic containers used to store flavorings. Studies show that the chemicals can leach from packaging into food and are linked to cancer, liver disease, kidney problems, decreased immunity, birth defects and other serious health problems. “People don’t realize that the chemicals are coming in contact with food that they’re eating and that’s a way that PFAS is getting into their bodies,” Dingell said. Despite mounting evidence of the chemicals’ toxicity over the last 10 years, a similar bill that passed the House last legislative session was filibustered in the Senate, though it’s unclear who killed it because Senate rules allow members to anonymously filibuster. PFAS manufacturers have spent heavily on lobbying and campaign contributions in recent years, and public health advocates say industry’s efforts have paid off. Last session, chemical company allies in the GOP defeated about 100 other pieces of legislation designed to reign in the chemicals’ use, and Donald Trump had promised to veto any that made it through. “It’s the dark and invisible hand of big money in politics,” said Erik Olson, a lobbyist for the Natural Resources Defense Council, which supports the new proposed ban. Among industry allies who have opposed PFAS legislation is Senator Jim Inhofe, who sits on the environmental committee and has received at least $60,000 from PFAS producers, including $14,000 last session that was donated as legislation was referred to committee. Senate armed forces committee member Thom Tillis last session cast the deciding vote against legislation that would have helped hold PFAS manufacturers accountable for pollution around military bases. Chemical giants DuPont and Honeywell donated to his campaign in the days after the vote. Advocates say they expect similar opposition this time around, despite growing public pressure to act. “I don’t think the chemical or food packaging industries are retreating even though there’s mounting evidence that there’s a lot of the chemical in food packaging,” Olson said. “Clearly there’s a big problem with an evenly divided Senate and the opportunity to filibuster.” Even if Congress fails to pass the ban, similar legislation has been enacted in seven states, including in California, New York and Vermont, though most only prohibit the chemicals’ use in paper products, not plastic. Several other state legislatures are considering similar bills, which advocates say is putting pressure on industry to stop using the chemicals. Companies like Chipotle, Freshii, McDonald’s, Panera Bread, Sweetgreen, Trader Joe’s, Wendy’s and Whole Foods have committed to stop using packaging with the chemicals. But Olson said PFAS in food packaging “is an issue that’s not going away”, even if legislation fails again. “Until we get toxic forever chemicals out of our food supply, there will continue to be mounting pressure to move legislation,” he said.Sandi Leroux remembers the yelling the most. The mother of Sydney Leroux has a story to tell about her daughter’s experience climbing the ladder of Canadian soccer’s elite player programs before she switched allegiance to the United States, with whom she won Olympic and Women’s World Cup titles. Leroux says the toxic training environment in Vancouver forced her daughter to make a choice as a teenager between quitting soccer entirely or moving to the US to pursue a career in her father’s country of birth. The gatekeeper to success in the Canada women’s program at that time was the now-infamous disgraced coach Bob Birarda, who was quietly released from his dual role as coach of the Vancouver Whitecaps and Canada Under-20 women’s teams in 2008 after allegations of abuse. As Sydney’s prodigious talent was more widely noticed, Leroux recalls Birarda contacting her to say her teenage daughter should join training sessions with his pay-to-play private academy – a two-hour drive from their family home. Leroux said her daughter wouldn’t be able to make it and explained: “I am a single mom and I work full time.” “‘Do you know who I am?’” Leroux recalls Birarda shouting at her. “He started listing who he was and who he had coached. He was like … a bully. By the time we left Canada, Birarda had control of everything. He had the Whitecaps. He had the U-20s women’s team. It was crazy how he took over everything.” Leroux recalls her daughter telling her of a trip to Texas while training with the Canada Under-20 team in the 2004-05 season. Birarda was assistant coach of the Canada Under-20 team on the trip and, according to Leroux, players were called into his hotel room for one-on-one meetings. Says Leroux: “Syd called me and said ‘Mom, Bob makes us go in his room’. By yourself. One of the players came out and said, ‘Oh, he’s gross. He told me how pretty I was’. She said it was so creepy.” Leroux said the silence around Birarda’s eventual departure struck her as odd at the time. “When things really got heated up with Bob Birarda [in 2008] we had already left Canada,” she says. “When they said they had let him go from the Whitecaps and the Under-20 team I knew immediately that he had done something. Why was this so quiet? Why is everybody being so quiet? Why is everything so hush-hush? That really bothered me.” Birarda was allowed to coach female youth players after leaving his role with the Whitecaps and Canada in 2008, after internal investigations into his conduct. He was arrested last year in Vancouver charged with six counts of sexual exploitation, two counts of sexual assault, and one count of child luring over a 20-year period between 1988 and 2008. The charges against Birarda are understood to involve at least three former soccer players. He is currently out on bail and has yet to enter a plea. Sydney’s time with Canada’s national youth teams became confusing for the player and her mother. A national team administrator told Sydney she had been cut for disciplinary reasons, while her coaches would tell her that she was still very much part of the team. Sydney’s talent meant she would often play with, and against, girls several years older than her within Canada’s elite youth program. This presented other problems. “She was getting bullied [by players] and she would come home crying every night saying, ‘Mom if this is what it is like, I don’t want to play soccer any more,” recalls Leroux (similar accusations have been made by Hope Solo against the US women’s team). Sydney told her mom that if she couldn’t move to the US, she would quit soccer. “She was getting burned out,” says Leroux. “She was little. It was crazy. A couple of coaches were the biggest bullies. It was a horrible experience playing soccer here in Vancouver. It was a culture of bullying.” Canada Soccer told the Guardian that “it is not aware of any bullying allegations in relation to [Leroux’s] time with the women’s national team program.” It added: “Canada Soccer has implemented a third-party independent review of the events of 2008. This will fully review the process that was followed by Canada Soccer and the investigation that was undertaken by the ombudswoman at the time. We are limited in making further comment until this investigation has concluded.” Later, Leroux would be coached by Hubert Busby Jr when she played for the Whitecaps in 2011. An investigation by the Guardian revealed allegations of attempted sexual coercion by Busby during his time with the team in 2010 and 2011. He has since been suspended from his job as coach of Jamaica’s women’s team. Busby denies the allegations. “Busby let [Sydney] do whatever she wanted to do,” Leroux says. “Sydney was going through a break up at the time and he let her leave and go to the States to do whatever she needed to do. I heard about what happened with him, though, and it is a shame.” Leroux’s comments come as Canada Soccer announced last week that law firm McLaren Global Sport Solutions, a Toronto sports governance consultancy, would lead an investigation into how the national governing body handled the removal of Birarda in 2008. That announcement followed Major League Soccer appointing law firm Rubin Thomlinson to investigate how Whitecaps executives had dealt with the allegations involving Birarda and Busby. The complex relationship between Canada Soccer and the Whitecaps is underlined by generational ties between the head of Concacaf, Victor Montagliani – a former president of Canada Soccer who was vice-president of the organization at the time of Birarda’s departure – and Bob and Dan Lenarduzzi, longtime Vancouver Whitecaps executives. Montagliani and the Lenarduzzis, whose fathers were friends, grew up together in East Vancouver and played on the same teams - even as adults. In a 2015 interview with The Province, Bob Lenarduzzi - Whitecaps president from 2011 to 2019 - credited Montagliani with creating a player pathway from local teams to national rosters. “We sat down and said this is crazy, why don’t we figure out who should be doing what?” Bob Lenarduzzi told the Province. “Victor was the one we started the dialogue with. Now there’s a better working relationship between the pro clubs and the CSA.” A Concacaf spokesperson said Montagliani had no direct oversight of the Canada national teams at the time of the alleged events involving Birarda despite being a vice-president, national teams, of Canada Soccer when they occurred. According to the spokesperson, Montagliani’s role dealt with fiduciary oversight, and he was not aware of any of the bullying allegations mentioned by Sandi Leroux. Concacaf and Montagliani have said they welcome a review into the 2008 investigation of Birarda. Montagliani is also a vice-president of Fifa. Leroux explains that hesitancy to speak up about allegations of abuse and bullying came from what she describes as a village environment in Vancouver at the time. “Everyone knew each other,” Leroux says. Yet as investigations begin, she now expects more players to come forward with allegations. “It was horrible,” Leroux says. “It really was. You felt that it was the men’s club. That you couldn’t do anything. You couldn’t speak. You couldn’t complain to anybody. You would be too scared. [Many players don’t speak because they] don’t want to lose the chance to work for Canada Soccer in the future or lose their position on the team. Even I’m still worried about saying things about Sydney. They all cover for each other.” Sydney Leroux, who currently plays for Orlando Pride in the NWSL, went on to play 77 times with the US women’s national team between 2011 and 2017. She won an Olympic gold medal in 2012 and was part of the US roster that won the 2015 World Cup held in Canada. “I kept a lot of the problems from Sydney at the time because Sydney was so young and didn’t want her to have to deal with it,” Leroux says. But she says her daughter was so keen to leave the environment that she had little choice but to move to the US to pursue her career. “Sydney would have quit soccer if she stayed in Canada,” she says. “It bothers me today that I didn’t do something at the time but I knew that if I did they would punish her. But she was already getting punished and I didn’t do anything. If she had been treated good maybe she wouldn’t have left. It could have been different. We probably wouldn’t have looked at another option if it was good.”After the Cop26 conference ended in Glasgow, many activists and climate scientists felt the agreement didn’t go far enough and that the US government was among those who had not backed strong words with enough actual deeds. But action on a smaller level in the US – in cities and states – is gaining traction and beginning to make a significant difference. Smaller-scale initiatives to cut emissions have been the significant way that America has made climate progress in the last few years, in the absence of stronger federal leadership. Researchers at the Brookings Institution calculated that in 2018, these climate action plans generated 6% emissions savings for the country – the equivalent of removing 79m cars from the road that year. “These are significant benefits,” says Mark Muro, a senior fellow and policy director at Brookings Metro. “None of this is large enough, but they add up to a meaningful trend of emissions reductions. Those are real contributions.” Even at the climate meeting there was an increased appreciation of city-based climate action plans – Cop26 featured a whole day focused on what regions and cities can do, Muro points out. In the US, 45 of the 100 biggest metro areas have pledged to cut carbon emissions. “There is no doubt that cities are crucial places where emissions can be curtailed and better solutions worked out.” Cities are on the frontlines of action plans, but also of the direct effects of the climate crisis, including power outages, fires and floods. That makes them more likely to take quick action. People moving due to climate change will also primarily be moving to cities, putting extra importance on their ability to plan for the future. Joe Biden’s new infrastructure bill will pour tens of billions of dollars into funding for climate-related projects. For example, San Diego recently created a plan to become more climate resilient – one that prioritizes the needs of the most climate-vulnerable. It would plant more trees, expand parks in low-income areas and update public transit. “As our country has witnessed in recent months, extreme weather driven by a changing climate can have devastating effects,” Todd Gloria, San Diego’s mayor, wrote in the plan. “While these threats aren’t new to San Diego, science tells us that climate change is making these events more frequent and intense. The cost of inaction would be far greater than investing in our future.” In Austin, Texas, the city successfully decreased its building emissions by 20% despite a booming population, but experienced an increase in transportation emissions between 2010 and 2018. The city hopes to electrify their municipal vehicle fleet in the near future. Pittsburgh finalized a plan this week to increase energy efficiency across the city and reduce emissions by 50% by 2030, pushed forward by the Glasgow conference, which the mayor attended. Ambitious climate action plans are crucial roadmaps, but they can be based on faulty assumptions. Muro’s research shows such plans have been a mixed bag in terms of actually delivering emissions reductions. “They make large promises that aren’t necessarily backed up by hard work of delivery,” he says. “It’s a good time to refocus and really think about how to make these work better.” For one thing, more cities need plans: in 2018, Muro and his colleagues tallied that only 45 of the largest 100 cities in the US had such plans. Smaller metros often don’t have any plans in place. Some regions of the redder states may struggle to implement climate strategies – though Muro says that when they package climate strategies as part of a data-driven good government effort, it is less fraught with politics. Also, the quality of the pledges is questionable – they can sometimes be infeasible if they don’t have control over a power plant that produces emissions in their region, or if they aren’t able to enforce rules that they propose due to other laws. Also, with the exception of cities in California, city action plans’ efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions are mostly non-binding. Cities and states can learn from each other, rather than reinventing the wheel each time. Groups like C40 cities – a global network of mayors taking action on the climate crisis – can make it easier to share data and strategies. Pooling data can also lower the cost of accountability. Coming out of Cop26, there is a recognition of the extreme urgency of the moment and the importance of cities as one source of progress, Muro says. “Cities need to couple their large aspirations with grittier implementation now.”There was a point in the early 00s when William Orbit was poised to go interstellar. He was one of the great pop architects of the Y2K era, the Mark Ronson or Jack Antonoff of his day. He produced Madonna’s Grammy-sweeping Ray of Light, with its magnetic techno-lite, in 1998; Blur’s 13 a year later; and made hits for some of the biggest films around the new millennium: Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me, Charlie’s Angels: Full Throttle, The Next Best Thing and The Beach. The latter’s lead track, Pure Shores, recorded by the British pop group All Saints, was the second most successful UK single of 2000. Echoes of its breathy acoustica and bleepy-bloopy electronica can still be heard in the charts; it was recently championed by Lorde, who said the song was an inspiration for this year’s much anticipated album Solar Power. Occasionally, Orbit, 65, will be in his local branch of Whole Foods in Kensington, west London, and Pure Shores will waft over the speakers. These days, he will think: “Oh yeah, it’s all right this track, I get it now.” At the time, it had taken so long to make that he thought it was “pure shite. When you really slave over something, it takes years until you can really listen to it with pleasure. That or a couple of bottles of wine,” he hoots. In the 80s, Orbit had been in the synth-pop band Torch Song and started Guerilla Studios, working with some of the edgiest acts of the decade – Gary Numan, Cabaret Voltaire and Laibach among them. The following decade, he made house music as Bassomatic. But by 2000, as chillout boomed in popularity, you couldn’t move for Orbit’s ambient-pop twinkliness. Indulging his other great love, orchestral music, Orbit’s classical-electronic fusion album Pieces in a Modern Style went to No 2 in 2000, off the back of a successful remix of Samuel Barber’s Adagio for Strings by the Dutch trance DJ Ferry Corsten. Orbit was so successful that, between 2002 and 2005, he took up residence at the Leonard hotel near Hyde Park, where he recorded Bono’s vocals for U2’s song Electrical Storm. “I had some serious money and I bought a big fat house in Connaught Square and did it up – and I couldn’t bear to move in,” he says. “So the hotel that I particularly liked, I just moved in there. It was like: this is the life. This is like the Chelsea hotel [in New York], but in London.” He could have been a superproducer turned star, the UK’s Rick Rubin by way of Moby. But that didn’t quite happen. “It should have,” he nods sagely, long grey hair falling around his face. *** When we speak, Orbit is in another hotel room, in an upmarket health resort in Austria, where he has gone to “get toned up a bit”. He has pushed his body to the limit to finish his new album, his first since 2014. It is a triumphant full stop after a tough period, about which he is surprisingly candid. “I did my rock’n’roll excess thing about four years ago, when I was 61,” he says. “I waited that long. I went a bit over the top, learned my lesson. I did go a bit crazy. Drugs will do that to you., you know, if you’ve got a certain predisposition to being in the clouds, as I suppose I do …” Today, Orbit seems more down to earth. He is terrifically gossipy, in a foppish, conspiratorial way, firing off stories about working with Pink (“one of the grumpiest singers, but one of the best”), hanging out with billionaires (“they’ll be like: is your dog helicopter trained?”) and why he is considering buying a Gandalf staff (“my limbs don’t work because they’re shit”). He talks at length about Madonna, with whom he made three albums – her unique musicality, her toughness, how she is a better arranger than him – and about whom illuminating anecdotes tumble out of nowhere. “We were at the Hit Factory [studio in New York] once and I walked in on her on the lav – she hadn’t locked it,” says Orbit. “She’s doing a No 2 and I’m like: ‘Oh God, I’m so sorry.’ She said: ‘William, look, I was brought up in a family of six kids with one loo, so don’t sweat it.’” The first time they worked together, on Ray of Light, “killed me”, says Orbit. “I was in a crisis with my family, which I put on hold. I remember getting very ill that winter; at the age of 43, I was done in physically.” It took months to complete. Madonna, who was a new mum at the time, cracked the whip. As hard as it was, it was an atmosphere in which he thrived. “I flourish under that,” he says. “She’s a fabulous producer. When it says ‘produced by Madonna and William Orbit’, people don’t always give her the credit for that. But she’s as responsible as me.” After his initial string of successes, however, Orbit became a chart-pop shill for Ricky Martin, Mel C and Chris Brown (and those are just the songs that were released). “I got into this songwriting scene in America and I thought: ‘I’m not suited to this,’” he says. “The inner voice was saying: ‘You did Ray of Light, why are you doing remixes now? You should be the don.’ I didn’t listen. My inner voice got suffocated by my own misguidedness and I felt increasingly impotent to do anything about it.” He made a couple of his own albums, “but they really fell off. I didn’t get returns to my calls. It’s been yonks since I’ve made any proper statement of my own, rather than trying to do a song for some pop artist who’s got 10 other people on speed dial.” In the end, he got “more and more frustrated, believing that I was useless and washed up”. The last album he worked on with Madonna, 2012’s EDM-fuelled MDNA, was a commercial and critical failure. “It was disappointing,” says Orbit, adding that he thinks ageism had “a profound negative effect” on its reception. Britney Spears’s 2013 album Britney Jean arrived shortly afterwards. Executive-produced by will.i.am, the album received lukewarm reviews, little to no promotion and felt strangely impersonal, despite claiming to be the opposite. Orbit worked on its opening track, Alien, in which she compares herself to a lonely extraterrestrial. In light of what we now know about her conservatorship, did the album feel similarly controlled? “That end of the pop spectrum is more controlled, if you like,” says Orbit, who says that they made Alien remotely. “Here’s the difficult thing, because I’m friendly with Will and with Britney. All I’ll say is that there was a frisson there. If I work with an artist, they are the goddess, they are the boss. If I want to be the boss, I’ll make my own records. You’re here to be in the service of a true pop star – if you don’t have that attitude, you shouldn’t be in the game.” *** Eventually, Orbit took a turn for the worse. Four years ago, he moved back to England from Los Angeles and got in with a party crowd. He took up painting, but mainly cocaine. “Instead of worrying about my career, I could just be a hedonist,” he says. “I’d never done coke before and in a short space of time I’d be the guy that could do the most. And then I went to some festivals and I did LSD, mushrooms, MDMA, coke, some hormones that everybody was experimenting with. Codeine. I wasn’t aware of what I was doing and I ended up having a psychotic episode.” Even that wasn’t enough to stop him. “I cringe when I think about it. I was in a bad space, but not terminally so. Then it got to the point where I started smoking tons of weed – eight joints a day. It never agreed with me and I became manic.” As a result, last March, “I had a second breakdown”, he says. He was lying in the street, convinced he was a secret operative tasked with saving the royal family. He was sectioned. “Fortunately, once the drugs were out of my system, I finally got back to being normal – and out I was,” he says, with a what-a-wally tone. Almost as soon as he was released from psychiatric hospital, though, the first UK lockdown was announced. “I was deeply disappointed with myself and there was fucking Covid at the same time,” he says. His new manager put Orbit in touch with a rising alt-pop singer called Maeve and Orbit taught himself how to use Pro Tools on his laptop, via online tutorials, to produce some tracks. He hadn’t made any music for ages “and, bit by bit, I started to enjoy it”. Now, a new Orbit album is almost finished: “The best thing I’ve done in 20 years!” he enthuses. “You’ve caught me at a turning point. You can have a turning point at any age and this is mine.” But first there is an EP, out next month, for the electronic label Anjunadeep. It feels like what he should have made after Pieces in a Modern Style: symphonic trance crescendos, some chillout meanderings, a major ambient-rave tune. The Canadian-Colombian artist Lido Pimienta appears on vocals, hinting at the direction that his full album might take next year (guest singers aplenty). He is not worried about being an old man in a young gun’s world; he is energised to see that his sound is having a moment once more. “Ambient music has gone mainstream,” he says. “Radio 1 have got into chill – I’m doing a Wind Down mix for them. Somebody sent me a link to one of my tracks [in a video] on Instagram and it said: ‘Music for calming dogs on Bonfire Night.’” He is genuinely thrilled, fizzing with enthusiasm. “I realised that I had to grow up a bit,” he says. “I’ve just left my adolescence. It’s great being 65 – it’s easier than being 40, because you’re an old dude and you don’t have an agenda any more. It’s a young game, the pop music game. But I think there’s room for one Bill Nighy. It’s not like it’s a crowded field.” Perhaps not an agenda, but he does have hopes for his music, at least. “I want this very much – and to reinvent is very hard,” says Orbit. “When you’re young, you don’t realise this at the time, but everything is handed to you. I like a challenge. I desperately want this music to be heard. Nothing will stop me now.” • William Orbit’s Starbeam EP is released on 1 December on Anjunadeep • This article was amended on 19 November 2021. Electrical Storm is a song by U2, not an album as previously stated.I grew up on Black River, Michigan, and started learning how to captain boats when I was three years old. I’d go out on my dad’s fishing boat, had a toy Playmobil boat and trawler, and every year for my birthday I’d get a miniature floating vessel with a viewing window to take out on the water. In Michigan, we’re surrounded by lakes and I soon discovered that I loved diving and skipping school days for the beach. After my divorce, three years ago, I became a single mom to three boys. We were in a difficult place and needed to make money. I’d been working as a waitress but successfully pitched an idea to an investor for glass-bottom boat tours in the small town of Cheboygan, where I now live. I set up my business in 2018. We head out on the Cheboygan River and Lake Huron, and run five trips each day, all summer long. We sail over three shipwrecks, past three lighthouses and travel under a lift bridge. I have a historian on board to explain the history of the river. My sons help out, manning the deck and phones. My youngest and I often drift dive the river, picking up all sorts of abandoned objects. Recently, we found a double-headed axe blade – the area is rich in logging history. We even found a tricycle. On the Father’s Day weekend in June this year, I met a potential scuba diving client beside the boat, around sunset. My first mate, Rob, was fuelling the boat. I thought I should probably keep this client interested by finding something on the riverbed. The river was pretty still, and I skimmed around, 10-12ft down, and found a giant clam shell. Then I saw a green bottle, with the sun shining on it, lying atop a fish bed. It was four inches long and half an inch wide. I could see something inside, but figured it was mud. I lifted the bottle and, when I looked closely, saw the word “this” pressed against the glass. I swam to my boat and asked Rob to snap a photo, using his jackknife to pull out the bottle’s cork. It was two-thirds full of water and the paper was stuck to the inside. I used a small hook to pull it through the bottle neck. I unfolded it and saw the date – November 1926. We all stood there like, “Woah, what just happened?” The 95-year-old note read: “Will the person who finds this bottle return this paper to George Morrow, Cheboygan, Michigan, and tell where it was found?” I was amazed to have a historical artefact in my hands. My heart was so light and happy. Rob put the paper in his freezer so it wouldn’t disintegrate. I kept the bottle, which was embossed with the words “Moone’s Emerald Oil” (an old “cure-all” remedy). Morrow is a common local name, so before I left the marina, I posted the picture on my Facebook page. I thought there was a chance someone might make a connection, but didn’t expect what followed. When I checked Facebook the next morning, during an early boat trip, there was a long stream of notifications. My phone blew up with messages. The next day, as I drove home from visiting my dad, I got a phone call from Michele Primeau. She told me she was George Morrow’s daughter and someone had sent my number. I wasn’t sure whether to believe her at first. When she became emotional, I knew she was for real. She said her dad would float notes in bottles any time he went on vacation, or hide them in walls when he remodelled their homes. She looked at the date and figured that he’d posted this one on his 18th birthday. In autumn, Michele travelled from Detroit to meet me. She brought his second world war journal with her. The handwriting matched. It felt wonderful that a piece of his history should return. Michele insisted on leaving the message and bottle with me – she felt it was the best way for his history to live on. It sits on the shelf in my shop, in a display case, with a letter she sent to me after we connected. Her last sentence was: “Isn’t this fun?” That Facebook post has had 87,000 likes now and my story has travelled around the world. This summer, I took 5,000 people out on the boat. Plenty ask about the note or joke about finding more treasures. In a hard year, the discovery has brought pure joy. For a scuba diver, it feels like a lifetime achievement. • As told to Deborah Linton Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.comThe regular season was defined by ... The number of MLS big beasts who experienced a fallow year. While the Seattle Sounders stayed competitive near the top of the Western Conference, the two Los Angeles teams found themselves at different stages of a rebuild, with Toronto FC preparing for a major overhaul in the East. The Columbus Crew, the defending MLS Cup champions, failed to make the playoffs while DC United also missed out. From early on, it was clear many teams already had their sights set on 2022. GR New England Revolution have been a rock of a team the entire season. Unmoved by the Colorado Rapids, the top seed in the Western Conference, the Revs dominated MLS with a 22-5-7 record. Thanks to an unflinching attacking style and Carles Gil, league leader in assists, the Revs are primed to take it all. PW The dominance of the New England Revolution, who waltzed away with the Supporters’ Shield after putting up a record breaking 73 points. Their trio of midfielder Carles Gil and strikers Gustavo Bou and Adam Buksa helped create the best attack in the league. It only gets trickier from here for the Revs though, as no Shield winner has won MLS Cup since Toronto FC in 2017. JF Best team that didn’t make the playoffs … While there was undoubtedly disappointment in Carson over the LA Galaxy’s failure to make the playoffs, Greg Vanney has made some progress in moving the club into a new era. What’s more, the Galaxy lost just one of their last seven matches of the regular season. They stand a good chance of a stronger 2022 with another year under Vanney’s stewardship. GR Let’s have a moment of silence for DC United, whose spot in the playoffs seemed safe until a combination of losses saw them plunge in the standings. The transition with new head coach Hernán Losada was tough for the club, costing them multiple matches. The nail in the coffin was the 6-0 spanking handed to them by New York City FC on 23 October. PW DC United missed the playoffs by a single point despite having one of the league’s leading scorers, Ola Kamara, fronting their attack. They’ll rue their poor defense and an astounding difference in home form (2.00 points per game) versus their away form (0.76ppg), the widest gap in the league. JF Your dark horses are ... Not so long ago, New York Red Bulls appeared to be drifting under Gerhard Struber. However, they dragged themselves into the playoffs for the 12th consecutive year. Their defence looks much improved with Struber’s high-press also more cohesive than it was during the summer. If the Red Bulls can get the better of the Philadelphia Union in their first-round match, they could be a real force. GR Minnesota United strategically picked up points to slide into the playoffs as the No 5 seed in the Western Conference. Their hopes ride on striker Emanuel Reynoso, who boosted the club after they started the season with four consecutive losses. PW The New York Red Bulls have lost just once in their last 12 matches. After a horrible start to the season, they’ve tightened up defensively, not giving up more than a single goal since their September matchup with Columbus. Rarely out of games, a couple moments of brilliance could spark a deep run. JF Player to watch ... After finishing third in the Western Conference, Sporting KC have the quality to make a deep run in the playoffs with Johnny Russell as their main man in attack. The Scot found the back of the net 12 times in his final 10 regular season games as everything he touched turned to goals. If Russell can carry that sort of form into the postseason, Sporting KC could go far. GR Sporting Kansas City’s Johnny Russell has risen to star status, particularly in a brilliant end to the regular season. Now, he prepares to face the Vancouver Whitecaps in the first-round of the playoffs. The Whitecaps have talented striker Brian White, but Russell’s speed and instincts should be enough to take Kansas City to the final. PW Carles Gil has been electrifying for New England. After missing much of last season to injury, he returned late in 2020 to lead the Revolution to the Eastern Conference final. In 2021 the Spaniard was even better and returned to the form that made him 2019’s Newcomer of the Year, bagging a league leading 18 assists. JF Team at risk of going out early ... If Russell doesn’t find top form, Sporting KC could find themselves in trouble. Peter Vermes’ side might have finished third in the West, but they lost three consecutive matches to finish the regular season and could be low on confidence heading into the playoffs. What’s more, Sporting KC can be defensively vulnerable. A first-round match against the in-form Whitecaps will be a tricky test. GR After a dismal start to the season Atlanta United made a comeback with Josef Martinez leading the club during a six-game undefeated streak. But in the first-round they face New York City FC, who are coming off an unbeaten streak of their own. Atlanta failed to beat NYC FC in the regular season and the club risks falling to Valentin Castellanos, who ended the season with six goals in four games. PW The Philadelphia Union have been a team on the rise for the last few years, finally making good with a regular season title during 2020’s abridged season. Still, they’ve never made it to the conference finals in their history. It’s hard to see them progressing that far this year either. The New York defense they face in the first-round will be tough to crack. JF Eastern Conference final … New England Revolution 1-1 Philadelphia Union (Union win on pens). GR New England Revolution 3-2 New York City FC. PW New England Revolution 3-1 Nashville SC. JF Western conference final … Portland Timbers 1-2 Seattle Sounders. GR Colorado Rapids 1-2 Sporting Kansas City. PW Seattle Sounders FC 2-0 Colorado Rapids. JF MLS Cup final Philadelphia Union have been building towards a serious playoff charge for some time. Last season saw them lift the Supporters’ Shield, but suffer defeat to the New England Revolution in the first-round. Twelve months older and wiser, the Union are a well-coached and disciplined side who have lost just one of their last 11 matches. They will take some beating. GR New England lost only five of their 34 matches in the regular season. The power of Gustavo Buo and skill of Carles Gil should result in the Revs clinching the title, whoever they face in the final. PW From 2002 to 2007, the Revolution made the MLS Cup final four out of six seasons, including three straight from 2005 to 2007, and lost every time in heartbreaking fashion. This year the Revolution will look to exorcise their demons. After a deep run courtesy of Carles Gil’s timely return last year, look for the Revolution to continue their form and capture their first MLS Cup. JFMy earliest reading memory The first pages of any book I remember reading, in Pinner Wood primary school, were from The Beacon Readers: stories of Farmer Giles, Rover the Dog, Old Lob the shepherd and Mrs Cuddy the Cow. I was very fond of Mrs Cuddy. My favourite book growing up The Amazing Pranks of Master Till Eulenspiegel, by L Gombrich, retellings of the German folk stories about the peasant trickster who outwits townspeople, shopkeepers, university professors and aristocrats. I so wanted to be Till. The book that changed me as a teenager My parents’ bookshelves were full of books that belonged to their lives in the Communist party. AL Morton’s A People’s History of England was the first of these that my teenage self found readable and it suggested that I was living two versions of history: the one I was studying at school, and another one, now known as the “bottom-up” version. The writer who changed my mind At university, in the mid 60s, I met the Jamaican politician Trevor Munro – a postgraduate at the time. He told me to read Capitalism and Slavery by Eric Williams. It laid out the inseparable connection between Britain and the empire and how the country’s wealth was underpinned by the transatlantic slave trade and the plantations of the Caribbean territories. The book that made me want to be a writer At around 16, I became obsessed with James Joyce’s A Portrait of the Artist As a Young Man. I was absorbed by the sense of someone trying to break out of an institution but then became interested in Joyce’s experimental way of writing. The book I reread I love rereading Shakespeare plays and I’m constantly finding bits that I’ve overlooked or not understood before. King Lear, Hamlet, Twelfth Night, The Tempest, Romeo and Juliet, Henry IV Part I , Macbeth: their scope, power, thought and complexity amaze me. The author I came back to I read all of Thomas Hardy’s poetry and novels except for Tess of the D’Urbervilles and Jude the Obscure. I came to these two much later in life. I loved that they are both novels of ideas dealing with class, education (or lack of), work and 19th-century forms of oppression. The book I could never read again I have fond memories of immersing myself in DH Lawrence’s novels, and I found his book of Selected Poems very liberating at the time. Maybe I resist reading them now because I fear I would end up regretting that I’m no longer that young reader! The book I discovered later in life About 30 years ago, I decided to go to a French evening class. Françoise, the tutor, got us reading a book I had never heard of, Raymond Radiguet’s Le Diable au Corps (The Devil in the Flesh). It tells the story of an affair between a 16-year-old boy and a young married woman whose husband is fighting at the front in the first world war. The book I am currently reading Debra Barnes’s The Young Survivors. It’s a book that overlaps with the experience of my father’s uncle and aunt, who were Polish Jews, naturalised French, turned in by Vichy and deported to Auschwitz. In this story, based on the true story of what happened to Barnes’s mother, five children lose their parents and do what they have to do to survive. My comfort read The first chapters of Charles Dickens’s Great Expectations: I remember my father reading it to us in a tent in Yorkshire when I was about 13. • Michael Rosen’s Sticky McStickstick, illustrated by Tony Ross, is published by Walker. To support The Guardian and Observer, order your copy at guardianbookshop.com. Delivery charges may apply.The music photographer Mick Rock – official photographer to David Bowie and “the man who shot the 70s” – has died aged 72. The news was confirmed by his representative in a statement that described Rock as a “photographic poet” and “a true force of nature who spent his days doing exactly what he loved, always in his own delightfully outrageous way”. Rock created the abiding images of Bowie’s Ziggy Stardust era, shot the back sleeve for his 1973 album Pin Ups and directed videos for Space Oddity, Life on Mars, Jean Genie and John, I’m Only Dancing. The pianist Mike Garson, a longtime collaborator with Bowie, called Rock “one of a kind, with such an eye for aesthetics and seizing the right moments … Mick gave so much to this planet and he adored David”. Sharon Osborne – whose husband Ozzy was shot by Rock – and British music photographer Kevin Cummins were also among those to pay tribute. Rock also created iconic album artwork for artists including Lou Reed (Transformer, Coney Island Baby), the Stooges (Raw Power), the Ramones (End of the Century), Joan Jett (I Love Rock’n’Roll) and Queen’s Queen II, an image that the group repurposed for the video of Bohemian Rhapsody as well as their album Sheer Heart Attack. He continued to shoot throughout his life, later producing album artwork for Atlas Sound (Parallax), Black Lips (Underneath the Rainbow) and Miley Cyrus (Plastic Hearts). Rock also worked in film, shooting production stills for cult musicals The Rocky Horror Picture Show and the John Cameron Mitchell films Hedwig and the Angry Inch and Shortbus. Michael David Rock was born in 1948 in Hammersmith. He studied medieval and modern languages at Cambridge and made headlines when he was arrested for marijuana possession at university. He first picked up a camera during an acid trip, although later discovered there was no film in it. It was at Cambridge that Rock started shooting the local music scene, befriending the local musician Syd Barrett – for whose debut solo album, The Madcap Laughs, he shot the artwork – and Mick Jagger’s younger brother, Chris. Rock met Bowie backstage at Birmingham Town Hall in the middle of the Ziggy Stardust tour, when the musician was still a cult act. He credited a shot of Bowie simulating oral sex on Mick Ronson’s guitar as launching both of their careers. “The guitar fellatio shot with Mick Ronson was an image that really got around, especially when it got to America,” Rock said. “And David would talk about being bisexual and would put on lipstick and drive people crazy. Mick wasn’t gay and the photo isn’t meant to suggest they had a thing, David was just trying to bite Mick’s guitar. For the first time people started to ask, ‘Who took this picture?’” It was Bowie who introduced him to Lou Reed and Iggy Pop, leading to connections with the wider 70s rock scene including Debbie Harry and Andy Warhol – whom he once photographed alongside Truman Capote dressed in a Santa outfit. Reed showed Rock New York’s gay underground. “I was fascinated,” said Rock. “We were upsetting the straight society, and just having fun. When I got to New York it was like Sodom and Gomorrah gone berserk! London was naughty, but nothing like New York.” Rock’s process was “more of an intuitive thing rather than a heavily pre-designed thing”, he told the BBC. “I am in the business of evoking the aura of the people and photographing. “I’m not necessarily looking for a literal reality, I’m looking for something that’s got a bit of magic to it, and quite where that comes from or when that moment is you can’t prescribe.” He representatives’ statement said: “The stars seemed to effortlessly align for Mick when he was behind the camera. Feeding off of the unique charisma of his subjects electrified and energised him … A man fascinated with image, he absorbed visual beings through his lens and immersed himself in their art, thus creating some of the most magnificent photographs rock music has ever seen.” In the mid-90s, Rock said he almost died following two decades of substance abuse – he called himself a “compulsive experimenter” – undergoing a quadruple heart bypass that he said was paid for by Rolling Stones managers Allen Klein and Andrew Loog Oldham. He also received a kidney transplant. “I was broke, and being broke is not fun, especially with a serious cocaine habit,” he said. “I had the IRS up my ass, I had a child, I owned nothing, I was in debt and I got a messy reputation because of my habit. The quality of my photography didn’t suffer, but I became less and less reliable in terms of meetings and delivery times. Eventually, the phone stopped ringing.” He credited yoga, massage and meditation with helping his rehabilitation, as well as never having touched heroin or alcohol. By the 2000s, classic rock photography had taken on a huge cultural appeal, regularly producing exhibitions and books. Renewed interest in Rock’s work gave the photographer a fresh start, shooting the likes of Kate Moss, Yeah Yeah Yeahs and Pharrell. Rock published several books collecting his most famous photographs and hosted the documentary series On the Record With Mick Rock, in which he met musicians such as Kings of Leon and Patti LaBelle and toured their home towns. Rock lived in New York City on Staten Island with his wife Pati and daughter Nathalie. He recently said that he had been “offered millions” for his archives, to which he retained copyright. “So why not cash in and do a Bob Dylan?” he said. “Well, if it was worth that much I might be tempted, because that’s just unbelievable. I have thought about it but it’s not going to happen right now. When it does I plan to leave some to the yogis and some to my college, because that’s where I learned all my mischief.” • This article was amended on 21 and 26 November 2021. The David Bowie song Space Oddity was previously referred to as “Space Odyssey”, and the album Pin Ups as “Pinups”; Mick Rock shot some of the back cover artwork for Pin Ups, not for its front as a previous version said.The former prime minister of Ireland and one of the architects of the 1998 peace accord in Northern Ireland has been urged to apologise after claiming loyalists in “ghettoes” did not have a clue about the Brexit protocol. Bertie Ahern said people in “east Belfast and the ghettoes and the areas where you are likely to get trouble” had mischaracterised the special arrangements in the Brexit deal and saw it as pathway to a united Ireland. His comments were described as “demeaning and degrading” by the east Belfast DUP MP Gavin Robinson, who urged him to clarify his remarks and offer an apology. Robinson said: “To associate east Belfast with a ghetto and suggest loyalists are not able to understand the protocol is demeaning and degrading. “People in my constituency who can’t get their Amazon parcels from another part of the United Kingdom well understand the impact of the protocol. Rather than belittling those who oppose the protocol, Bertie Ahern should seek to understand why not a single elected unionist in Northern Ireland supports the protocol,” said Robinson. The spat came as a fifth week of talks over the Northern Ireland protocol came to an end with negotiations over checks and the control of goods crossing from Great Britain and Northern Ireland expected to continue into December. Speaking on Thursday at an event hosted by the Brexit Institute in Dublin, the former taoiseach said the protests staged by some loyalist communities were more about identity politics than the Brexit trade arrangements. “The reality is in east Belfast and in the ghettoes and in the areas where you’re likely to get trouble, is that people haven’t got a clue about the protocol, not a clue. “They see it as identity. They see it as a road to the Dublin government taking over again and this is a pathway to that. That’s how they see it, even those who you might consider to be a bit more intelligent and articulate. That is the difficulty,” said Ahern. Robinson said: “As a man who was central to the Belfast agreement being negotiated, Bertie should be honest in recognising that the protocol does alter Northern Ireland’s status within the United Kingdom single market without any consent from people living here, driving a coach and horses through the Belfast agreement.” Robinson’s DUP colleague Diane Dodds described Ahern’s remarks as “snide” and “despicable”.Tim Paine’s captaincy of the Australian men’s cricket team ended with a familiar scene on Friday – a flood of tears and a scripted apology. Paine, whose text messages to a work colleague in 2017 have now come to light, was full of regret as he announced he would be standing down from the Test captaincy. While Paine’s actions instantly caused a storm around the nation, presumably there are more details yet to come to light. As such there is little to be gained from speculating further on what transpired. What we do know is that Cricket Australia conducted an internal investigation in mid-2018 when they first became aware of the incident. The investigation concluded that Paine had not breached CA’s code of conduct and was free to continue in the captain’s role that he had taken on just months earlier after the infamous sandpaper scandal. Presumably the national body hoped that would be the last anyone would hear of the text messages. The investigation took place behind closed doors and ended favourably for their captain so it could be filed away neatly into the ever-expanding filing cabinet marked “Scandals – non-career ending”. But these things have a way of coming to public attention – it would be naïve to assume the messages would never emerge. And so CA chair Richard Freudenstein’s inconsistent statement is quite baffling, considering the time CA have had to prepare for this day. Freudenstein noted that the board has accepted Paine’s resignation, before going on to acknowledge that he was cleared of any breach of the code of conduct during the 2018 investigation. He then stated: “CA does not condone this type of language or behaviour. Despite the mistake he made, Tim has been an exceptional leader since his appointment and the board thanks him for his distinguished service.” This throws the whole situation into confusing territory. If CA does not condone this behaviour, why is it acceptable under their code of conduct? If the incident is serious enough that Paine is stepping down, why wasn’t he found to be in breach of the code at the time? Are the actions serious enough that they are not befitting of a captain, but acceptable for any other player? It’s an overly cautious approach from an organisation that usually holds itself to much higher standards. In some ways that’s to be expected – the leadership of CA has changed considerably since the investigation took place. But that very fact also presents an opportunity to show the work that has been done since that time. This was the moment to put their hand up and say, “We got this wrong. We have evolved as an organisation since then and we are working to ensure this situation never happens again.” A statement along those lines may well be coming, but it could be too late. The initial impact has been felt, the public have made their judgements and there is the potential for significant fall out. How safe, for example, will women now feel applying for roles in cricket knowing that this behaviour doesn’t breach the code of conduct? It appears CA have undermined their own investigation by not taking a stronger stance. If they have confidence that the outcome they reached in 2018 was the correct one, they could have refused to accept Paine’s resignation and fronted the media with him to explain their rigorous processes and their belief in his suitability to continue on as captain. Instead they have taken an approach that is neither here nor there. Refusing to condemn Paine’s actions, but not condoning them either. Allowing Paine to step down from the captaincy, but making it clear he is still available for selection. Some good may yet come from this – the public reaction may prompt more meticulous standards on workplace behaviour within CA and its state organisations. There may be a re-examining of the code of conduct and a clearer set of guidelines for all employees about what constitutes acceptable workplace behaviour. But by not playing a shot upfront and letting this incident go through to the keeper before considering its stance, CA has lost an opportunity to establish itself as a forward-thinking, progressive organisation. They must hope it doesn’t take another scandal for that opportunity to present itself again.Xavi is back. With him as coach, Barcelona want to revive a great era. Thanks to his technique and overview, he was a world-class footballer who played strategically and with the team in mind. He supported his teammates as a play-off station, he set the scene for them precisely, he always found solutions. It seemed impossible to separate him from the ball, even when he was surrounded. In Xavi’s heyday, Spain were practically unbeatable, becoming European champions, world champions, European champions in successive tournaments. In the Euro finals, in 2008 and 2012, he assisted four goals. For a period he dominated the Champions League with Barcelona – winning the title twice and reaching the semi-finals in four other years. “It was the best team we have ever faced,” said Manchester United’s coach Alex Ferguson years after losing the 2011 final, when tiki-taka was at its peak. In midfield, Xavi complemented Andrés Iniesta ideally. Xavi was the metronome, Iniesta the ball carrier. The two had a similar division of labour to Luka Modric and Toni Kroos, who with Real Madrid replaced Barcelona as the benchmark of club football. Xavi also shares with Kroos the high quality of his long passes. Xavi was a perfect fit for Barcelona’s philosophy. Under Pep Guardiola’s direction, Xavi, Iniesta, Carles Puyol and Lionel Messi, the best footballers in the world at the time, internalised his idealism that everyone can do everything. Together they raised the balance between attack and defence to a new level. Body size was not decisive, not even in attack and defence. At that time, I could have moved to Barcelona. It would have been a great experience to be on the pitch with these greats. I look back with a tear in my eye, but also with a smile. As a Munich kid, I really wanted to win the Champions League with my club FC Bayern. I would never have forgiven myself if I hadn’t been there for the victory at Wembley in 2013. At that time, Barcelona was a role model for the whole world in another respect: the club had Unicef as its shirt sponsor. Times have changed. Coaches have lost some of their influence and players are even more decisive for the results. The last time Barcelona won the Champions League was in 2015. Since then, they have not been in the final, and instead are remembered for big defeats: 2-8 against Bayern Munich, 0-4 in Liverpool, 0-3 in Rome, 1-4 against Paris, most recently 0-3 in Lisbon. That is the downside of this football, which demands the best technique and a high level of intelligence from everyone but where physicality is not a priority. It sometimes backfires. Barça’s appeal has diminished, the dominant style with possession of 70% and more has been called into question. Already in 2010 and 2012, Internazionale and Chelsea barricaded the goal and eliminated Barcelona in the semi-finals. Today, they all have the “everyone behind the ball” principle down pat. Against a team defending in their own penalty box, technical solutions are less likely to help. Instead, the attacking team are reliant on their physique, such as for set pieces (height) or counterattacks (speed). So football has become faster, more robust, more physical. Even Guardiola has adapted in Manchester, his finely tuned game is still easily recognisable, but he lets play more defensively. The present knows new protagonists on the pitch: Trent Alexander-Arnold, Paul Pogba, Vinícius Júnior, Alphonso Davies or Erling Haaland – athletes who resemble Usain Bolt more than the 1.70m-tall Xavi. And Messi plays in Paris. There is, in fact, new economic competition. In 2011, Barcelona and Real Madrid, the clubs with the highest turnover in the world, were followed at a distance by Manchester United (€365m), Bayern (€320m), Arsenal and Chelsea (both €250). Today, large investments are being made at many locations. In Europe, there are about 10 clubs with an annual turnover of about half a billion euros. Meanwhile, about twice as many clubs compete for the best players. Many clubs are in the hands of very rich owners, now including Newcastle United. The dynamic that the market has ignited also affects coaches, who are also hired like stars. Once Arsène Wenger, Ferguson or Johan Cruyff became institutions in their clubs because of their philosophy. In the Bundesliga, Christian Streich will soon celebrate his 10th anniversary as head coach of Freiburg. Who still knows Guy Roux, who coached Auxerre from 1964 to 2000? Auxerre and Freiburg are niches where the quirky Roux and Streich were highly respected. Even Jürgen Klopp took four years to win titles with Liverpool. Coaches being given time is now the exception. At Barcelona, Xavi’s two immediate predecessors lasted less than two years combined. Most of the 10 or so top coaches such as Mauricio Pochettino, Thomas Tuchel, Antonio Conte or Carlo Ancelotti rotate every two to three seasons at the financially maximised clubs in London, Madrid and Paris. For them, it is more important to create a good atmosphere and to be accepted by the stars. Zinédine Zidane, who won the Champions League three times in a row with Real Madrid from 2016 to 2018, says about himself: “Tactically, I’m not the best coach.” He led his team through aura. This is now the decisive factor, not the long-term development of a playing idea; Liverpool even rely on artificial intelligence for squad planning. Xavi has the necessary charisma. There are few who have lived up to the Barcelona ideal as he has, who embody the great times so credibly. Now he is supposed to reproduce them under different circumstances. That will be a difficult undertaking. • Philipp Lahm’s column appears regularly in the Guardian. It is produced in partnership with Oliver Fritsch at Zeit Online, the German online magazine, and is being published in several European countries.On a street of shops in the Austrian city of Linz, a stone’s throw from the winding Danube river, two police officers in navy-blue uniforms and peaked white caps stop random passersby to check their vaccine passports. Elderly shoppers rummage around in their handbags and comply with a smile, but a fortysomething woman with a nose piercing is less forthcoming: she says she left her immunisation certificate on the kitchen table as she had to dash across town to see a dentist. When the woman fails to provide proof of her medical appointment, the officers ask her to head home, though they decline to take down details. “This is a state of complete madness,” she says as she continues on her original northward journey. Since Monday, about 2 million unvaccinated people in Austria are facing severe restrictions on their free movement after the conservative-led government took the unprecedented step of trying to suppress a powerful fourth wave of Covid-19 with a stay-at-home order for those with no proof of immunisation. Under the “lockdown for the unvaccinated”, those who have declined to take the jab and are found to have left their home for non-essential reasons can face fines of €500, rising to €1,450 if they fail to comply with checks. The measure has attracted worldwide attention, as countries across the globe are wondering if they can battle a seasonal resurgence of the virus through vaccines alone. In Germany, which has a comparable vaccine uptake (68%) to Austria (66%) and where the head of the disease control agency warned this week that the real number of new daily cases could be up to three times the 50,000 that showed up in tests, some politicians have suggested following the example set by its southern neighbour. Others fear the lockdown of the unvaccinated could set a dangerous precedent, enforcing a segregation on medical grounds in an already polarised society. In Austria, the step has been criticised not just by the far-right Freedom party (FPÖ) but also the liberal NEOS. The former Olympic skier Felix Gottwald, a national sporting icon, has said the law reminds him of his country’s darkest National Socialist past. Further still, medical experts fear it may also prove ineffective in fighting the pandemic, as authorities struggle to police the rules the government has imposed. In Linz, Austria’s third-biggest city, this week’s partial lockdown, as well as proof-of-immunity requirements in restaurants and bars introduced a week earlier, are already having one visible effect: on Wednesday morning, a rapidly growing queue had formed at the walk-in vaccine centre inside a shopping centre on Landstraße. Thomas Draxler, a bus driver in his 50s queueing for his first jab of the Johnson &amp; Johnson vaccine, said he was not a militant anti-vaxxer but had held out until now “because I haven’t had any run-ins with the virus”. But regular testing requirements for the unvaccinated had worn him down. “Now there’s no way around it”. From a legal point of view, driving up vaccination rates is only a desired side-effect of the partial lockdown. To survive challenges in court, the new measure also has to prove that it is suited to protect the healthcare system from a surge of Covid-19 patients. Lining up for his booster shot to the back of the queue, Maximilian Scherlacher justified the measure to restrict the movement of unvaccinated people in similar fashion. “I do think it’s fair,” said the 39-year-old, who is married to a hospital worker. “What would have been unfair is if we did not try to protect medical personnel working in emergency care and ill people who can’t get hospital beds because they occupied by unvaccinated Covid patients”. Upper Austria, of which Linz is the capital, experienced relative mild earlier waves of the virus but is now one of the Alpine republic’s Covid hotspots. At 60.8%, it also has the lowest vaccination rate of its nine states. “A year ago, we laughed at Donald Trump for suggesting you could treat corona by injecting disinfectant,” Scherlacher said. “Now we see it’s not that different over here.” For Austria’s stay-at-home order for the unvaccinated to be compatible with the country’s constitution, it must be justifiable from a medical point of view. Since vaccinations reduce the risk of catching and therefore passing on the virus, even if less effectively so over time, some scientists say this is the case. It also needs to work, argued Karl Stöger, a professor of constitutional law at Vienna university. “If the partial lockdown ends up being an intelligence test for those looking for loopholes how to evade fines, then that’s not good enough”, Stöger said. “A measure that doesn’t work must not come into action”. Since the start of the week, police in Upper Austria have carried out about 5,000 spot checks a day in the streets – none of them in people’s private homes – and detected 63 breaches of the new regulations. But even law enforcement officers concede working out whether a person walking around town is engaged in essential or inessential activity is at times impossible. The list of exemptions is long: unvaccinated people are still allowed to go to work, visit their partners, go for recreational walks and go shopping for food or other essential supplies. Asked whether the roasted chestnuts sold at the ubiquitous stalls on Landstraße counted as sustenance or leisure, a police spokesperson said: “That’s a good question.” Even the right to freedom of assembly is excluded from the lockdown rule: on Tuesday, police allowed a 600-strong anti-vaxxer protest outside the Wels-Grieskirchen clinic to go ahead. “Of course we can’t carry out comprehensive controls”, said another Linz police spokesperson, David Furtner. “We are reminding people that rules apply even when the police isn’t present.” On Friday, the national government conceded that minimising the movements of the unvaccinated alone would not suffice to flatten the curve. From Monday, every citizen in Austria will go into their third general lockdown of the pandemic for at least ten days. From February 2022, the government plans to make vaccinations mandatory across the country.Six years on from 2015’s 25, and the month after her comeback single Easy on Me went to No 1 in 25 countries, Adele has finally returned with her new album 30. Written amid her divorce from the father of her child, it returns to the wellspring of Adele’s songwriting: heartbreak, and the pain of moving on from it. It’s a process, as song titles like I Drink Wine and Cry Your Heart Out make very plain; in another new song, Love Is a Game, she sings: “My heart speaks in puzzling quotes I’ve been trying my whole life to solve / God only knows how I’ve cried.” So where does this rank in her tear-sodden canon? What wisdom has she learned from a rough few years, and has it found an effective voice in these songs? What are the contributions of new songwriting partner Inflo like – the brains behind Sault and a foil for Michael Kiwanuka and others? And has she rediscovered magic with old Grammy-winning partner Greg Kurstin? We want to hear your impressions of 30 after you’ve had time to listen to and digest it – please share them in the comments or via the form, perhaps while drinking a goblet of rosé. We will publish a selection of your thoughts next week. Share your thoughts You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.A direct descendant of Clive of India, whose exploits helped establish British rule in the country, has said he is uncomfortable with his ancestor’s statue in his home town of Shrewsbury and would prefer if it was removed. John Herbert, the eighth Earl of Powis, was speaking on Channel 4’s Empire State of Mind to the writer and columnist Sathnam Sanghera, who travels across Britain to explore how our misunderstanding of our imperial history confuses us about our national identity. The first episode of the series, which airs on Saturday at 9pm, explores the British empire’s legacy of racism. In the second episode, broadcast the following week, Sanghera confronts the legacy of empire head on. Clive is commemorated in Shrewsbury with a statue in the town centre, which during the Black Lives Matter protests of 2020 became a focal point of anger. Following a petition calling for the statue to be removed, the council voted to retain it and instead have an information panel explaining the historical context. This panel has yet to be installed more than a year after this promise was made. Standing beside Clive’s statue, Herbert says: “There was very much a request to bring it down and there were quite strong feelings. The council resolved in the end to keep it but put a plaque on it that will tell us more. But they haven’t put the plaque on. I’ve often wondered if it ought to come down. It’s very imperial and I’ve never been very comfortable with it. I’ve always wished it wasn’t here, put it that way.” When asked if his politics were anti-imperial, he replies “Yes” and goes on to explain he became so when he was about 14 or 15 and was expelled from school. Initially surprised by his response, Sanghera says: “One of the reasons this debate has become so poisonous is because people have such an emotional connection to the history. Someone like me is a descendant of the colonised, someone like you is the descendant of the colonisers, but you’re breaking that pattern.” To which Herbert replies: “I do think it’s because I am a little bit detached time-wise, I just don’t like that kind of stuff.” In the series, Sanghera travels from Edinburgh to speak to the writer Alex Renton, who recently discovered his ancestors’ involvement in West Indian slavery; and Batley and Spen on the eve of a byelection to examine the debates around multiculturalism and the culture wars. The series is a deeply personal one, as Sanghera examines his own confused sense of identity, which he traces back to empire. He returns to his home town of Wolverhampton, where he visits the house where his parents lived upon arriving from India in 1967, one year before local MP Enoch Powell’s infamous “rivers of blood” speech; and goes to his former grammar school to meet a new generation of young people eager to learn the history of empire that he wishes he was taught.Rents are rising at the fastest pace since 2008 as strong demand outstrips supply, according to the property website Zoopla.. Across the UK, private sector rents in September were 4.6% higher than a year earlier at £968 per month on average, marking the strongest growth in 13 years, Zoopla found. We’d like to hear from private renters in the UK looking for property now about their experiences of the rental market. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Austria is to become the first European country to make vaccinations against Covid 19 mandatory, and will go into its fourth nationwide lockdown for at least 10 days from Monday, the chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, has announced. The government said it was preparing the legal groundwork for a general vaccine mandate to come into effect from 1 February, with exemptions for those unable to receive a jab on medical grounds. The age from which people will be required to be vaccinated has not yet been determined, the government said. Those refusing to be vaccinated are likely to face administrative fines, which can be converted into a prison sentence if the fine cannot be recovered. “For a long time the consensus in this country was that we don’t want a vaccine mandate,” Schallenberg said after a meeting with the Alpine republic’s heads of state. “In spite of months of persuasion, we have not managed to convince enough people to be vaccinated”. Tightening vaccine pass controls and testing requirements had started to make a difference but it “hasn’t convinced enough”, said Schallenberg, who took over as chancellor last month from his party ally Sebastian Kurz. “We don’t want a fifth wave, we don’t want a sixth or a seventh wave.” Austria is weathering its most powerful wave of Covid, with authorities on Friday reporting 990 cases per 100,000 people over seven days. It recorded another 15,809 new infections on Friday. The country has the lowest vaccination rate in western Europe, with 66% of its population fully vaccinated. Over the past two weeks, the conservative green coalition government has tried to prevent a collapse of the health system by making it mandatory for citizens to show proof of vaccination or recovery at restaurants and bars, and then announcing a “lockdown for the unvaccinated”. The national lockdown is expected to last until 12 December but could be reevaluated after 10 days if the Covid situation has improved. Nurseries and schools will stay open but mask-wearing is mandatory in classrooms and pupils can choose to study remotely without a note from a doctor. Lockdown rules would end for vaccinated people from 12 December but stay in place for those who declined to take the jab. Those who have got their second jab will in the future only be considered fully immunised for seven rather than nine months, and can get their booster shot after four months. The former chancellor Kurz, who resigned amid a corruption inquiry in mid-October, had assured the public in July that “for everyone who is vaccinated, the pandemic is now over”. “No one wants a lockdown, it is a crude instrument,” said Austria’s Green health minister, Wolfgang Mückstein, on Friday. “But it is the most effective instrument that we have available”. In particular, the planned general vaccine mandate drew heavy criticism from the opposition benches in parliament. “From this day Austria is a dictatorship,” said Herbert Kickl of the far-right Freedom party, which has advocated scientifically unproven alternative treatments against coronavirus infections, such as the anti-parasite drug ivermectin. While countries including Italy and France have made vaccination against Covid-19 mandatory for health workers, Austria will be the first country in Europe to apply such a requirement for the society at large. Outside the continent, Indonesia, Micronesia and Turkmenistan have a vaccine mandate for adults. Unlike other federalised countries like Germany, Austria has a centralised national database of vaccination, which the government could check against those registered as living in the country to determine who has not yet got a jab. Mandatory vaccination is not unprecedented in Austria. In 1948 the postwar government made vaccination against smallpox compulsory by law. In 1980 the World Health Organization declared smallpox the first disease to have been defeated through vaccination. • This article was amended on 20 November 2021. Austria is entering its fourth nationwide Covid lockdown, not its third as an earlier version said in the text and subheading.Mary Ann Evely already knew she wanted to be a nurse at age 15, so she started volunteering at a children’s hospital in St Louis. Fifty years later, Evely’s feelings about nursing haven’t changed in spite of her work during the past 20 months in a hospice unit in Naples, Florida. In one instance near the start of the Covid-19 pandemic, three young men stood outside their grandfather’s room, not allowed to enter because of the virus. Evely wheeled the grandfather’s bed close to the window so they could at least see his face as he died. “That was the hardest thing for me,” said Evely, crying as she recounted the story. While Evely managed to move past that sorrow, her 28-year-old daughter Veronica, an intensive care unit nurse in Nashville, Tennessee, called her a year ago, after seeing three millennials die from Covid and said, “I can’t do nursing anymore.” That sense of burnout has become more common among nurses in the US during the pandemic because of anxiety, depression and exhaustion due to the increased workload; fears of catching the virus; and the witnessing of so many deaths, among other reasons, according to several studies. Now healthcare organizations across the country are trying to keep a shortage of nurses from getting worse and searching for answers on how to provide relief to nurses who are ready to quit. “Everybody has gone through some amount of stress and emotional distress with the pandemic, and nursing is no different,” said Betty Jo Rocchio, chief nursing officer for Mercy, a St Louis-based Roman Catholic healthcare organization. “It seems like our nurses have had that double impact, personally and professionally, and we say it’s created professional burnout, but it’s kind of just life burnout.” In a recent survey from the American Nurses Foundation, 21% of nurses said they planned to leave their job within the next six months, and half of those who wanted to leave said it was because work was negatively affecting their health and wellbeing. “They have given their all for a year and a half or two years,” Annette Kennedy, president of the International Council of Nurses, said at a recent press conference. “They have worked long hours. They have worked without breaks and they have been called to do a duty without protective equipment and without support.” Before the pandemic, Mercy had about 9,000 nurses, which was about 1,000 fewer than the health system needed, Rocchio said. That gap was further exposed as Covid patients started to fill up the hospitals’ emergency rooms and intensive care units. During the pandemic, the system has lost an additional 500 nurses to burnout, retirement or better paying travel nursing positions, Rocchio said. The College of Nursing at the University of Missouri–St Louis (UMSL) also saw a 20% decrease in its enrollment this year, according to Roxanne Vandermause, dean of the program. She doesn’t know the exact reason for the decrease but speculates that it could be because people have found school to be less of a priority during the pandemic or because of how healthcare – with its masking and vaccination requirements – has become an arena for conflict. “There is a point where I think average citizens say, ‘I don’t want to hear about these conflicts anymore. I don’t want to be part of these situations that are so completely uncontrollable,’” Vandermause said. The UMSL enrollment is not necessarily representative of national trends. Enrollment in bachelor’s nursing programs across the country increased 5.6% in 2020 from the year before, to just over 250,000 students, according to a survey from the American Association of Colleges of Nursing. But whatever the reason for the UMSL decrease, Rocchio is concerned because the local nursing schools are Mercy’s pipeline for staff. To increase the pool of nurses, Mercy is trying to find adults already established in other careers and encourage them to become nurses by offering scholarships and flexible clinical hours for training at its hospitals, Rocchio said. “We are trying to position ourselves to help anybody interested in nursing school get through nursing school,” she said. Hospitals across the country have also significantly increased salaries for nurses as they compete with one another and travel nursing companies for staff. The Wall Street Journal reported that the average annual salary for nurses, not including bonus pay, increased about 4% in the first nine months of the year to $81,376. Mercy is preparing to release an improved benefits and compensation package in order to remain competitive in the local market, though they can’t compete with travel nursing companies, Rocchio said. “We are looking at what are the things that our workforce needs in order to remain healthy, happy and stay working at Mercy, and it’s not just money but competitive childcare…as well as things around retirement, wellness” and flexible scheduling, Rocchio said. Evely, the Florida nurse, has not received a pay increase during the pandemic, but her employer did provide nurses an additional week of vacation time, she said. Still, if her husband had become sick with Covid, and Evely had to stay home from work, that would have counted against her vacation time. “I don’t think nurses take care of themselves, and of course I think they are underpaid and underappreciated – especially nowadays.” But she said before Covid “I felt like that too,” Evely said. In spite of that feeling and other heartache – she lost a 48-year-old fellow nurse to Covid – Evely remains committed to working in hospice. “So many people say, ‘How do you do this?’ And I don’t know what the correct response is, but I always say, “It’s part of life, and I am so glad that I was able to be able to help your loved one in the final journey,’” Evely said. Her daughter Veronica has also continued to work as a nurse. After the phone call, she had three days off. Evely encouraged her to “regroup and realize you’re helping people,” she said. “After that, she was fine.”The Wheel of Time, the new fantasy series on Amazon Prime, is what happens when Jeff Bezos orders you to come up with a Game of Thrones-type hit. This adaptation of Robert Jordan’s 11-novel series also functions as a stopgap while fans await Amazon’s Lord of the Rings prequel – Telling “Unexplored Stories” Based on JRR’s Works But With Creative Restrictions Imposed By the Estate! – which is expected to launch late next year. In the meantime we have the tale of a matriarchal land overseen by the magical ladies of the Aes Sedai, who channel the One Power to keep the peace. Men used to be able to harness the power too, until they – led by what we must presume was a rather charismatic figure called The Dragon – ruined everything. Now the few magical men left are hunted down and put to death by the sisterhood. Top Aes Sedai banana is Moiraine Damodred (played by Rosamund Pike, whose air of being fundamentally detached from, if not slightly above, proceedings serves her well here). She and her sidekick Lan Mandragoran (Daniel Henney) are on the hunt for the reincarnation of The Dragon. She knows he’s been reborn (“The Dark One is waking”), but precisely where and in what body she cannot be sure. Her search takes her to Two Rivers, a village full of surprisingly clean and dentally sound peasants. One of the local twentysomethings is likely to be the reincarnation (and all of them look as if at least one of their parents was Ryan Phillippe or Jonathan Rhys Meyers, a phenomenon I think requires as urgent investigation as the whole Dragon reborn business). They include: irrepressible scamp and wheeler-dealer Mat (Barney Harris); responsible, happily married Perrin (Marcus Rutherford), Egwene (Madeleine Madden), who has recently undergone the hairbraiding and rapids-shooting-in-a-diaphanous-gown that constitutes passage into womanhood round these parts; and motherless Rand (Josha Stradowski), who has no distinguishing characteristics apart from wearing a mohair jumper I’m sure I had in 1987 and being the prettiest of all the Meyers-Phillippe offspring. There is also Nynaeve (Zoë Robins) – a Wisdom who, despite looking like a zygote, seems to be a protective village elder. She is not pleased to see Moiraine, reckoning she is a sure sign of trouble. And so it proves. The village is attacked at length by some pleasingly well-rendered (Amazon Prime has money) monsters called Trollocs. Much grisliness ensues – including Perrin’s accidental killing of his wife in the heat of battle – until Moiraine throws magic at the problem. Off they go, to find themselves, their destinies and enough sex scenes to keep the punters happy (the characters’ ages in the books have been raised to keep them firmly out of YA territory). It’s absolutely fine. It’s got brio, it’s got style and it’s got enough portentous voiceover book-ending events to make everything feel high stakes. “The Wheel of Time turns, and ages come and pass, leaving memories that become legend,” says Moiraine as she and the young villagers set out and Pike thinks of the money and Harrison Ford’s plangent cry to George Lucas back in the day. “Legend fades to myth and even myth is long forgotten when the age that gave it birth comes again.” You can type this shit, but you sure can’t say it. Except, of course, sometimes you must.Good morning. Emergency crews in western Canada have been trying to reach 18,000 people stranded by landslides and struggling to find food among bare grocery store shelves after devastating flooding. With communities in the region braced for more torrential rain in already inundated areas next week, the premier of British Columbia province declared an emergency and gave an emotional address in a press conference on Thursday. Appearing to fight back tears, John Horgan said: “The positive I’m going to take out of this is that it had shown British Columbians coming together supporting each other. “This has been a terrible, terrible disaster but I know this: as British Columbians, as Canadians, we stick together. I want to come out of this. I’m going to build a stronger better province and a stronger and better country.” How many have died? One person is confirmed dead in a landslide that swept vehicles off a road, but with many others missing that number is almost certain to rise. What’s been done to help the stranded? Troops have been deployed in British Columbia to help stranded residents, support supply chains and search areas hit by landslides and floods. Democrats vow passage of ‘Build Back Better’ bill as Republican leader derails planned vote House Democrats have vowed to vote Friday on an expansive domestic policy package that would overhaul large swaths of the American economy, after the Republican minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, derailed a vote planned for Thursday evening with a rambling, hours-long speech. After months of fits and starts, gridlock and intra-party warring, Democrats had been on the verge of passing the centerpiece of Joe Biden’s economic vision on Thursday. But final passage of the measure was ultimately delayed by McCarthy, who used his leadership privileges to rail furiously against the legislation, the administration and the Democratic party for more than four hours. Democrats eventually dispersed and Steny Hoyer, the House majority leader, announced they would return early on Friday to vote on the legislation, known as Build Back Better. If it passes the House, the measure would next go to the Senate, where additional hurdles await in the evenly divided chamber. House speaker Nancy Pelosi’s office derided McCarthy speech as a “temper tantrum”, accusing him of making “unhinged claims” about the bill. With a paper-thin majority, Democrats can spare only a handful of defections on the package. Only one House Democrat, Jared Golden of Maine, was expected to vote against the bill. Peng Shuai: WTA prepared to pull out of China over tennis star’s disappearance The Women’s Tennis Association is prepared to pull its tournaments out of China if there is not an adequate response to Peng Shuai’s allegation that she was sexually assaulted by China’s former vice-premier, the WTA chief executive, Steve Simon, has told US media. Peng, a Chinese tennis star and former doubles world No 1, has not been seen in public since she accused the former high-ranking official, Zhang Gaoli, of sexual assault in a Weibo post that was deleted half an hour later. Concern among the global tennis community and beyond has grown over Peng’s safety and whereabouts since her allegation, with the WTA calling for an investigation and the world’s top players – including Serena Williams, Naomi Osaka and Kim Clijsters – tweeting #WhereIsPengShuai. Simon went further yesterday, telling US media the WTA, which has 10 events scheduled in China for 2022 worth tens of millions of dollars, was willing to pull them. What did Simon say? “We’re definitely willing to pull our business and deal with all the complications that come with it because this is certainly, this is bigger than the business … Women need to be respected and not censored.” What have China said? There has been no official response. Neither China’s government nor Zhang have responded to media queries or made any public statements. ‘I can’t do this any more’: US faces nurse shortage from burnout Anxiety, depression and exhaustion are among the reasons why nurses are quitting the profession, leaving healthcare organizations grappling with staffing shortages. The sense of burnout has become more common among nurses in the US during the pandemic due to the increased workload, fears of catching the virus and the witnessing of so many deaths, among other reasons, according to several studies. Now healthcare organizations across the country are trying to keep a shortage of nurses from getting worse and searching for answers on how to provide relief to nurses who are ready to quit. “Everybody has gone through some amount of stress and emotional distress with the pandemic, and nursing is no different,” said Betty Jo Rocchio, the chief nursing officer for Mercy, a St Louis-based Roman Catholic healthcare organization. “It seems like our nurses have had that double impact, personally and professionally, and we say it’s created professional burnout, but it’s kind of just life burnout.” More than 20% of nurses said they planned to leave their job within the next six months, according to a recent survey from the American Nurses Foundation. Half of those said it was because work was negatively affecting their health and wellbeing. “I don’t think nurses take care of themselves,” one nurse told the Guardian. In other news … The Republican congressman Paul Gosar retweeted a violent video that depicts him murdering Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez just minutes after being censured by the US House. Narendra Modi, the Indian prime minister, has announced he will repeal three contentious farm laws that prompted a year of protests and unrest in India, in one of the most significant concessions made by his government and a huge victory for India’s farmers. A Republican Senator has asked Saule Omarova, nominated to be comptroller of the currency, if he should call her “professor or comrade”, thereby dusting off the “red scare” playbook to portray Omarova, who was born in Kazakhstan, as a dangerous communist, which was a common ploy in the 1950s. Tiger King’s Carole Baskin is refusing to speak to a detective in Florida investigating the disappearance of her second husband. The detective said the star had three times refused requests for interviews, and that the investigation was continuing. Don’t miss this: How to thrive in the great resignation if you don’t want to quit They are calling it the great resignation or the big quit. A record 4.3 million workers in the US quit their jobs in August and the trend is continuing. People cite all kinds of reasons for quitting – they want a better work-life balance, they want more challenges, better conditions, more meaning. But what about those left behind? How do you stop your own career getting trampled as your colleagues race out the door? How do you manage your Fomo and quarry some advantage out of the situation? Climate check: US cities working to reduce emissions in the absence of bold action in Washington After the Cop26 conference ended in Glasgow, many activists and climate scientists felt the agreement did not go far enough and that the US government was among those who had not backed strong words with enough actual deeds. But action on a smaller level in the US – in cities and states – is gaining traction and beginning to make a significant difference. Smaller-scale initiatives to cut emissions have been the significant way that the US has made climate progress in the last few years, in the absence of stronger federal leadership. Want more environmental stories delivered to your inbox? Sign up to our new newsletter Down to Earth to get original and essential reporting on the climate crisis every week Last thing: I found a 95-year-old message in a bottle Jennifer Dowker describes spotting a glass bottle on the riverbed in Cheboygan, Michigan: “It was four inches long and half an inch wide. I could see something inside, but figured it was mud. I lifted the bottle and, when I looked closely, saw the word ‘this’ pressed against the glass. I swam to my boat and asked Rob to snap a photo, using his jackknife to pull out the bottle’s cork. I used a small hook to pull the paper through the bottle neck. I unfolded it and saw the date – November 1926. We all stood there like, ‘Woah, what just happened?’ Sign up First Thing is delivered to thousands of inboxes every weekday. If you’re not already signed up, subscribe now. Get in touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comPatrick Reyntiens, who has died aged 95, occupied a singular position in the history of British stained glass. Recognition of his genius as a maker in this medium has been complicated by its almost invisible status within the history of modern art and by the fact that some of Reyntiens’ finest work was done in creative collaboration with other artists. The period just after the second world war witnessed a stained-glass renaissance, after the genre’s apparent irrelevance in the 1930s. The multiplicity of ecclesiastical commissions, mostly funded by the government’s War Damage Commission, shaped the life of the young Reyntiens, whose remarkable partnership with the artist John Piper resulted in some of the finest modern glass in the British Isles. Complete trust enabled Piper and Reyntiens to work together on the huge challenge presented by the monumental baptistery window at the new Coventry Cathedral rising from the bombed-out ruins in the 1950s. Both men were impressed by the abstract expressionist section of the 1956 show Modern Art in the United States at the Tate Gallery. Piper acknowledged Reyntiens’ creative intelligence: “He took contemporary painting – and this meant Pollock and Guston – as his immediate influence, my cartoon as his pattern for operation and what he had learned about stained glass as his means of action.” It was Reyntiens who pushed the Coventry designs in the direction of pure abstraction, a Bernini-inspired “explosion” of colour that would overcome the limitations of the stone mullions that broke Piper’s design into 198 lights. Trust was also needed when the pair embarked on a commission for the lantern tower of Frederick Gibberd’s Roman Catholic Metropolitan Cathedral in Liverpool, constructed in the mid-60s. Reyntiens’ team worked at speed using the then fashionable technique of dalle de verre, in which the glass is set in structural mortar. Reyntiens’ reading of the last stanzas of Dante’s Paradiso led Piper to conceive the Trinity in bursts of blue, yellow and red light, abstracted further by Reyntiens’ strategic configuration of glazing bars. Reyntiens and Piper first met in about 1952 when Reyntiens, recently graduated from Edinburgh School of Art, was serving an apprenticeship with JE Nuttgens, a former student of the Arts and Crafts stained-glass artist Christopher Whall. While working for Nuttgens, Reyntiens’ sensitive repair of a JF Bentley window in Wantage church, Oxfordshire, impressed the poet John Betjeman and his wife, Penelope, enthusiasts for Victorian architecture. The Betjemans brought Reyntiens and Piper together, with Reyntiens initially translating a Piper gouache of two heads into a stained-glass panel, leading to the first of their many collaborations, for Oundle school chapel, Northamptonshire. Inspired by Picasso and the monumental figures of saints in the clerestory at Bourges Cathedral, the three windows, nine lights in all, each showed a different aspect of a crowned Christ figure. Hieratic and powerful, Reyntiens’ interpretation of Piper’s designs – employing flashed, painted, etched and layered glass – combined artistry and technical brio, and led to a commission for the war-damaged Eton college chapel, where eight windows represented miracles and parables semi-abstractly. Reyntiens’ training as a painter helped him source colour-intense glass from Germany and France. Reyntiens was generous about co-authorship although, eventually, after several decades, he ceased to work with Piper, unable to accept his tight budgets. He argued that it was only recently that the artist took up a role as originator or solitary prophet: “Until the 18th century, artists were priests; they reprocessed data which society laid at their feet and reclothed it with aesthetic wonder. Even someone as original as Michelangelo was reprocessing very old facts, very old data.” For Reyntiens, stained glass was a priestly occupation, not a prophetic one, and he also worked collaboratively with the artists Cecil Collins and Ceri Richards. His own glass – large and small scale – always reflected developments in modern painting, from his Braque-inspired Still Life panel, shown in British Artist Craftsmen at the Smithsonian in Washington in 1959-60, to his return in the 1980s to figurative work inspired by a whole range of resonant visual and literary sources, from Ovid’s Metamorphoses to Commedia dell’arte, to satellite dishes clustered on buildings and the beauties of the Jurassic coast. In windows to St Cecilia and St Hubert (1979) in the Chapel of St Mark at Sledmere House, in Yorkshire, we see Reyntiens at his most playful and literary. If appropriate, he could eschew originality, as with his window for the Great Hall at Christ Church, Oxford (1985), which wittily employed the language of 19th-century glass. Reyntiens held firm views on education, saying: “Teaching is not the conveyance of a commodity.” He and his wife, the painter Anne Bruce, ran an arts trust from 1963 until 1979 at Burleighfield, near High Wycombe, with its large studio initially used for the Liverpool Metropolitan commission. Burleighfield functioned as an innovative exhibition gallery, a temporary sculpture park and an alternative art school, with workshops for painting, stained glass, tapestry, print-making and ceramics, and a commitment to training local adults and children, as well as international students. Its closure by unsympathetic trustees was traumatic, even though Reyntiens was by then head of fine art at the Central School, London (1976-86), running his department with an eye to laughter and encouragement, campaigning for the continuance of life drawing, and retaining the services of the visionary Collins until well after his retirement date. Reyntiens was born into a Roman Catholic family in London, the son of Serge Reyntiens, a British diplomat of Russian-Belgian descent, and his Scottish wife, Janet (nee MacRea). Patrick grew up in Brussels, chiefly in the care of a loving nanny who read him Dickens. He was educated at Ampleforth college in North Yorkshire, served in the Scots Guards (1943-47), and attended St Marylebone School of Art (1947-50) and Edinburgh College of Art (1950-51). In 1953 he married Anne, and for the next two years the couple travelled on a scholarship through France, studying medieval and contemporary glass. A radical who always voted Conservative, Reyntiens’s book The Techniques of Stained Glass (1967) was cited in the countercultural Whole Earth Catalog. His subsequent The Beauty of Stained Glass (1990) is a fine short guide to glass from the 12th century onwards. The book was generous to younger practitioners and this generosity was played out in practice. In 2009 Reyntiens collaborated with the glass artist Graham Jones on a window for St Martin’s church in Cochem, Germany, and during 2003-07 he created a sequence of 35 windows for Ampleforth Abbey with his son John. His last commissioned art work was a panel for the American glass artist Dale Chihuly, completed when he was 92. Reyntiens’ experiences encapsulated the difficulties faced by a creative artist in stained glass in the 20th and 21st century, and made him a sympathetic art critic for the Tablet and the Catholic Herald during the 1980s and beyond. He served on advisory panels for Westminster Abbey, Westminster Cathedral and the Brompton Oratory. In 1976 he was appointed OBE. A lengthy biographical interview for the British Library’s National Life Stories captured his self-deprecating, drawling speech and his restless intelligence. Ebullient, well-read, a fine cook, a keen dancer and a devout Roman Catholic who believed firmly in angels, he was a master of the poetic aperçu. Anne died in 2006. He is survived by their children, Edith, Dominick, Lucy and John, six grandchildren and five great-grandchildren. Three grandchildren predeceased him. • Nicholas Patrick Reyntiens, stained-glass artist, born 11 December 1925; died 25 October 2021Jose Tovar believes he can pinpoint the day he got Covid-19: it was 8 April 2020 and he was cutting chuck bone at a meatpacking plant in Cactus, a little town in the Texas panhandle. Cactus might be a small place, but if you regularly eat beef in the US, at one time or another, it very likely came from the JBS meatpacking plant here, where Tovar was one of its 3,000 workers. The day he caught Covid, Tovar remembers that the man working next to him on the line was visibly ill. Just two days later Tovar, an immigrant from the northern Mexican border state of Coahuila, was short of breath and had a fever. Company management refused to share the health status of his co-worker, Tovar recalls, and he was told it was up to him if he tested for Covid-19. He tested positive the next day, and went into quarantine. At one point in the initial weeks of the crisis, supervisors at the Cactus facility instructed workers to use hairnets, rather than masks, to cover their nose and mouth, according to Tovar. “It was absolutely ridiculous,” said Tovar. At the time, it didn’t occur to him that he would have to fight so hard to prove that he caught Covid at work, or that in the coming weeks hundreds of his co-workers, and their families would be infected. Or that meat plant workers would be hit so hard by the pandemic that representatives would liken their experience to that of a “disposable” workforce. The human costs are still being fully comprehended. Last month a House subcommittee report found that workers at the leading US meatpacking plants experienced cases and deaths that were up to three times previous estimates. For Tovar and many other workers the early response by the big firms was key, and indicative of long-term, systemic concerns about safety. The World Health Organization declared the coronavirus a pandemic in mid-March last year, and Texas’s governor classified its spread across the state as a disaster. Yet, for nearly a month, JBS did not do enough to protect its employees at the Cactus facility, many of them low paid refugees or migrants, according to interviews with workers, union leaders and experts. “You just have to look at the conditions in plants to understand the way that folks were crowded without masks was an epicenter of transmission,” said Melissa Perry, chair of environmental and occupational health at George Washington University. Perry was an expert for Tovar in a lawsuit he later filed for compensation benefits from the insurer after missing work for weeks due to Covid. Worker representatives recalled that when some people brought masks from home, human resources ordered them removed. “JBS was concerned that people were going to get scared or excited [about mask use],” said Celestino Rivera, the United Food and Commercial Workers union representative for the Cactus plant. Asked about its response to the outbreak, JBS said it “aggressively” prioritized health and safety through a range of steps to keep the virus out of its facilities as early as February 2020. It said that to instruct workers to wear hairnets as opposed to masks would have been a violation of company policy. In mid-April, the company began to install plastic dividers between workers, hand out masks and check temperatures at the entrance of the building. Employees 65 years and older were kept from the plant and anyone experiencing Covid symptoms was advised to quarantine at home. Still, there was immense pressure felt by employees to keep working as staffing shortages raised the specter of a temporary shutdown. The company even resorted to cash and steak incentives to keep workers on the line. By the end of the month, the Trump administration had stepped in to declare meat processing plants “critical infrastructure”. “We felt there were instances where supervisors, because they were short-handed, were trying to convince individuals to continue working,” Rivera said. State health investigators in late April were tracking at least 159 coronavirus infections tied to the Cactus plant, including one death associated with the outbreak, the Texas Tribune reported at the time. When Tovar returned to work in May, he said that in banners and other communications there was a big focus on the “essential workers” message. “They kept telling us we were essential so that we wouldn’t complain,” Tovar said. “It felt wrong.” Tovar said the processor was getting by with a depleted workforce, which made the pace of production daunting. Frustrated, some of his co-workers passed around the number of Texas RioGrande Legal Aid, a non-profit organization that provides pro-bono legal services to low-income people across Texas. “I wasn’t looking for money, and I didn’t care if [JBS] fired me,” Tovar said. “I wanted to fight for justice.” There were 914 Covid-19 cases associated with that JBS plant by the end of June 2020, Texas Health and Human Services told the Guardian in an email. *** Cactus is probably best known for a Waylon Jennings song, named after the town, an immigration raid that hit the meatpacker in 2006, and a tornado that ripped through town the following year. These days, the streets of Cactus are populated by refugees and migrants. The Guardian spoke to more than 30 workers in the town; many had stories about how tough life could be working in the plant, even before the pandemic. Some described injuries, including one man who showed the Guardian his hand where one of his fingers had been amputated in an accident at the plant. Considering the blood-drenched environment of a slaughterhouse it should come as little surprise that the industry relies heavily upon, and the government is complicit in providing, foreign born workers to fill jobs that most American citizens won’t do. Though traumatic injuries from ultrasharp knives and bone-crushing machines are common, the gradual wear and tear of the job can also break a body. Existing protections simply do not account for the physical toll of disassembling thousands of animals into their saleable parts for a living. Ultimately it took the devastation of the Covid-19 pandemic to fully expose the vulnerability of the nation’s meat processing workers. From the start of the pandemic until September nearly 60,000 slaughterhouse workers at the major firms have contracted the coronavirus, and at least 298 of them have died. An exact accounting of the virus’s toll may never be known, in part, because of what has been described as weak oversight and a hands-off approach to workplace inspections that were features of the US Occupational Safety and Health Administration (Osha) enforcement under the Trump administration. On the campaign trail, Joe Biden cast himself as a champion of the working man, calling attention to the plight of workers in the meatpacking and processing industry. As president, Biden directed Osha to issue new emergency temporary standards to protect workers from the spread of the coronavirus. He also paused a controversial Trump-era proposal that would have allowed some meat processors to increase line speeds beyond regulatory limits. Both steps were widely praised by worker advocates, among them Debbie Berkowitz, a former Osha chief of staff, now a fellow at the Kalmanovitz Initiative for Labor and the Working Poor at Georgetown University. But after several months in office, the momentum toward deeper reforms has stalled, Berkowitz said. “The meat industry has not been held accountable for their failure to adequately protect workers,” Berkowitz said, “a true travesty.” In a statement, Osha said it was committed to worker safety and added that, as Biden had ordered, it was “continuing to review” its response to Covid. Worker advocates and safety experts say the administration has barely scratched the surface of problems baked into the industry’s DNA. “The pandemic opened a window to the working conditions inside these plants,” said Celeste Monfronton, workplace safety expert, “but the attention has not really extended to the underlying causes.” Large multinational companies dominate the $227bn market and before the pandemic about eight workers died annually, while coronavirus has claimed at least 30 times that number. Industry critics say foreign workers are particularly susceptible to exploitation, and the US refugee resettlement system funnels refugees to slaughterhouse jobs. Nearly 40% of the US meat industry workforce is foreign born and in Texas the number is closer to 56%. “Our government has partnered with the meat industry to bring refugees so that they have a workforce that is vulnerable and scared,” Berkowitz said. “And they get away with it because the industry is hidden from public view.” Advocates say the Biden administration has shown no indication that it will take on the social conditions and policy environments that endanger the lives of workers, such as requiring that the industry engage in health and safety research. Attention has turned, for now, to the congressional panel investigation into how the nation’s largest meatpacking companies handled the pandemic. The investigation, opened in February by the House select subcommittee on the coronavirus crisis, said not only had JBS USA, Smithfield Foods and Tyson Foods refused to take basic precautions to protect their workers, they had “shown a callous disregard for workers’ health”. In September the committee’s chair, Jim Clyburn, added Cargill and National Beef Packing Company (National Beef) to its investigation. *** With barely 21,000 residents spread over 900 sq miles of windswept plains, the people of Moore county, where Cactus is located, have cultivated a sort of frontier mentality. Perhaps that partly explains why county officials speak so supportively about its largest employer: JBS. Tommy Brooks, the county’s emergency coordinator, bristled at the suggestion the company, or county officials, should have acted sooner to protect workers. “This is a very reputable company,” Brooks said. “[JBS] did what they needed to do to make sure their people stayed as safe as they possibly could while still providing food to the American people.” The company claims to have adopted measures beyond federal guidance and industry standards, including ordering face masks in March, and requiring their use in April. Moreover, the company said workers who tested positive for Covid received up to 26 weeks of pay at the short-term disability pay rate of between 60% to 70% of their base pay. And Covid-related healthcare costs were covered in full, while the families of workers who died from the virus received compensation equal to at least one year’s salary, according to JBS. “We strongly disagree with any claim that suggests we have not prioritized the safety of our workforce at all times throughout the pandemic,” JBS said in a statement. When the department of state health services initially offered assistance, the company refused, and as far as Brooks and the county judge, Rowdy Rhoades, could see, there was no reason to doubt the company’s decision. With at least 3,476 sick and 85 dead, Rhoades acknowledged the devastation caused by the coronavirus in his county. He added that Covid restrictions that shuttered businesses was tragic in its own right. “This sounds stupid for me to say, but we’re God’s country,” Rhoades said of how the county endured the pandemic. “God takes care of us.” *** Tovar missed three weeks of work with Covid and had a fight to get fully compensated from a state workers compensation insurance scheme. Since passage of the Texas Workers’ Compensation Act in 1989, it has become exceedingly difficult for workers to sue over injuries or illnesses that occurred at work. Texas businesses are not required to subscribe to the workers’ compensation program, but the ones that do cannot be sued for negligence. “The system is anti-worker, anti-safety and designed to benefit big business,” said John Gibson, a Lubbock-based workers’ compensation lawyer. With few legal options, Tovar filed suit in May of 2020 against American Zurich Insurance Company, a participant in a Texas’s workers’ compensation insurance program, which had denied him temporary income benefits for missed work. His claim was rejected by the insurance company, so Chris Benoit, Tovar’s attorney, took his case to the Texas department of insurance’s division of workers’ compensation. Benoit had to prove that Tovar contracted the virus at work, something that very few workers’ compensation cases involving respiratory diseases have found. His expert witness was Melissa Perry, the epidemiologist from George Washington University. In the two weeks before his infection, Perry told the Guardian that JBS did virtually nothing to limit the spread of the virus. She based her opinion, in part, on crowded working conditions and photos that Tovar took of the plant locker room. “Everyone was just huddled together with no masks,” Perry said. Benoit argued that JBS did not socially distance its employees, or require masks at the time Tovar was exposed to the virus. The only reasonable epidemiological conclusion, she said, was that the virus was transmitted to Tovar inside the plant. “What was also clear from her assessment is that the one thing that they had to do to lower the risk of exposure in an outbreak like this was to reduce the line speed and space out workers,” Benoit said of Perry’s testimony. “That’s just not something they were willing to do.” The insurer dragged out his case for a year, but, in May, it lost, and paid Tovar that $1,300 in lost benefits, in what was seen as a “rare win for workers”. *** Critics say the business model of meat processors is designed to sustain the health of the industry, not its employees. Injured and sick workers are looked after by a pool of company-approved doctors who, critics say, send them back to work so that production won’t suffer, and the company can avoid reporting lost workdays to Osha. Employers were slow to protect their workers, Tovar’s expert Perry said, adding that Osha failed to enforce infection control requirements. “What can change if there’s really no data, if there’s really no information, if the companies say things are fine and Osha, which may never set foot inside the plant, accepts that on face value,” said Perry. For a change, union officials say the administration is listening to their concerns and seeking their input. By January this year just five meatpacking plants have been fined a total of $69,000 for Covid-19 violations. Rather than strengthen worker protections, Texas lawmakers made it even harder to challenge negligent employers when it passed Senate Bill 6 this June. The law shields businesses from lawsuits that ostensibly acted in good faith during the pandemic. Plaintiffs must gather evidence, which in some cases, such as Covid exposure, is practically impossible, Benoit said. Despite the obstacles, Benoit believes there is still reason for hope. “Mr Tovar’s case proves that insurance companies can be beat,” Benoit said. *** Tovar stayed on at the JBS plant for months, right up until he was demoted from his chuck bone duties. The change came with a pay cut, from $24 to $19 an hour. “They told me I could either take the job or quit,” Tovar said. At the end of October, he quit. Within days, Tovar was working the chuck bone line at another meatpacking plant near Amarillo. Tovar fidgeted uncomfortably on the edge of his living room couch on a late May evening. He had gone under the knife to repair a hernia only a few days prior. The injury occurred while doing the same cutting, lifting and twisting he had been doing for three decades in meatpacking houses. “The hernia tore open,” he said, and the slab of beef and knife fell from his hands at the moment. “The pain was intense,” he said. Workers’ compensation insurance covered the cost of his hernia surgery. Just two days later, he was back at work for the 6am shift. *** The meat processing industry has been desperate for workers, still reeling from pandemic related shortages, and Trump-era limits on refugee arrivals, down from 110,000 to just 15,000. Some have been offering signing bonuses of up to $5,000. Amazon, meanwhile, has been building a warehouse in Amarillo, and many in the refugee communities hoped to land a job there, apparently unfazed by the stories of the tech giant’s poor treatment of its workers. Tovar, for his part, has been trying to find meaning in his lawsuit. “I think I did the right thing,” Tovar said. “Hopefully it helps others.” Additional reporting by Encarni Pindado The International Women’s Media Foundation contributed to this article through grants awarded to Encarni Pindado.Imagine gathering the strength and courage to report an incident of domestic abuse to the police, only to be told that it is too late for them to take any action – you have been timed out, there’s nothing they can do. This is what is happening to thousands of domestic abuse victims every year when they discover that a six-month time limit applies to their case. The law isn’t working, and it is part of a wider failure of the criminal justice system to properly recognise or tackle violence against women and girls. A crucial vote in parliament on Monday provides the opportunity to change the law – now we need the government to show its support. Figures show that, over the past five years, police in England and Wales dropped close to 13,000 domestic abuse cases because they ran out of time, as a result of a six-month limit on prosecuting common assault cases in magistrates courts. The full figures are likely to be much higher – and the problem is getting worse, with more victims being timed out every year. The ostensible purpose of the time limit is to keep the justice system moving for lower-level offences in the magistrates courts that don’t pass the threshold for crown court. Charges have to be laid within six months of the offence so that cases can be decided quickly and everyone can move on. But while that might make sense for a fight in a pub, or an assault by a stranger in the street, it simply doesn’t work for domestic abuse. There are countless reasons why victims of domestic abuse may take time to report assaults to the police. The abuse may be continuing; leaving may be emotionally hard or fraught with physical danger; victims may feel ashamed; they may have nowhere to go or no money with which to leave; there may be children who need time and support to resettle. Victims have to muster a huge amount of courage to go to the police. For them to then be told nothing will happen can leave them feeling more vulnerable than ever, while their abuser is emboldened. While it is true that the most serious cases can still be prosecuted as actual bodily harm through a crown court, where there is no time limit, or through the more recent law on coercive control, vast numbers of domestic abuse cases every year are ruled to not meet that higher threshold. Police officers have told me of their frustration trying to secure an actual bodily harm prosecution against a violent perpetrator, only to be told by the Crown Prosecution Service that it should be downgraded to common assault instead. But too often by that time it is too late, and the perpetrator walks free. The consequence is that, once again, the criminal justice system is failing to recognise the reality of violence against women and girls. Laws and procedures designed to tackle other kinds of assault just don’t work for domestic abuse, but there has been a blindness to the experiences of abuse victims that has seen the problem continue for far too long. Earlier this year, I proposed an amendment to change the existing law, removing the six-month limit for domestic abuse cases to give victims more time to come forward. On Monday, the former victims commissioner, Baroness Newlove, will take the amendment forward in the House of Lords. In advance of the debate, and together with violence against women experts, we have written to the home secretary asking her to accept our amendment. It has support from the domestic abuse commissioner, senior police officers, Refuge, Women’s Aid and the Centre for Women’s Justice. Rightly, the government has promised stronger action to tackle violence against women and girls – Monday will be an opportunity to put this promise into action. This law change could make the difference in getting thousands of survivors and victims of abuse across the country each year the justice and the protection they need. Too many have been let down – such as the incredible campaigner Erica Osakwe, who spoke out about her own experience to try to get the law changed, or the brave woman in my constituency who reported appalling abuse to the police, only to be told the investigation had run out of time and there was nothing more she could do. Victims have shown huge strength in coming forward, only to find their chance of justice stolen by the time limit, giving the perpetrator the chance to abuse once more. It’s time to change the law. On Monday, we must not let survivors and victims down again. Yvette Cooper is the Labour MP for Normanton, Pontefract and Castleford In the UK, call the national domestic abuse helpline on 0808 2000 247, or visit Women’s Aid • This article was amended on 19 November 2021. The law applies in England and Wales, not across the UK as suggested in an earlier headline.With a title seemingly aiming this film at younger generations, this dynamic documentary from 22-year-old Franz Böhm is in fact a must-watch for people of all ages. Cop26 has shown how the media landscape is driving a wedge between age groups, with young activists’ work met with misconceptions and ridicule. But this film, as it chronicles the struggle for justice and equality across Hong Kong, Chile and Uganda, is an intimate and empathetic portrait of young people who are simply fighting for a brighter future. What arises from these vignettes of radical activism and protest is a sense of deep attachment to one’s home, the kind of unconditional love that galvanises spirits into physical and ideological battles. After the raising of metro fares in Santiago in Chile, a move that would directly affect low-income families, Rayen became one of more than a million people who protested and called for President Piñera’s resignation. Their demands, however, were met with police brutality; nearly 400 protesters were blinded as a result of seemingly deliberate targeting. Such dangers are eerily similar to those endured by young Hong Kong dissident Pepper, who was on the frontline during the demonstrations against controversial extradition laws. In both locations, the camera, like its subjects, takes to the streets, capturing the fervour and the peril of the protests at a close range. Moreover, as the narration consists entirely of the activists’ own voices, the film acquires an urgent immediacy, as the young women are enabled to tell their own stories. Not all the stories are so effective: in contrast to Rayen’s and Pepper’s militant struggle, Hilda’s fight for climate change awareness in Uganda feels at times haphazardly edited and out of rhythm with the rest of the film. Still, this remains an impressive debut from such a young director, who is clearly marching in step with his progressive peers. • Dear Future Children is released on 19 November in cinemas.New South Wales is bracing for more potential flooding with heavy rainfall expected to lash much of the east coast over the weekend and possible thunderstorms predicted to hit Sydney. The city is expected to see up to 50mm of rain on Sunday alone, with rain and thunderstorms also forecast for Saturday and Friday afternoon. The Bureau of Meteorology said there could be further severe weather warnings issued across the weekend, with heavy rainfall likely to hit much of the state, intensifying beyond the Western Slopes region and towards the coast. Agata Imielska, senior climatologist and manager of NSW and ACT at the bureau, said there was potential for “severe thunderstorms” that could bring heavier rainfall and hail. “With those thunderstorms, they can produce that localised heavier rainfall but also a risk of damaging winds and hail, which is more of a risk for the north-east of the state.” “The most significant element is that the rainfall will be quite widespread, with the rain expected to start late afternoon or evening on Saturday and to peak on Sunday.” The south coast can also expect a drenching, with up to 50mm of rain forecast for Bateman’s Bay and Bega across Saturday night and Sunday. Usually dry areas around the south-west of Queensland could also be affected, with a month’s worth of rainfall predicted for the region. The rain is due to a deepening low pressure system crossing NSW and could potentially see renewed flooding across the state. There is potential for renewed flooding at catchments that are already saturated from rainfall earlier this week, including at the Paroo, Namoi, Macquarie and Lachlan catchments. “It will come down to where we’ll see those heavier falls, and with these kinds of events there’s always the risk of thunderstorms developing in the wrong spot, and intensifying,” Imielska said. “The risk is in these catchments that already have water moving through the river system. So there has been a flood watch issued for minor to moderate flooding, so if you intend on heading out on the road, please be mindful of the conditions. “Thunderstorms could develop and change conditions very rapidly on the road.” The bureau warned there was still some unpredictability about where the rain would fall. “With this particular system, we’re seeing some of the guidance moving the area where we could see significant falls. These systems are a bit more sensitive and a bit more changeable.” It comes after the Lachlan River peaked at Forbes at 10.53m on Thursday morning, damaging crops and homes but avoiding a repeat of the 2016 floods. The flooding caused more than 1,800 residents to evacuate their homes earlier this week. Major flooding was seen at Cottons Weir this week, and is also forecast for Jemalong on Friday. The Namoi River peaked on Friday morning just below the minor flood level (4.9m), with the flood peak expected to reach Goangra on Tuesday. Dam levels across the state remain high, as many towns in the central-west hope floodwaters will recede before the weekend’s rain.They call it “the Great Resignation”. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 4.4 million Americans quit their jobs in September. The analytics firm Visier puts it in even starker terms, reporting that one in four workers quit in the past year. Job separations initiated by employees – quits – have exceeded pre-pandemic highs for six straight months. After the insecurity of the pandemic and the mass layoffs in hard-hit industries, many had predicted that the Covid crisis would yield more job retention and sterner worker competition as people sought stability in an uncertain time. Instead, employees are showing themselves more willing than ever to quit or change their jobs. The result has been a labor shortage, as employers struggle to find people to work and wages have finally been forced up. In an unexpected twist, the dawn of the post-pandemic era has brought with it a surprising moment of labor power. Most popular explanations for the Great Resignation focus on the shifting sentiments of workers. “The pandemic was sort of a nationwide awakening during a very stressful time,” Anthony Klotz, a psychologist at Texas A&amp;M who coined the term “Great Resignation”, told NPR. “Most people were reflecting on their lives at the same time that work was causing them burnout, or they were really enjoying working from home.” But while the introspection occasioned by quarantine may have led some workers to reassess their priorities and willingly change their lives, such an explanation for the sudden disappearance of so many people from the job market might be better explained by material factors. The fact of the matter is that when we speak of the Great Resignation, we are really referring to a great resignation of women. During the pandemic, women have exited the labor force at twice the rate that men have; their participation in the paid labor force is now the lowest it has been in more than 30 years. About one-third of all mothers in the workforce have scaled back or left their jobs since March 2020. That labor shortage? It’s being felt most acutely in sectors like hospitality, retail and healthcare – industries where women make up a majority of workers. Why are women leaving the workforce at such a disproportionate rate? It’s not because they have been on personal journeys of soul-searching and self-discovery. It’s because they have nowhere to put their kids. Schools were closed for much of two straight school years; many still face interruptions, quarantines and closures. And for the parents of even younger kids, daycare centers, already unaffordably expensive and in dramatically short supply before the pandemic, closed in record numbers over the past year. Now, costs have been driven even higher; waiting lists can stretch for months. It might be more accurate, then, to say that as far as working mothers are concerned, the Great Resignation doesn’t reflect women leaving the workforce. It reflects them being forced out. The pandemic made women’s exit from the labor force rapid and highly visible. But the loss of female workers is nothing new. Women’s workforce participation rate has been declining steadily since the 2008 financial crisis. The pandemic merely accelerated an already alarming trend. Childcare – along with its generational inverse, elder care – have always been among the primary culprits. American disinvestment in the care economy has waged a war of attrition on women’s employment, with women forced to chose between jobs where they are paid too little and childcare solutions that cost too much. The result has been a massive loss of talent, creativity and human potential from the paid economy. When care is not invested in, women are not prioritized – and that means that half of the nation’s minds risk being exiled to the domestic sphere. The economic impact of women’s expulsion from paid work is being felt acutely now, as the service and healthcare sectors struggle to find workers. But the moral impact has been felt for decades. The first time the first woman sat down and calculated that sending her kids to daycare would cost more than she could earn at her job, the nation was already in crisis. The loss of women from the paid workforce – a trend not seen on anything like the same scale in countries with sane and responsible investments in their care infrastructure – makes the US economy less competitive, and makes families less prosperous, leading to worse outcomes for households over the long term. And it also makes women less equal, less powerful and often less challenged and fulfilled in their individual lives – a great loss unto itself. *** The trend of women leaving the workforce to care for their children has often been explained as a matter of women’s personal choices. But to the women facing the stark financial reality that they can’t afford both their own professional ambitions and to meet the needs of their kids, it doesn’t feel like much of a choice at all. It feels like their options have been narrowed so much that the choice has been made for them. With so much of the labor shortage being driven by women’s forced exit from paid work, why has the “Great Resignation” been spoken of as a shift in sentiment and attitudes, rather than as a response to women’s caregiving responsibilities? Maybe one reason is that commentators have become blind to women’s needs, or accustomed to ignoring them. That might explain why major economic shifts have been explained with theories about gender-neutral emotions – rather than gender-specific material realities. But to be fair, not all of the labor shortage can be explained by the childcare crisis pushing women out of the workforce. No doubt there are, in fact, many workers reassessing their priorities and demanding more from their employers – as well they should. But workers who are quitting their jobs for other reasons have the power and flexibility to do so because of a labor shortage caused in part by a mass forced exit of women from the workforce. It’s a reality that casts the victories of rising wages and employer concessions in a more complex light. This moment of worker power – a social good – has been in part subsidized by the expulsion of mothers from the workforce – a generational tragedy. Moira Donegan is a Guardian US columnistRyanair is pressing ahead with plans to delist from the London Stock Exchange because of foreign ownership and control rules that apply after Brexit. The low-cost airline, which indicated earlier this month that it intended to become solely listed in Dublin, said its last day of trading on the London Stock Exchange would be 17 December. “As indicated at our interim results, and following subsequent shareholder engagement, Ryanair has decided to request the cancellation of London listing,” the company said in a statement. “The volume of trading of the shares on the London Stock Exchange does not justify the costs related to such listing and admission to trading, and so as to consolidate trading liquidity to one regulated market for the benefit of all shareholders.” Ryanair said it had notified the UK’s Financial Conduct Authority and would be officially delisted at 8am on 20 December. Earlier this year, Ryanair said that the move away from a listing in London was “consistent with a general trend for trading shares of European Union corporates post Brexit”. The airline said it was also a “potentially more acute” issue for it because EU rules mandate that airlines are majority-owned by EU nationals. Ryanair has its primary listing in Dublin, Ireland, and has previously made some UK investors sell shares this year to remain in compliance with the rules. “Following the cancellation of the London listing, the company will continue to have a primary listing on the regulated market of Euronext Dublin, which offers shareholders the highest standard of protection, including compliance with the UK corporate governance code,” Ryanair said. Its chief executive, Michael O’Leary, said earlier this month that the move was “sadly an inevitable consequence of Brexit”. While the EU and UK reached agreements that ensured flying could continue uninterrupted, the UK was unable to secure amendments to the foreign ownership rules. UK and other non-EU-owned carriers cannot operate flights between other European countries, and while Ryanair is EU-based, 45% of its shares are held in the US – meaning it had to deter any further investors. EasyJet relocated much of its operation to a Vienna-based EasyJet Europe before Brexit to remain compliant.Risotto is perfect food. Warm, starchy and comforting, it is one of the most versatile dishes the home cook can learn. It is an ideal first food for young children who don’t quite have it in them to chew yet and it’s perfect for anyone under the weather. My mother always taught me, in a manner that would have purists running for the hills, that risotto was basically a dustbin for any scraps you happen to have lying around. That isn’t necessarily the case, but there is still plenty you can do with it, as these 10 recipes attest. Perfect risotto If you are new to risotto then allow me to direct you, as always, to Felicity Cloake. Her perfect risotto recipe is now 11 years old and contains nothing but rice, stock, butter, wine, onion and cheese, but every element is able to reach maximum potential. Better yet, if you haven’t made a risotto before, Cloake is very careful to guide you through all the laborious stirring that you’ll need to do. Of course, you don’t have to continually stir every risotto, but we’ll come to that. Risotto with lemon Equally simplistic but no less delicious is Anna Del Conte’s risotto with lemon. This is a creamier dish than Cloake’s – which is why it requires actual cream, along with an egg yolk, which is mixed together with parmesan and stirred through the dish a couple of minutes before serving – but it is just a non-stop delight to eat. If you’re going to default to anyone when it comes to risotto, it should probably be Del Conte. Recioto red wine risotto with lardo In 2019, Nino Zoccali offered us four types of risotto in the same article. They are all great, but I’m choosing to showcase his recioto red wine risotto with lardo. This is partly because it offers the most thump, in both taste and appearance, but also because I have lost count of the times that I’ve accidentally dumped a load of red wine into my risottos, and the existence of this recipe makes it look like I did it on purpose. Brussels sprout risotto Yotam Ottolenghi’s brussels sprout risotto is nothing short of a wonder, transforming what has the potential to be a bitter bowl of slurry into something that might be the most perfect vehicle for brussels sprouts ever created. Try this once and you’ll never eat a risotto-less sprout again. Nettle risotto Meanwhile, Locanda Locatelli’s Giorgio Locatelli has a recipe for nettle risotto. There is obviously a mental barrier to trying something like this – you might not want to get stung, or go out and forage for your supper – but the ingredient does have one enormous benefit over nearly everything else covered here today. As Locatelli himself states: “It’s free.” Vegan risotto Risotto is also a tremendous vegan dish, as Meera Sodha’s celeriac risotto with caper, sage and lemon oil handily proves. The dairy is replaced with nutritional yeast and a gorgeous oil infused with sage leaves and capers. The star of the dish, though, is the celeriac, which breaks down into a mash during the cooking process and makes every mouthful extraordinarily soft and creamy. Bacon, chicken and cheddar risotto Here is where I hold my hands up and admit that, with picky young kids in the house, I have a habit of bastardising my risottos far beyond what most Italians would deem acceptable. The closest I can find to my favoured recipe is this one for bacon, chicken and cheddar risotto by A Flavour Journal. Should any of these things be in a risotto? Probably not, and definitely not together. But you try making it, and then tell me it isn’t delicious. Spinach and mushroom pearl barley risotto Equally, there are options for risottos that require non-rice grains. The internet brims with different types of quinoa risotto, and here is a spinach and mushroom pearl barley risotto recipe, courtesy of Olive magazine. It’s good, too. A little stiffer than rice, pearl barley in a risotto always feels slightly more substantial than its more traditional cousin. Ginger and lemon risotto Risotto is good for the sick and it is hands down the best thing you can eat when you feel the first murmurings of a cold. The DeTacchi website has a recipe for ginger and lemon risotto that offers such a heavy medicinal punch that it should really come in tablet form. I couldn’t recommend this one more. Baked risotto Last, it is worth pointing out that I have stopped making stove-top risotto altogether lately. A traditional risotto requires total, undivided attention, and I constantly find that my attention is being aggressively yanked in a hundred different directions at once, even during dinner time. So what I do is this: I cook my risotto in the oven instead. A baked risotto barely requires any stirring at all; instead you saute onions and herbs in a dutch oven, add the rice and broth, stick in the oven for 15 minutes and you’re done. The Kitchn has a great beginner’s recipe. Get good at that and then you can start to freestyleThe multimillionaire Afrobeats star Davido has said fans and friends paid him more than £300,000 after he asked people on Twitter to send money. The Nigerian-American singer, whose real name is David Adeleke, posted on Wednesday: “If u know I’ve given you a hit song … send me money,” and gave details of a new Nigerian bank account. Within 90 minutes of the posts – to his more than 31 million followers on Twitter and Instagram – the 28-year-old shared a screenshot of his account balance showing more than 42m naira (about £76,000) had already been deposited. In one post with laughing emojis, he said his aim was to raise N100m to get his Rolls-Royce car cleared from a port. Stars and companies boasted of taking part, posting screenshots of their donations, in a viral episode that has been met with positive and excited reactions on social media in Nigeria but also bemusement and criticism of the wealthy star publicly soliciting funds. As word spread, the singer lightheartedly called out celebrities and friends in videos posted on Instagram Stories. He thanked stars ranging from the singer Falz to the Nigerian Leicester City footballers Wilfred Ndidi and Kelechi Iheanacho, and Nigerian royals, between posts showing him sitting in a Lamborghini and appearing to buy luxury jewellery in Dubai. On Thursday night a further screenshot showed N184m (£333,000) had been sent in less than two days, and Davido hinted at a possible show in Lagos. Many fans posted screenshots showing transfers of a few dollars in appreciation for his almost decade-long career of international hit songs and as one of the continent’s biggest pop stars. But some have been fiercely critical, calling the stunt unethical. “Nigeria is a dystopia,” said one person in a series of posts on Twitter. “Someone who isn’t in need encouraging people who are likely in need and who have much less than them to send them money is weird, man. In a country where only a small tiny per cent have up to N500k in their account.”Australia and New Zealand have signed legally binding participation agreements to compete in next year’s Rugby League World Cup, the tournament’s chief executive revealed on the day the full schedule for the delayed event was unveiled. The World Cup was due to be held in England this autumn before organisers pushed the tournament back 12 months after the Kangaroos and the Kiwis said they would not attend due to concerns around player safety and Covid-19 rates in the United Kingdom. However they, along with the other 19 nations that will compete in the men’s, women’s and wheelchair competitions, have now fully committed to participating in 2022, Jon Dutton said. He said that with the agreements now signed, his remit reverts to rebuilding relationships with Australia and New Zealand. He will go to Australia in January and hold up to 50 meetings with NRL clubs and senior figures from both nations. “That adds more confidence,” he said. “We’ve had what I would describe as positive, conciliatory conversations. They didn’t want to play this year, but they do next year. They appreciate how significant this is for international rugby league. “We all needed a break after August [when the competition was postponed]. We needed to stop feeling sorry for ourselves and come back positive. The agreements are as legally binding as any other contract we have in place. We have every nation signed and committed and we didn’t have that before. Dwelling on what might have been isn’t important any more. Everyone now wants to look forward and make this happen.” Dutton also insisted that no matter what the Covid situation looks like next autumn, the tournament has no plans to introduce its own policy surrounding the vaccination status of players. “The rates both here and in Australia are heartening but regardless, we will adhere to whatever Public Health England rules are in place,” he said. “There will be nothing mandatory from our end in terms of vaccination status.” The men’s tournament begins on 15 October when England play Samoa at St James’ Park, with a crowd of more than 50,000 the aim. The women’s event begins in Leeds on 1 November, where organisers are targeting a sell-out at Headingley for England’s game with the debutants Brazil. Only five of the 61 fixtures have been affected by the postponement across all three tournaments, but one of those is the men’s quarter-final that was due to be staged at Anfield. With Liverpool’s stadium undergoing renovation work next autumn, the quarter-final involving the winner of England’s group will be staged at the DW Stadium in Wigan instead. The Emirates Stadium will still host a men’s semi-final – almost certain to be England’s should they reach that far – while all three finals will now be played in Manchester within 24 hours of each other. The men’s and women’s finals will take place at Old Trafford in a double-header on 19 November, the day after Manchester Central stages the wheelchair final.Thank heavens the narrative can shift from Steven Gerrard’s career after Aston Villa to his performances actually managing his new side. Although that might not last long if Villa hammer Brighton but that is rather unlikely considering Villa’s miserable losing run of five and Graham Potter’s side losing only to Manchester City in their last eight matches. Potter’s problem is his winning start stalling. Brighton’s away form is good, though, and the 2-2 draw from two down at Anfield should be more than enough inspiration for the coach to get back on track with a win that shows he is still the brightest English footballing mind in the top flight at present. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Villa Park Last season Aston Villa 1 Brighton 2 Referee Anthony Taylor This season G9 Y31 R2 3.66 cards/game Odds H 17-11 A 2-1 D 12-5 ASTON VILLA Subs from Steer, Archer, El Ghazi, Traoré, Young, Nakamba, Hause, Bogarde, Douglas Luiz, Tuanzebe Doubtful Douglas Luiz (hamstring), Nakamba (groin), Traoré (hamstring) Injured Trezeguet (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y25 R1 Form WLLLLL Leading scorer Ings 3 BRIGHTON Subs from Scherpen, Connolly, Sarmiento, Lamptey, Mac Allister, Richards, Webster, Burn, Moder Doubtful Burn (knee), Connolly (heel) Injured Mwepu (knock, 27 Nov), Alzate (ankle, Jan), Welbeck (hamstring, unknown) Suspended Sánchez (one match) Discipline Y29 R1 Form DDDLDD Leading scorer Maupay 4Farmers in India have been celebrating after the prime minister Narendra Modi announced he would repeal three contentious farm laws known as the “black laws”. After a year of protests in India where hundreds of thousands of farmers marched to Delhi’s borders, Modi announced on Friday: “We have decided to repeal all three farm laws. We will start the constitutional process to repeal all the three laws in the parliament session that starts at the end of this month.” If you are a farmer in India, we would like to hear your reaction to the laws being repealed. Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact for publication before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.There is a decent chance you haven’t caught, or even heard of, The Problem with Jon Stewart. Available on Apple TV+, the new(ish) comedy current affairs series from former Daily Show ringleader Stewart seems – at least from the lack of buzz on social media* – to be a victim of that peculiar streaming-age phenomenon where a deep-pocketed media company throws huge amounts of cash at talented people to make projects that then get buried amid a slew of similarly pricey projects made by similarly talented people. (See also: practically every TV series and film made in the last few years by Amazon.) I have been watching The Problem with Jon Stewart, mainly out of a nostalgic desire to relive the glory days of Stewart-era Daily Show, clips of which I devoured online as a student gawping across the pond at the stupidity and brutality of Bush-era America. Clever, goofy, droll, and possessing a Gen-Xer note of disdain for any and all authority, the Daily Show felt like an exciting update of what satire could be. It was also at times fabulously mean: just witness the utter ruthlessness of this segment reacting to Dick Cheney accidentally (and non-fatally) shooting his hunting partner in the face. The Problem with Jon Stewart, I should warn anyone looking to time-travel back to those less-than-halcyon neocon-era days, is definitely not The Daily Show. Granted, it does feature an opening behind-the-desk monologue that – with its deadpan zingers and endless archive clips of Fox News hosts saying outrageous/inane things – feels close to what Stewart did every night on Comedy Central for 16 years. But from thereon in The Problem … diverges markedly from The Daily Show. Each episode sees Stewart seek to solve a societal, political or cultural problem, from hyper-specific issues such as the deadly effects of US military burn pits to broader catch-all topics like “the economy”. He does this, primarily, by carrying out interviews with politicians, scientists, industry insiders and other people tangentially connected to said problem. These interviews are usually extremely long, often quite worthy and rarely terribly funny. And, in fairness, I am not sure they’re intended to be terribly funny. Stewart seems less interested in making people laugh than getting them energised to change things. This was something already starting to become evident towards the end of his Daily Show run – the episode on burn pits is a sequel of sorts to his impressive work raising awareness and money for 9/11 first responders – but with The Problem … he has gone further. These days, Stewart is more activist than satirist. He is not alone. If you have watched any of the major US topical satire shows of the last five or so years – Last Week Tonight with John Oliver, Full Frontal with Samantha Bee, the Trevor Noah-era Daily Show, even a few late-night hosts such as Stephen Colbert and Seth Meyers – you will have seen something similar: the usual razor-sharp gags crafted by a well-armed militia of comedy writers, yes, but also big, emotive campaigns and calls to action. Activist satire is hardly new (Mark Thomas has been doing it in the UK for decades), but this current strain found its voice in the cruelty and absurdity of the Trump era, where merely coming up with acid one-liners at travel bans, rampant corruption and attempted subversion of the democratic process didn’t really cut it: you had to be seen to be resisting in word and deed. Now that Trump has gone and there is borderline business as usual, those comics are having to work a little harder to get their audiences activated: ‘We Need to Save the Postal Service – Here is How We Do It!’ implored a recent segment of Full Frontal. Is this “activist satire” a problem, per se? Certainly it’s better than some of the current alternatives: the scattershot and hopelessly tone-deaf Spitting Image or the low-stakes chumminess of political panel shows such as Have I Got News For You. “Are you doing some kind of exotic display for the court, or are you trying to change something?” Chris Morris, who knows a fair bit about these things, asked of satirists in a Channel 4 interview a few years back, and by that metric Stewart and co are succeeding. Still, there is a tricky line for shows such as The Problem with Jon Stewart to tiptoe. Satire is at its best when it lures you into some blinding realisation – about power, inequality, society – through laughter, rather than clubbing you over the head with a message. Tip too far towards the latter and, well, you’ve got a problem. * As ever with streaming, actual tangible ratings for The Problem … are unobtainable. Apple has merely said that the series is the biggest unscripted programme among its still fairly small roster of original shows. If you want to read the complete version of this newsletter please subscribe to receive The Guide in your inbox every Friday.An organisation has been established to tackle sexual harassment in the UK comedy industry. Get Off! Live Comedy was launched this week with a fundraiser at London’s Comedy Store featuring Sara Pascoe, Nish Kumar, Russell Howard and Sikisa Bostwick-Barnes. The lack of structure and regulation within the live comedy industry, plus the fact that most of its workers are self-employed, has led to problematic power imbalances and difficulties reporting harassment. The new organisation was set up by comedians Nina Gilligan and Kiri Pritchard-McLean following a wave of revelations from the industry in 2020. “We think everyone deserves a safe, respectful workplace,” said Pritchard-McLean. Venues and promoters can become members of Get Off!, which provides them with access to an independent HR professional as well as assistance with harassment policies and training. Individuals can also approach the organisation to report incidents. “If you’ve witnessed or experienced sexual harassment you can come to us,” said Gilligan. “We want victims and witnesses to feel safe enough to come forward, so that we can investigate based on evidence.” Members who complete training and embed a policy will earn the right to display the Get Off! kitemark, showing performers and customers that they are actively tackling the problem. “We want the general public to understand who we are, so you can consume comedy ethically,” said Gilligan. Around 60 venues and promoters have already joined, including the Comedy Store, Glee and the Stand. “I’m pleasantly surprised at how enthusiastic everyone has been, from the rooms above pubs to the big chains,” said Pritchard-McLean. “It shows this is a priority, they’re not just paying lip service.” Jessica Toomey runs Manchester comedy club the Frog and Bucket, which is now a Get Off! member and will host a fundraiser for the organisation later this month. Toomey also sits on the Live Comedy Association board and is part of its sexual harassment taskforce. “We knew that something like this had to be set up, but we almost felt it was impossible,” she said. “Get Off! helps flag a venue as a safe space. If you saw a venue hadn’t signed up to this, you’d wonder why. If something happens in your venue, it could be quite daunting to deal with that and know you’re doing it in the right way. When it’s your business, you’re naturally going to be protective over it, so you need someone who is not linked to comedy and can take a fair, independent view of any complaints.” Simon Mason, production manager at the Comedy Store, added: “It’s important that all comedy clubs are involved. We are the longest-standing and one of the biggest, so it seems right to lead by example. We have a lot of young comedians performing here and they have to feel safe.” Get Off! has collaborated with the University of Sunderland to conduct a comprehensive survey on harassment in the industry. “If you have anything to do with live comedy – if you’re a technician, agent, producer, whatever – please fill in the survey,” said Pritchard-McLean. “We want to be industry-led.” The results, said Gilligan, would help determine where to put their resources. “Often people don’t think of organisations like this until they need them,” said Pascoe. “It would be great if they at least knew it was there. Anything like this requires constancy – we need to make sure this is a constant conversation.” The organisation will host further fundraisers in early 2022 in north-east England, Wales and Scotland. When live comedy begins to recover from the pandemic, Get Off! will ask members to contribute a percentage of ticket sales.Even when she was being escorted to prison, Patrizia Reggiani was determined to go in style, wearing dark sunglasses and a fur coat. “I told her: ‘Look, you’re going to prison and this fur coat is hugely expensive’,” said the former police officer Carmine Gallo. “And so we left the coat with her mother and I lent her my green jacket, which she promised to give back.” Gallo never saw his jacket again, but he does not hold a grudge. He was the police officer who called at Reggiani’s opulent central Milan home at about 5am on a frosty morning in January 1997 to arrest her on suspicion of orchestrating the murder of her ex-husband and fashion house heir, Maurizio Gucci. Gucci was gunned down outside his office on Via Palestro almost two years earlier, aged 46. The case captivated Italy, and now the story is being retold in Ridley Scott’s film about the fashion dynasty, House of Gucci. Gallo does not know if his character features in the film, starring Lady Gaga and Adam Driver, but his inadvertent role in finding Gucci’s killers was instrumental. He was on duty as head of a police unit targeting organised crime when he answered a phone call from a man saying he had information about the murder. “Until then, I only knew about the Gucci case through the newspapers,” said Gallo. “I was used to dealing with corruption, not murder. It was difficult to believe what this person was saying, but I was curious.” The informant, called Gabriele, had not long returned to Italy from South America and was jobless and homeless. He was living in a cheap hotel on the outskirts of Milan, where he met Ivano Savioni, a porter who confided in him about his involvement in Gucci’s murder. “Gabriele said he could give more information in return for cash,” said Gallo. “I said no, we can help find you a job and a home, but only if the information is proven correct.” Gabriele got Savioni to recount the story again, this time recording the conversation. Savioni said he had been approached by Pina Auriemma, an old friend from Naples, asking if he knew anyone who could kill Gucci. Auriemma was a clairvoyant to Reggiani, by then divorced from Gucci, who was living with another woman. “Auriemma told Savioni that Reggiani was sick and tired of being harassed by her ex-husband, who she said wanted to take the Gucci name away from her,” said Gallo. “She hated him and wanted him dead, and if Auriemma could find someone to kill him, she would pay for it.” Savioni turned to Benedetto Ceraulo, a debt-ridden pizzeria owner, and Orazio Cicala. Ceraulo carried out the shooting on the morning of 27 March 1995, also injuring Giuseppe Onorato, the concierge who had been sweeping away leaves from the entrance to Gucci’s office building. Cicala drove the getaway car. Neither of the four involved in the murder – for which they were paid 600m Lira, the old Italian currency (£260,600) – had committed a previous crime. The inspector leading the official investigation team, which for a long time had been pursuing the theory that Gucci might have been the target of an international plot after selling his stake in the company to an Arab bank, laughed when Gallo presented him with his initial information. But that did not put Gallo off. “The one thing that struck me when I first read about the murder was that the concierge had been injured – if these people were professionals, they would have killed him too, they wouldn’t have left behind a witness,” he said. As the group caught wind that police were homing in on Gucci’s inner circle, they worried that Reggiani would confess and so plotted to kill her too. They were recorded hatching their plan to kill Reggiani after Gallo sent an undercover police officer pretending to be the Colombian hitman suggested to the group for the job by Gabriele. All apart from Ceraulo confessed to their involvement upon their arrest, and that Reggiani had ordered the murder. Police had to break down the door to Reggiani’s home when they arrested her as she did not hear the doorbell. “She was walking around this huge place, holding a lamp,” said Gallo. “But she was very calm. She said she had been joking when she told Auriemma that she wanted Gucci dead. She said: ‘How many wives say they want to kill their husbands?’” Reggiani was called “the black widow” by the Italian press as the portrayal of a woman scorned emerged during her trial. She was convicted along with the others and served 16 years of a 29-year sentence. In an interview earlier this year, Reggiani, now 72, for the first time spoke candidly about ordering a hitman to kill Gucci, saying she went around asking everyone if they could do it on her behalf, “even the local shopkeeper”. She said she quite enjoyed her time in prison, where she kept a pet ferret, helped fellow inmates do their hair and nails and tended to the garden. Since her release on good behaviour in 2014, she has often been photographed walking around Milan with her pet parrot on her shoulder. A condition of her shortened jail term was that she had to work, something she balked at until her lawyer arranged a part-time job at Bozart, an upmarket costume jewellery shop. “It was a blessing and a curse; some people thought we were bad people for hiring an assassin,” said Maurizio Manca, the co-owner of Bozart. Reggiani spent over two years at Bozart, where she advised on the firm’s jewellery designs and helped curate the Instagram account. It was the first real job she ever had. “The most complicated thing was the technology – we had to train her to use email and left post-it notes on the computer with instructions on how to switch it on, open files and print,” said Manca. “There wasn’t so much freshness of mind, but she was diligent.” Less diligent was the parrot, who she would occasionally bring to the shop. “The parrot was a bit of a nuisance,” added Manca. Reggiani often spoke about her life with Gucci, their holidays in St Moritz and their time in New York, where they socialised with members of the Kennedy family and the Trumps. “The newspapers were always full of what they’d been up to, they were like the king and queen of Milan’s social scene,” said Manca. “She used to say she was the only true Gucci left.” It was the obsessional attachment to the Gucci name which some believe motivated her to arrange her ex’s killing. “She refused to sign her police statement with the name Reggiani,” said Gallo, who still has Reggiani’s old passport in his possession. Giuse Ferrè, a veteran fashion journalist in Milan, said all the elements of the story provide perfect fodder for a Hollywood film. Reggiani is being played by Lady Gaga. “It hit me just how much they look alike,” said Ferrè. “It was such a shock when the murder happened, like something that would happen in America, not here.” Gallo, who retired from the police force after 40 years, said the culprits would never have been found had it not been for the chance informant, for whom he found a job and stayed in contact with for several years. “It was all thanks to Gabriele that the case got solved,” he said.Trying to guess the plot of a movie from the trailer is always a pointless exercise, especially given modern studios’ propensity for cheating. These days, there’s every chance that promo material will feature footage that doesn’t end up making it into the final movie … a situation further complicated by the smoke and mirrors regularly employed by reality-bending Marvel superheroes such as Doctor Strange. Even so, there is so much to unpick in the new trailer for Spider-Man: No Way Home that it’s worth suspending our disbelief all over again. Have the audio and video been edited to avoid giving too much away? Probably. Are there characters shown behaving in ways that will look different when given their final context? Almost certainly. Are the Tobey Maguire and Andrew Garfield versions of Spidey being cunningly hidden from view? It is certainly starting to look like it. We do get a look at the returning villains the Lizard and Sandman, though it’s not 100% clear if they are being played by the same actors as in 2012’s The Amazing Spider-Man and 2007’s Spider-Man 3, Rhys Ifans and Thomas Haden Church. But that’s the aspect of No Way Home that is starting to come into view: Alfred Molina’s Doc Oc from Spider-Man 2, Jamie Foxx’s Electro from The Amazing Spider-Man 2 and Willem Dafoe’s Green Goblin from the original 2002 Spider-Man film are also back – but Spider-Man’s enemies may not be the ones we thought we knew. Electro has a different costume, Doc Oc has some strange new powers. But most importantly, there seems to be a suggestion that all these supervillains (five of them, mind, so who else will make up the infamous Sinister Six?) met their demise after a final encounter with their own universe’s Spidey. Fair enough in the cases of Doc Oc, the first Green Goblin and Electro, but Curt Connors (AKA the Lizard) was imprisoned rather than killed after his brushes with Garfield’s take on the wall-crawler, while Sandman was allowed to escape by the Maguire iteration. So what is going on? Could it be that these villains are from alternate realities that do not entirely match up with those we’ve seen before? That might also explain why Doc Oc is 20 years older than in his death scene (as well as the fact that Molina, the actor, has also aged since he last pulled on the robo-tentacles). If all these baddies are “ghosts”, as Doc Oc describes them, that might explain why they are so determined to take revenge on Spider-Man, and why they appear so unbothered by the prospect of being offed all over again. It would not explain why Tom Holland’s Peter Parker seems so upset by the prospect of their slipping once again off this Marvel coil, however, unless of course it is the demises of the Maguire and Garfield wall-crawlers (or perhaps the entire universes linked to them) that he’s really worried about. We are still in the dark about why Doctor Strange is acting so weirdly in this trailer. He doesn’t seem himself at all, and it’s tempting to wonder if he’s really being controlled by the missing sixth member of the supervillain team. Scarlet Witch? Mephisto? A returning, or non-fake outtake on Mysterio? It won’t be long before we find out, as No Way Home is in cinemas from 15 December. In the meantime, good luck working out what that nebulous title is all about: is Peter going to find himself stuck for good in one of the other Spider-verses? Let’s hope, for everyone’s sake, it’s not the tiny corner of Marvel reality that Sony retains the rights to, for he would be much missed by the MCU.An easy all-in-one dish, the fresh flavours of the lime, chilli and coconut work so well with the cod. Celeriac is a lovely seasonal ingredient, served here as spiced chips along with the squashy roasted cherry tomatoes. Chilli fiends could add a second red chilli and leave the seeds in, but those with less tolerance, like me, should stick to one and take the seeds out. Instantly shop all these ingredients from ocado.com/codwithceleriacchips Coconut, chilli and lime cod with celeriac chips and roasted tomatoes Prep 15 min Cook 50 min Serves 2 500g celeriac, peeled and cut into fat chips 1 red onion, quartered 1 tbsp olive or vegetable oil 2 tsp sea salt flakes 250g vine cherry tomatoes, halved 2 portions cod loin 4 tbsp desiccated coconut 1 fresh red chilli, deseeded, if you wish 2 cloves garlic, peeled 2 limes, juice only Handful mint leaves, plus extra to serve Preheat the oven to 220C (200C fan)/425F/gas 7. Tip the celeriac chips, onion, olive oil and one teaspoon of sea salt into a roasting tin large enough to hold everything in one layer, and mix well. Transfer to the oven to roast for 25 minutes. Then lower the heat to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6, and remove the tin from the oven. Scatter over the cherry tomatoes, and move the vegetables aside to make room for the two cod portions. Tip the coconut, chilli, garlic, lime juice, a handful of mint and a teaspoon of sea salt into a small blender or Nutribullet, and blitz until roughly blended into a greeny-red rubble – there shouldn’t be any massive pieces of chilli visible. Pat a tablespoon of the coconut and chilli mix on to each piece of fish, and scatter the rest over the vegetables. Transfer to the oven to bake for a further 25 minutes, until the cod and celeriac are cooked through. Scatter the fresh mint leaves on top, and serve hot – with a seasonal slaw-type salad of purple cabbage and rainbow carrots. Shop all these ingredients fresh from Ocado.com, which offers more choice than any other UK supermarketTaking the Edinburgh festival by storm back in 2004, La Clique was the show that ushered in the new wave of alt cabaret in the noughties, and its now-famous spiegeltent hosted everyone from chanteuse Camille O’Sullivan swinging on a trapeze to Bath Boy, singers Meow Meow and Le Gateau Chocolat, and hula hooper Marawa the Amazing. Seventeen years on, director David Bates is still seeking out the cream of the nu-cabaret scene from around the world and La Clique returns with relish, pitching up in London’s most touristy commercial spot yet still managing to feel like an intimate, underground experience. German/Australian cabaret queen Bernie Dieter takes the crowd in hand as MC and even manages a Covid skit that’s actually funny. La Clique is never just about the skills, it’s about the theatre. Handstander Mirko Köckenberger doesn’t balance on poles but on suitcases while wearing a bellboy costume. Burlesque performer J’aiMime doesn’t just take her clothes off, she gets swallowed up by a giant pink balloon while doing it. There are truly original acts and familiar ones too – La Clique veterans will recognise high-risk rollerskating duo the Flying Willers, only this is the next generation of skaters – Skating Willers III – taking up the baton. Highlights this time round include every occasion “Incredible Hula Boy” Craig Reid appears on stage, bursting with cheeky exuberance. He does more than jiggle hoops, including an ebullient quick change routine. And there’s LJ Marles, louche, lithe and slinky, wrapping his thigh-high Pretty Woman boots around his aerial straps. All kinds of sexiness are embraced with a flirtatious rapport between artists and audience (only the endlessly thrusting saxophonist Leo P hasn’t got the tone quite right). The most head-exploding moments come from sword-swallowing, fire-breathing, vintage pin-up girl Heather Holliday. She must have some sort of steel-lined gullet and asbestos tongue, so much danger does she slide down her throat. Her act gives you that visceral reaction you only get with live performance. La Clique is an edgy, sexy, joyful show full of giddy thrills and celebration. At Leicester Square Spiegeltent, London, until 8 JanuaryWhen most people choose a calendar to pin on their wall they would usually go for some cute animals or a famous film star. So Kevin Beresford was surprised when his calendar, celebrating the benches of his hometown, Redditch, became a runaway success. The unique dullness of his subject matter has struck a chord with the British public, and he’s now grappling with hundreds of orders while his flat has turned into a full-time calendar factory. “I’m having to get another 100 printed every day. We must be getting on for over a thousand now. It’s all we’ve been doing, night and day,” said the 69-year-old, who is retired but used to run a small printing business. The A3 calendar features a variety of benches around Redditch and its surrounding areas, from grimy street benches littered with empty beer cans, to picturesque wooden benches on rural village greens. November features a war memorial bench, August is a picnic bench with disabled access. As Beresford says: “There’s something for everyone.” He made his first calendar – the Roundabouts of Redditch – in 2003 to try to drum up interest for the town. “At the time we had three prisons and no cinema, so we didn’t have much going for us,” he said. His catalogue has grown and this year he’s selling five calendars, including Car Parks of Britain and the Wonderful World of Jack Grealish’s Calves (another big hit). But some are more successful than others, he admits: “I made a roadkill calendar one year but nobody wanted to buy that.” When asked about how he chose his calendar subjects, he said he strived to find ordinary things that had been overlooked. “I like to take slices of English life that nobody else bothers with,” he said. “I like to focus on the mundane, artists have always focused on the mundane. You’ve got Tracy Emin’s bed, Andy Warhol did a can of soup.” He’s a proud member of the Dull Men’s Club, and won the award for anorak of the year in 2018. “When people say, are you offended when people call you the dullest man in Britain, I say it’s a badge of honour for me,” he said. The club’s founder, Lee Carlson, said the group was really pleased to see Beresford’s success. “Our motto is celebrating the ordinary. There’s ordinary things to enjoy that are right in front of us that we often overlook,” he said. “Simple things like a park bench are everywhere, and they’re just a great place to sit and relax and watch the rest of the world going by.” Beresford created his now-famous benches calendar in one day over summer. Having lived in Redditch for 15 years he already knew which benches he wanted to feature. “It’s a sort of egalitarian calendar because I don’t just photograph picturesque ones, there’s a council estate one in there with cigarette butts,” he said. His personal favourite is featured in May, a circular seat surrounding a tree on the village green in Sambourne a short drive from his house. “Benches don’t come much better than this,” he captioned it. Around the streets of Redditch, most people are bemused by the calendar and enjoy counting how many benches they recognise. Many have seen it featured on the national news and are proud to see the town getting some positive recognition. “I think it’s a great idea. It’s great to see the town getting some national attention,” said David Talbot-Sykes. “It’s nice to celebrate the ordinary but many of the benches have stories behind them as well.” The art of a good bench didn’t just lie in its structure, Beresford said. “For a nice bench it’s location, location, location. They’re almost like meditation devices.” He’s done roundabouts and postboxes, benches and car parks, so what dull subject matter does he have in mind for his 2023 calendar? “Rubbish tips,” he said. “I’m going to go around Britain for that.” The pursuit of dullness: meet the world’s most boring hobbyists With a Facebook group of more than 10,000 members, the Dull Club shows that a growing number of people are embracing the world of the ordinary. The club’s annual calendar showcases the best boring hobbyists from around the world. This year’s features Steve Silberberg from Massachusetts, who has collected 3,161 airsickness bags. “I thought it would be interesting to collect something no one else collects,” he said. But now his website, airsicknessbags.com, has a list of 265 collectors across the world. There’s also Louis Chung, who photographs rubbish bins around his home city, Hong Kong; Ton Merckx from the Netherlands, who has amassed a huge collection of cycling jerseys; and Gianni Bellini from Italy, who has the world’s largest collection of football stickers. But the UK population arguably has a special gift for finding joy in the dull. Andrew Dowd, a maths teacher, has photographed all 2,548 of Britain’s railway stations. “Most aren’t very interesting,” he concluded. David Morgan has received a Guinness World Record for the largest collection of traffic cones, and James Brown, from Derbyshire, has the world’s largest collection of vacuum cleaners. Nick West, from Somerset, has moved house twice and built an extension to house his huge collection of quirky beer cans, collected over decades – he has more than 9,000 of them. In Cumbria, Archie Workman photographs drain covers, and is particularly fascinated in their geometry and how they interconnect. “I do dull,” he told his local newspaper. “Celebrating the ordinary, that’s what I like to do.”Cafe Cecilia in Hackney, east London, put to the test the question that strangers often ask me, which is: “So, can you get a table anywhere at any time?” The answer is complex, but, for shorthand, I always reply: “Yes!”, when I really mean: “Usually yes, but sometimes no, depending on myriad variables, including the ‘hotness’ of the establishment in question, the pliability of its maître d’ and, of course, my own cunning while trying to inveigle my way in.” For now, let’s concentrate on hotness, which has nothing to do with its suitability for the peri-menopausal, but rather the almost tangible fervour that surrounds certain new openings. Cafe Cecilia, which recently appeared just off Broadway Market on a relatively charmless side road close to an old gasworks, is run by Max Rocha, a chef with connections to the River Cafe and St John, and heavy links to the fashion industry, with both his father and sister, John and Simone, being much-loved designers. This type of buzz inevitably leads to all 15 or so tables being booked up for weeks in advance, while every lunchtime another tempting array of social media reports seep into the ether, showing us the likes of pig’s head, sage and potato pie, cuttlefish with orzo, pork braised in milk with fresh coco beans, raspberry galette and Guinness by the can. I hope Cafe Cecilia can forgive me for pointing out its hotness, because in the past I’ve found that some restaurants blanch at this elusive, sparkly tag. It’s a bit like telling a top model how ruddy gorgeous they are, only to be greeted with a, “Well, yes, but I have very serious thoughts about the Tibet Autonomous Region, too.” Hot restaurants do not want to be merely hot and filled to the rafters with hot-restaurant chasers. No, they want to be respected and loved for their skills, the provenance of their ingredients and their authentically influenced recipes made with modern twists. They want to be hot in meaningful ways, not merely because Doris from the Emotional Support Squirrels did her latest Rolling Stone interview there. Anyway, what is for certain is that “hot” restaurants such as Cafe Cecilia do not need critics to love them, so me sweeping in on the off-chance of a free table (the one restaurants always have up their sleeve just in case Barack Obama and his security detail are passing by) was not going to cut it. Instead, I booked almost six weeks in advance, then pondered who to bestow this magical treat on, before settling on my old friend Dave, who is not a hot-restaurant chaser at all. I found him sitting in a white, concretey room with plain brown tables and no tablecloths – in fact, no decor of note whatsoever – perusing a list of pig’s head terrine, crisp fried sage leaves with anchovy, and deep-fried bread-and-butter pudding with cold custard, almost as if it were just a normal room, and we were not, in fact, behind the velvet rope and living our best London lives right there and then. Obviously, it would make a fantastic denouement if Cafe Cecilia turned out to be a terrifically dull dud, but it’s not. It’s a calm, self-effacing space with lovely staff and a menu that allows Rocha to lean on his Irish heritage via the likes of mussels steamed in cider and bacon, Guinness bread ice-cream and barmbrack with a heap of freshly churned butter. Notions of Ireland, and of St John, were alive in Rocha’s ham hock terrine, which was the piggiest slice of rough-and-ready paté I have witnessed in my lifetime. For the more squeamish, I’d recommend a balm-like plate of silky agnolotti filled with goat’s curd and Fellows Farm squash and swimming in a glossy, buttery sauce, which, at £13.50, is a far cry from River Cafe prices. A whole plaice, grilled to crispness, but with soft, white flesh, came festooned with steamed clams and a side of pink fir potatoes, which are my very favourite spud, or at least were until last year, when my attempts to grow these pretty, nutty vessels of joy resulted in sad, stubby bullets and a lot of sulking. At Cafe Cecilia, they have deep-fried pink firs on the menu, as well as peculiarly delightful plates of deep-fried sage and anchovy fritti, which you may love or loathe, but will certainly never forget. Cafe Cecilia isn’t really a cafe, even if its opening hours until recently – short breakfast sittings and lunchtimes, and only now beginning dinner service on Fridays and Saturdays – give the place a homespun edge, rather than the feel of a new rumbling hospitality juggernaut. Even so, I have a sense that it’s really only just getting started on its path to being one of London most serious restaurants. Hotness comes and goes, but genuinely very good can last for ever. • Cafe Cecilia Canal Place, 32 Andrews Road, London E8, 020-3478 6726. Open lunch Weds-Sun, noon-3pm; dinner Fri &amp; Sat only, 6-9pm (last orders). From about £40 a head for three courses, plus drinks and service. • Episode five of the second series of Grace’s Comfort Eating podcast is released on 23 November. Listen here or wherever you get your podcasts.If the natural world was trying to have its say on the Glasgow climate pact, the arrival of a plague of scorpions in Egypt as Cop26 came to an end was not a subtle message. Around the time a tearful Alok Sharma lowered the gavel on the summit, rare thunderstorms were sweeping through Aswan province along the south of the Nile, forcing thousands of the creatures to seek shelter in people’s homes. Scorpion stings left more than 500 people needing hospital treatment in the host nation for Cop27. Nobody died from the effects of the venom and, as is often the case, it is too early to say whether the climate crisis caused or intensified the flooding. But many experts warn we are at the beginning of a period of potentially biblical instability. “Cop26 was bad for nature because we are nowhere near limiting warming to 1.5 degrees,” said Simon Lewis, a professor of global change science at University College London who was supporting Congo basin countries in Glasgow. “Double the number of species will lose more than half of their climatically defined area at 2C than they would have at 1.5. So big changes are coming.” There were significant announcements on nature at Cop26 that could move the dial on global heating and biodiversity loss. Jair Bolsonaro, Xi Jinping and Vladimir Putin were among more than 100 world leaders to commit to halting and reversing deforestation and land degradation by the end of the decade, covering about 85% of the world’s forests. Meeting this target would avoid emissions equivalent to a quarter of global greenhouse gases from transport between 2009 and 2019, according to the World Resources Institute. Multibillion-dollar funding commitments were also made to protect vast carbon sinks such as the Congo basin. Four Latin American countries joined together to create an enormous marine reserve in the Pacific. Indigenous peoples were given $1.7bn (£1.26bn) in recognition of their role in protecting forests. But even during the summit, some of these paper commitments began to lose their gloss. Indonesia’s environment minister Siti Nurbaya Bakar said the deforestation pledge was “inappropriate and unfair” just days after it signed up. Others, many of whom have made deforestation commitments before, have not yet explained how they will monitor land-clearing reductions or what ending and reversing deforestation even means. Then there is the issue of trust. “Our commitments are real. We have – by far – one of the most ambitious NDCs [nationally determined contributions] in the world,” said Leonardo Cleaver de Athayde, Brazil’s lead climate negotiator, on his way home from Glasgow, when asked if the world could really believe the deforestation pledge made by Bolsonaro’s government. Deforestation in Brazil’s Amazon rainforest soared 22% in the past year to the highest level since 2006, according to the government’s annual figures, released this week. Campaigners have warned Brazil’s cattle ranching plan will drive further land-clearing via the back door. The link between nature and the climate was a clear theme in Glasgow and did make the final decision text, despite division over the wording. In June, a report from 50 of the world’s leading scientists warned humanity must solve the climate and nature crises together or solve neither, something which the UK presidency had clearly embraced. There were peatland-themed pavilions and dozens of events on nature conservation and the climate. But battles over the role of nature in carbon offsetting and so-called nature-based solutions were not resolved in Glasgow, and will continue at the UN’s biodiversity Cop in Kunming, China, next year. And despite frequent references to the importance of respecting the rights of indigenous peoples, many of those communities want to see action rather than words. Meanwhile, evidence of the intertwined fates of the Earth’s climate and the natural world continues to mount. In western Canada, the same areas that endured a summer heatwave of temperatures above 45C and wildfires are now experiencing heavy flooding. In the Andes, guanacos – close relatives of llamas – are heading to lower ground in search of better grazing because of the changing climate. Great white sharks are moving to new areas. So too are polar bears, leading to increased conflict with humans. But unless humans cut greenhouse gas emissions, experts are clear that these changes are just the beginning and present a major threat to the natural world. “We’re going to see changes in land use. Anywhere there’s biodiversity or wildlife in the way has a real potential for new conflicts that weren’t there before,” said Alexandra Zimmermann, a senior research fellow at the University of Oxford’s Wildlife Conservation Research Unit. “Climate events are sudden. Like the scorpion example, this is exactly the sort of thing we would see more of.” Find more age of extinction coverage here, and follow biodiversity reporters Phoebe Weston and Patrick Greenfield on Twitter for all the latest news and featuresChina’s most expensive film to date and its second highest ever box-office grosser, The Battle at Lake Changjin possesses worryingly belligerent overtones. An account of a pivotal battle in November 1950 during the Korean war in which Chinese forces, who had infiltrated the country, pushed US marines back over the 38th parallel, this government-ordained project wastes no opportunity – current geopolitical tensions notwithstanding – to assert the moral superiority of the Chinese soldier. Not only is he unfazed by superior opposition numbers and equipment or impossibly harsh climate conditions, even the enemy catering doesn’t get him down. We see Uncle Sam chowing down on a bounty of turkey legs and bacon while the People’s Volunteer Army break their teeth on stony potatoes. The film also applies its collectivist we-all-suffer-together message, standard for recent Chinese blockbusters, to its own making; it shares directorial credit between “fifth generation” leading light Chen Kaige of Farewell My Concubine renown, and Hong Kong veterans Tsui Hark and Dante Lam. At least the involvement of the latter two means The Battle at Lake Changjin is an update on stodgy recent communist party cinema epics and presumably the reason for its box-office success. There is accomplished action film-making on show here, from a turkey shoot by US scout planes across a scree field in which the camera careens between the stricken Chinese troops (Lam’s, if I had to guess); to a rowdy hand-to-hand battle inside an American encampment that, with everybody trying to shoot and stab each other, comes over like a homicidal game of Twister (probably Tsui’s). It’s a shame there is virtually no story to sew this ungainly patchwork of styles together, apart from some threadbare twaddle about 7th Company commander Quanli (Wolf Warrior’s Wu Jing) and his wannabe soldier brother Wanli (Jackson Yee), as a stowaway who mostly exists for his comrades to impart self-sacrificing wisdom. This film is historically highly debatable, but any comparisons to equally blinkered and jingoistic American rabble-rousers such as Rambo are not accurate; The Battle at Lake Changjin is essentially a government project. It is possible to make interesting cinema within the Chinese censorship system that still bears a communist message, such as 2015’s Wolf Totem. But here, there’s nothing to censor; it’s straight-up propaganda – almost comedically so at times. Early on, an irate Wanli sweeps open a train carriage door to escape, only to be stopped in his tracks ... by a rolling vista of the Great Wall! Chinese commercial cinema is learning Hollywood’s tricks for cloaking ideology with entertainment, but in many ways it is still trapped in the past. • The Battle at Lake Changjin is released on 19 November in UK cinemas.Little Glow by Katie Sahota and Harry Woodgate (Owlet, £12.99) Perfectly timed for the gathering darkness and the world’s many festivals of light, this glimmering, gorgeous picture book features gentle rhyming text, joyous gatherings and a shy candle flame who gradually realises that a small, quiet glow can light an entire home. You Can! by Alexandra Strick and Steve Antony (Otter-Barry, £12.99) Follow 14 children as they grow from babies to adults in this inclusive picture book affirming individual talents, needs and rights, the result of asking many different children what messages they would give their younger selves (“Explore new worlds … discover what brings you happiness … tell people what you feel”). Antony’s humorous, dynamic illustrations delicately develop each child’s story from page to page. I’m Sticking With You Too by Smriti Halls and Steve Small (Simon &amp; Schuster, £12.99) In the delightful sequel to I’m Sticking With You, best pals Bear and Squirrel are annoyed by Chicken’s persistent attempts to break in on their perfect pairing. When a trap is laid for Chicken, however, Bear and Squirrel find themselves racing to the rescue in this wryly funny look at friendship dynamics and sharing. Sticky McStickstick: The Friend Who Helped Me Walk Again by Michael Rosen, illustrated by Tony Ross (Walker, £12.99) A powerful picture book for five-plus chronicling the much-loved author’s slow recovery from Covid, supported by the stick of the title. Balanced perfectly between the fear and pain of serious illness – brought out in the blue-white tints Ross gives Rosen’s haggard face – and straight-talking joy and humour as the patient’s (wobbly) mobility returns, it will resonate with any reader who has struggled with ill health, or seen a loved one struggling. Sunday Funday by Katherine Halligan and Jesús Verona (Nosy Crow, £16.99) For seven and up, a gloriously colourful compendium of 52 hands-on nature activities for every season, including egg decorating, growing a secret garden, creating a nature memory jar and making Splendid Soup and cinnamon french toast stars. Lively text and inviting images are infused with contagious enthusiasm and excitement. Polly Pecorino: The Girl Who Rescues Animals by Emma Chichester Clark (Walker, £10.99) Polly Pecorino can communicate with wildlife – and she’ll need all her skill and kindness when unscrupulous zookeepers steal a cub from the ferocious nearby bears. An adorable first foray into young fiction from the beloved author-illustrator of Plumdog and Blue Kangaroo, with endearing black-and-white illustrations throughout. Sisters of the Lost Marsh by Lucy Strange (Chicken House, £7.99) A gripping gothic novel for nine-plus, featuring six daughters and one curse. In a swampland settlement where books are banned, Willa and her sisters have had their fates mapped out for them since birth; each must play the part the curse allots her, or tragedy awaits. Then Grace vanishes just before her preordained wedding. Can Willa save her sister, and reshape her own destiny along the way? Eerie and atmospheric, this is perfect wintry reading. Ghostcloud by Michael Mann (Hodder, £12.99) Forced to shovel coal under Battersea Power Station, 12-year-old Luke longs only to win his ticket to freedom. Then he meets Alma, a ghost-girl with powers to shape the clouds – powers Luke seems to share. When Luke discovers the terrible truth about the power station’s output, he’s even more desperate to escape – but can Alma help him, and will his own strange, unique nature work in his favour? Fantasy fans will dive headlong into this imaginative, action-packed debut. The Chime Seekers by Ross Montgomery (Walker, £7.99) Yanni hates his bleak new home, Fallow Hall. He hates what’s happened to his family, and he hates his screaming new sister. But when a charismatic faerie steals the baby, Yanni embarks on a desperate quest to find her, with the help of his nerdy cousin Amy – and the reluctant changeling the faerie left in his sister’s place. Funny, terrifying, full of folkloric strangeness hiding in everyday corners, this sparkling homage to David Bowie’s Labyrinth is just as satisfying as last year’s The Midnight Guardians. The Hideaway by Pam Smy (Pavilion, £14.99) For readers of 11 or 12-plus, a deeply touching, highly illustrated story from the acclaimed author of Thornhill. Unable to bear his stepfather’s treatment of his mother, Billy runs away to hide in an overgrown cemetery – but when he meets an old man tending the headstones, he discovers there may be hope for him after all. Told both from Billy’s perspective and his mother’s, Smy’s poignant book conveys the small cruelties of domestic abuse and the abiding, ineffable power of love via restrained text and expressive black-and-white images. The Song That Sings Us by Nicola Davies, illustrated by Jackie Morris (Firefly, £14.99) On her mother’s orders, Harlon has always protected her twin siblings, Xeno and Ash, who possess the forbidden power of communicating with animals. When the ruthless Automators attack their home, however, the siblings are split up, and each is drawn separately into an epic fight to save the natural world. Who will sing the song to save us all? This is storytelling on the most poetic scale – strange, bloody, grand and unforgettable. Skin of the Sea by Natasha Bowen (Penguin, £7.99) Simidele is a Mami Wata, a mermaid who guides home the souls of those who die in the sea – until she finds a beautiful boy not yet dead, thrown overboard by slavers. Though it endangers herself and others to save him, Simi cannot let Kola die. Now she must make a dangerous journey to ask forgiveness of the Supreme Creator – and to safeguard the whole balance of existence. But what happens if a Mami Wata falls in love with a mortal boy? A compelling, moving YA fairytale, richly woven with west African mythology and vividly evoked colour and warmth.This is the second book from the mega-selling thriller writer to feature Lacy Stoltz, a no-nonsense attorney and investigator from Florida. Stoltz, whose specialism is judicial conduct, was last seen in 2016’s The Whistler taking on a grubby crime syndicate that was siphoning money to a sitting judge. She has since become disenchanted with work after her department had its budgets slashed, leaving her job heavy on admin and light on action. But then she is contacted by a frightened woman named Jeri Crosby whose father, a professor of constitutional law, was murdered 20 years ago. The police have long given up looking for the culprit, and the FBI have shown little interest, so Crosby has been doing her own digging. The murderer, she claims, is a Pensacola judge who is responsible for at least six killings, each of them enacted out of revenge. Furthermore, he is rich, powerful and a mastermind of the dark web. Could this case offer the challenge that Stoltz has been craving? Grisham, who is a former criminal defence lawyer, provides a slightly bewildering introduction here in which he reminds listeners of Stoltz’s backstory, describing her in this book as a “35-year-old lawyer – single, attractive, pretty cool and hip. In fact, I’ve always had a crush on Lacy.” Mercifully, though, the actor Mary-Louise Parker takes over from there, narrating what is a sleekly plotted murder mystery, and expertly conveying both Stoltz’s initial ennui and Jeri’s jumpiness – the latter born out of fear that she might just be next on the judge’s list. Fiona Sturges • The Judge’s List is available from Hodder &amp; Stoughton, 11hr 36 mins Further listening Ask a Historian Greg Jenner, Weidenfeld &amp; Nicolson, 11hr 4min The historian and broadcaster narrates his latest book answering assorted questions including: who is the richest person in history? And did Anne Boleyn have three nipples? Frankenstein Mary Shelley, Audible Studios, 8hr 10min In the gothic horror story, read by the actor Jamie Bell, a student doctor gets carried away in the laboratory, with monstrous consequences.Former barman Sam Fender’s ascent from his first single in 2017 to topping the album chart with this year’s Seventeen Going Under is the stuff of dreams, but his first arena show in the region that made him is something else. The 27-year-old from North Shields walks on stage to seas of flags and phones and massed “woah-ohs”. There are times when it feels like the entire audience is singing every lyric with him. “I can’t believe this,” he splutters. By singing about ordinary lives – from his mother’s fibromyalgia to children in Gaza – in songs that are widescreen and epic yet intimate and emotional, the likable Geordie has truly struck a chord. Bruce Springsteen – whose song Dancing in the Dark Fender performs magically, with just a guitar – is the dominant influence, the driving sax recalling the E Street Band’s late Clarence Clemons, and the plangent guitars suggest the Police or Simple Minds. However, Fender’s concerns and his sublime, quivering Tyneside holler suggest that he is his own person, and a rare talent. While his songs always sounded too big for the small venues he played only two years ago, now even this jam-packed arena doesn’t seem large enough. With the singsongs having started in the evening’s first chorus, the sound of 11,000 voices singing Dead Boys, about male suicide, is powerful and eerie. The northern powerhouse’s already eclectic songbook stretches from gorgeously reflective (Mantra or Get You Down) to jagged and punky (Howdon Aldi Death Queue, which starts a mosh pit). Fender is backed by photographs of those whose lives he sings about, so when he gazes upwards during The Borders’ line “she took those pills and now she’s gone”, it feels personal, not hammy or theatrical. The last half-hour is a procession of showstoppers as people roar along with the likes of Saturday and Hypersonic Missiles. In the mega-anthemic Seventeen Going Under, about teenage nihilism, there’s an enormous “oh, oh, oh” – which the crowd take up again later, between songs. Long after the concert ends it’s still being hollered in surrounding streets. At Alexandra Palace, London (Saturday 20 November), then touring.The register of members’ interests is the system by which MPs declare what they earn on top of their salary as an MP, by working for private firms or others outside parliament. They also have to declare gifts, or substantial shareholdings, among other interests. In the most recent update, the prime minister has added an entry confirming that he took free hospitality at a Heathrow VIP lounge on the way to his controversial stay at a villa owned by the Goldsmith family in Spain. This is the first published version of the register since the Owen Paterson affair erupted. Our search also shows how each MP voted in the Leadsom amendment, which sought to spare Paterson from punishment for breaching lobbying rules, and to change the system of regulation. That motion passed but has since been rescinded.On my way into the Science Museum I overhear someone say that they prefer the Natural History Museum next door. Well, who doesn’t? Compared with the neighbouring cathedral of dinosaurs, this place struggles to communicate the joy of science. It veers from inert displays to interactive playgrounds. The playgrounds are popular, the galleries often empty. Surely there must be a middle way. This foray into ancient Greek culture fails to find it. An exhibition about ancient Greece at the Science Museum sounded like a chance to discover who renowned ancient Greek scientists such as Anaxagoras, Pythagoras, Democritus, Aristotle, Euclid and Archimedes really were, to find out what they thought and why. But you may as well search for Atlantis (the mythical island first described by the ancient Greek thinker Plato) as expect answers in this unbelievably trivial encounter with the ancient world. It doesn’t engage in any serious way with Greek science, nor bring any of the minds revered down the ages to life. Archimedes in his bath saying “Eureka!” is too heavy a nugget for us to handle, apparently. Atoms, which Democritus casually suggested everything is made from, might blow our minds. Aristotle, the scientist and philosopher whose writings are best preserved and whose influence has lasted millennia, is merely quoted on various species of fish next to a display of plates painted with sea creatures. In fact the whole exhibition is like a tourist poster. Deep blue walls evoke the Aegean. There’s a marble statue of the god Hermes with its once-smooth body eaten away by marine animals. As a classical survival it is ruinous but as an evocation of the Mediterranean it is strangely evocative – calamari on the harbour front and swimming under temple-topped hills. But its only connection to science is that it comes from the famous Antikythera shipwreck, which also contained the world’s oldest geared mechanism. The machine itself isn’t here, and the statue is no replacement. Another statue, much better preserved, is accompanied by a wall text telling us the ancient Greeks saw the beauty of the human body as a mathematical problem. Well, yes. This is a vast theme at the heart of classical civilisation. You could fill the whole space exploring it from the canon of perfect human proportions calculated by the sculptor Polykleitos to Leonardo da Vinci’s drawing Vitruvian Man. Instead we get one statue and a short text. Then it’s on to a case of medical instruments, and a cursory reference to Hippocrates. Musical instruments illustrate a completely inadequate description of Pythagoras’s theory of harmonic frequencies – why not more on this? Or at least more of something. Only at the end does it get a little bit interesting. There’s a mechanical calendar worked by bronze gears, made in ancient Byzantium. It is similar to the Antikythera machine, which we get to see, at last … but only in a brief video. You could just stay at home and Google it instead. One truly exceptional survival of ancient Greek science is on display, however: a celestial globe made from silver in about 300 to 100BC and found near Lake Van in Turkey. This glittering treasure illustrates both the limitations and genius of Greek science. On the one hand it is covered with images of the constellations, embodiments of a magical, astrological attitude to the night sky. On the other, this is a globe: the ancient Greeks knew the Earth was a sphere. Flat-Earthers are a modern species of idiot. Which is why we need better science education, to save us from internet ignorance and anti-vaxxing antediluvians. But you won’t find it here. I’ve seen more diverting displays of Greek archaeology in Mediterranean hotel lobbies and learned more about the world of Heraclitus eating a gyros. This is a prolegomenon to nothing. It’s a Greek tragedy is what it is. Ancient Greeks: Science and Wisdom is at the Science Museum in London until 5 June 2022Since Leicester won the title in 2016, they have found Chelsea a difficult nut to crack, losing to them seven times in 14 games across all three domestic competitions. But the momentum shifted a little last season, with Brendan Rodgers’ side winning at home in the league and then in the FA Cup final. This season, however, the clubs’ paths have diverged, with Chelsea on top of the pile and aiming for a six-point lead over Manchester City, for a little while at least, if they win this early kick-off. Leicester might seem marooned in 12th, but a win could take them above Manchester United and into sixth after everything shakes out. Leicester are without their Cup final hero, Youri Tielemans, because of injury, which could hurt them more than Chelsea suffer from the absence of Romelu Lukaku, who Thomas Tuchel said is close to a return but will not be fit for this game. Conrad Leach Saturday 12.30pm BT Sport 1 Venue King Power Stadium Last season Leicester 2 Chelsea 0 Referee Paul Tierney This season G8 Y31 R0 3.875 cards/game Odds H 4-1 A 9-11 D 37-13 LEICESTER Subs from Ward, Thomas, Dewsbury-Hall, Choudhury, Daka, Vestergaard, Pérez, Iheanacho, Amartey, Bertrand, Albrighton Doubtful Bertrand (knee) Injured Tielemans (calf, Dec), Fofana (ankle, Jan), Justin (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y14 R1 Form DDWWLD Leading scorer Vardy 7 CHELSEA Subs from Arrizabalaga, Bettinelli, Chalobah, Sarr, Baker, Saúl, Loftus-Cheek, Pulisic, Vale, Barkley, Christensen, Ziyech, Werner, Alonso Doubtful Mount (wisdom tooth), Werner (hamstring) Injured Lukaku (ankle, 23 Nov), Kovacic (hamstring, unkown) Suspended None Discipline Y12 R1 Form LWWWWD Leading scorer James 4Our art teacher had the habit of gripping his gown in both hands – at chest-level, like a Victorian making a speech, his thumbs in his lapels – and staring out through the classroom window, smiling at the memory of all the fine things he had seen. “Boys,” he might say after a minute or two’s silence, “the Wembley Exhibition had the most marvellous pavilions.” More often, it was cathedrals he remembered: those that lined the route of the London-to-Edinburgh train, a progress that started in Peterborough and ran via York Minster to its magnificent climax at Durham, with Lincoln sometimes mentioned too, because when he was an art student in the 1920s the occasional express to the north still went that way. Each had its different beauty. He suggested we found photographs and saw for ourselves. Sixty and more years later, the cathedrals of Mr Smyth’s reverie still stand untouched, though my own highlight – on a journey I must have made hundreds of times – comes further north, with the dash along the cliffs at the Scottish border and the glimpse of the North Sea tumbling on the rocks below. Many other sights have vanished meanwhile. The multi-chimneyed brickworks that sailed across the flatlands south of Peterborough; the shipyard cranes poking their heads out of the Tyne valley; the colliery near Alnmouth where well into the 1970s a small steam engine could be seen shunting wagons. Gone, all gone, as completely as the dodo. But even if they still existed, who would notice them today? Fewer people look out of the carriage window now. The flicker-book world of Robert Louis Stevenson’s poem holds no charm: “And here is a mill and there is a river:/ Each a glimpse and gone for ever!” Publicity-conscious railway companies once produced booklets that told the traveller what to keep an eye out for beyond the telegraph wires – old battlefields, churches, birthplaces – but now we have other entertainments and preoccupations: keyboards to tap, screens to stroke and prod. What used to be thought of as “long-distance travel” (which in Britain certainly included the 400 miles between London and Edinburgh) is now an ordinary experience, prompting only the smallest sense of adventure and occasion. Many more people do it. The cancellation of the eastern arm of HS2 and the projected high speed line across the Pennines may be a political betrayal of northern England, whose railways have been in a ruinous state for decades. But the whole scheme, from Euston northwards, can also be read as a symptom of incurable hypermobility. In the early 1960s, only five or six trains a day left Edinburgh Waverley for London King’s Cross, with nameboards advertising them variously as the Flying Scotsman, the Talisman, the Heart of Midlothian and the Queen of Scots. The fastest journey took six hours. Today, there are 28 trains each way, with average journey times of four hours 30 minutes. Twenty-six are operated by the state-owned franchise London North Eastern Railway (LNER), and bear the name Azuma, which means “east” in Japanese; the other two are run by Lumo, a new subsidiary of First Group, which, according to its publicity, has formed its name from the first two letters of luminosity and motion. Beneath the branding, both LNER and Lumo trains share the same fundamentals: inspired by Japan’s bullet train, they were manufactured by Hitachi in Japan and assembled at the Hitachi plant in County Durham. Lumo started its service late last month, is expanding its fleet, and plans to have added another three trains each way by February. Since they were created by privatisation a quarter of a century ago, train-operating companies have often tried to suggest some ghostly link to a more glorious past. The Great North Eastern Railway, winner of the first franchise for the East Coast main line, stocked its restaurant cars with stylish crockery and decorated its carriage sides with elaborate crests; even its eventual successor, the LNER, adopted an old name vaguely associated with excellence (“the fastest steam engine in the world”) in the hope that its sentimental appeal might distract from the franchise’s history of financial disaster. And always there is the dull drumbeat that says that Britain invented the modern railway, which is true but unhelpful. Lumo has taken the opposite approach. Lumo believes in the new. Its mission statement proposes “a new service armed with some smart thinking aiming to shake up the industry and revolutionise the way we travel”. There is only one class. Fares between Edinburgh and London start as low as £19.90 if seats are booked early enough. Its PR combines the hard-nosed appeal of Ryanair with the wafting promise of aromatherapy: these trains stop at Nirvana as well as Stevenage, Newcastle and Morpeth. The people who push the trolley down the aisle are known as “customer experience ambassadors”, committed to their customers’ “individual wellbeing … physical, spiritual, corporal, emotional and social”. The climate crisis is addressed: half of the meals on the trolley are wholly plant-based, and every part of the train is electric. The company likes to think of itself as “a new movement, reimagining travel for a world where sustainability matters, everyone is welcome and will be treated fairly and with respect …” It might have been written in Sweden, the country that in 2018 produced a new word, flygskam, meaning flight shame, to describe the growing opposition to flying, especially to domestic flights where trains are an easy substitute. Another new word, tagskryt (literally “train brag”), attached itself to the tendency of virtuous travellers to post selfies taken on station platforms and at carriage doors. The effect on airline passenger numbers in Sweden and elsewhere in Europe is hard to calculate – Covid sent them all down – but France is banning some short-haul flights and Germany is debating a similar plan. The facts are stark enough. Up to 24 flights a day leave Edinburgh for London and vice versa, and according to a recent Which report the average UK domestic flight is half as cheap as the equivalent train journey and six times more polluting in terms of carbon emissions. The traditional policy of British governments has been to let the market decide, a tragic piece of hand-sitting in the face of climate breakdown, made worse when the chancellor announced in his October statement that the tax on domestic flights would be halved. The annual cost to the Treasury is estimated at £30m, and yet nobody had noticeably demanded this change, and certainly not the Scottish government. All Rishi Sunak could muster was that “in a sense” it was part of the UK government’s pro-union policy. Lumo has set out to capture some of this airline market – the younger, poorer and perhaps more idealistic part – and despite its astonishing verbiage it would be hard not to wish it well. Edinburgh expresses haven’t stopped at Morpeth in my memory. I like to think of my old art master getting off there in his plus-fours, looking around him and wondering if there was some convenient church he could draw. Ian Jack is a Guardian columnistVaccine passports enjoy substantial support across Europe, a YouGov survey suggests, as a fourth wave of infections prompts a growing number of countries to impose tougher restrictions on people who have not been fully vaccinated. The annual YouGov-Cambridge Globalism Project suggests majorities in all 10 European countries surveyed back compulsory vaccine passes for large events, while in most, more people favour than oppose their use in cafes, restaurants and gyms. The broad support for the constraint came despite the survey also finding that people are growing increasingly frustrated both with their governments’ performance in tackling the pandemic, and with Covid-related restrictions in general. Facing record case numbers, Austria this week first imposed a “lockdown of the unvaccinated”, followed by a general lockdown – and a decision to make vaccines compulsory from February. Germany on Thursday announced plans to restrict leisure activities for the unvaccinated in places with high hospitalisation rates. Greece said it would bar people without a vaccine pass from cinemas, theatres and gyms from Monday, the Czech Republic and Slovakia took similar steps, and Sweden will next month introduce a vaccine passport for events of more than 100 people. Emmanuel Macron said the success of France’s health pass, which provides proof of vaccination, recovery or a negative test and has been needed since summer to enter cafes, restaurants and cinemas, and take long-distance trains, meant the country should avoid having to lock down those who are not fully vaccinated. Denmark, which abandoned its Covid pass as cases fell in April, reintroduced it this month. In the UK, Boris Johnson’s government has consistently rejected vaccine passports, although Scotland requires one for entry to nightclubs and large events. The YouGov survey, of more than 26,000 people in 26 countries, found majorities of the public in Europe and around the world in favour of vaccine passports in their country as a requirement for large events or to travel in and out of the country. Support for a pass showing proof of vaccination to attend large sporting events and concerts ranged from 57% of respondents in France to 59% in Germany, 62% in Italy and 64% in Spain and Britain, with only Poland (45%) falling below 50%. Outside the EU, 51% of respondents in the US and 69% in Australia said they backed a vaccine passport for large events. The survey found similar high levels of approval for the use of vaccine passports to travel into and out of respondents’ home countries. Support was lower, but still often substantial, for compulsory vaccine passports as a prerequisite for a range of other activities, including travelling on public transport, eating in restaurants, going to bars or cafes or doing indoor exercise at gyms. In all but three – Denmark, Hungary and Poland – of the 10 European countries surveyed, more people said they were in favour of requiring vaccine passes on public transport than were opposed or unsure, with pluralities or majorities ranging from 41% in Germany and Britain to 56% in Italy. A similar pattern emerged for eating in restaurants, with more people in favour of vaccine passes than against in eight of the 10 countries and only Hungary and Poland opposed. Percentages supporting the measure ranged from 41% in the UK and 50% in France, to 54% in Germany and 58% in Italy. Levels of support were similar for mandatory vaccine passports to enter cafes or bars and exercise in indoor gyms, but slightly lower – generally ranging between 30% and 40% in most European countries – for supermarkets and clothes shops. Results in the US broadly mirrored those in Europe, while respondents in Australia were often more enthusiastic. Of the 26 countries surveyed, Russia stood out with consistently low support for passports in nearly all cases except international travel. Compared with last year, several countries showed a marked drop in the percentage who said their government was handling Covid well, including Germany (67% in 2020, 44% in 2021), Denmark (81%/74%), Italy (58%/48%), Greece (72%/42%), Hungary (60%/43%), Poland (43%/35%) and Australia (79%/52%). A few countries bucked the trend, with approval levels staying roughly the same, such as France (37%/40%) and the UK (39%/41%), or increasing, such as South Africa (44%/56%). The US also had a slight increase from 34% to 39%, far from a “Biden bump”. The survey also revealed growing frustration with the pace of return to normal life. Several countries experienced a sharp rise in those who thought their government was “putting too much priority on limiting the spread of the virus and not enough on allowing ordinary life to function”. These included France, where the figure jumped from 19% in 2020 to 30% this year, Germany (21%/34%), Italy (17%/25%), Poland (23%/33%), Australia (13%/27%), the US (20%/29%), Japan (12%/24%), and Indonesia (11%/33%). Several also showed a comparable rise in the number of people who thought their government’s response to the virus has been too restrictive on personal freedoms, such as France (23%/39%), Germany (27%/42%), Hungary (30%/44%), Britain (13%/25%), Australia (17%/34%) and the US (29%/36%).If we’re being honest, most of us will admit that we choose our shoes based purely on aesthetics, not really thinking about whether they’re fit for purpose. But while we probably know deep down those high heels and narrow, rigid shoes are bad for our feet, it turns out that over-engineered, cushioned trainers aren’t doing them any favours either. Decades of slick marketing campaigns fronted by sporting and cultural icons may have told us that technologically advanced trainers are essential for running faster and leaping further, but is that really true? The 1970s jogging boom led to the rise of cushioned trainers that do all the hard work for feet. The irony is that with 26 bones, more than 30 joints and over 20 muscles, the human foot is a biomechanical masterpiece that doesn’t actually need any extra help to perform. Parts of the industry are recognising that some consumers want footwear that’s good for our bodies and that hasn’t harmed people or the planet in its production. A few brands have been taking a different path and inspiring others to do better. One such brand is Vivobarefoot, a B Corp business with a radically different approach to making shoes. Vivobarefoot is on a mission to take on “big shoe” – companies that, according to its annual report (pdf), are “designing over-complicated shoe-shaped sneakers packed with fancy underfoot technology that overprotect feet into weakness, leaving them bent out of shape, while also trashing the planet”. Its solution is a bold one: strip away the unnecessary stuff in favour of sustainable, minimal shoes. Designed to be as close to actually being barefoot as possible, these wide, thin, flexible shoes help feet rediscover their natural, healthy movement, while bringing people closer to nature and leaving a minimal footprint (pun intended) on the planet. Being a B Corp means that every single aspect of Vivobarefoot’s business – from what its shoes are made of to how they are marketed – has to be ethical and sustainable. One of the ways it is doing this is with the Revivo scheme, which reconditions pre-loved Vivobarefoot shoes and sells them at a lower price to stop them ending up in landfill. With more than 24bn pairs of shoes made each year globally and more than 90% of those likely to end up in landfill within 12 months, this is a small but significant step in the right direction. Sport scientist Peter Francis, who works on research with Vivobarefoot, discovered the benefits of running in barefoot shoes while recovering from an injury. Two months of expensive physiotherapy temporarily alleviated the symptoms, but just two days of barefoot running made them disappear completely. Intrigued by observing students racing barefoot on a hard running track in New Zealand, he undertook research that confirmed his theory: barefoot is better. Cushioned shoes have only been around for about 50 years; for the 30,000 years or so before that, Francis says, “shoes were designed to protect from extreme temperatures and sharp objects. They were minimalist foot coverings rather than shoes.” The Future Footwear Foundation studies similar shoes made today by indigenous communities around the world, from the Sámi people of northern Scandinavia to the Ju/’hoansi in Namibia. Whether they’re sandals or reindeer skin boots, all are made by hand using traditional techniques and natural materials with no arch support or heel pads. This kind of minimal footwear activates all the muscles in the feet and allows the toes to spread, improving strength and balance while making for a closer connection to the earth. David Jackson, an ex-professional rugby player and Vivobarefoot ambassador, who went barefoot after years of playing rugby with his feet crammed into boots with a narrow toe box, says: “Someone described a standard pair of shoes as coffins for your feet. It’s funny but there’s truth to it. If you give feet so much support, the muscles don’t have to be strong. It’s the same as any other part of our body.” Research by the University of Liverpool has found that older people’s balance can improve simply by encouraging them to walk barefoot or in a minimal shoe. Better balance means fewer falls: an Age UK survey found that up to 3.4 million over-65s suffer a fall each year and, according to Nice, this costs the NHS more than £2.3bn per year. Kris D’Août, senior lecturer at the musculoskeletal biology department of the University of Liverpool, says: “Our study adds to the increasing body of evidence that for many people, less [shoe] is more. A minimal shoe helps our feet to be used how they are supposed to.” This is just as true for kids. Brands have always told parents that their children’s soft, malleable feet need to be “supported” as they grow in stiff, narrow shoes or cushioned trainers. But studies are increasingly showing that if children spend longer barefoot or in minimal shoes, they develop stronger feet, better balance and greater motor skills. Vivobarefoot makes light, flexible shoes for kids so they can run, play and climb with their feet in as natural a state as possible. It seems like the footwear industry has been built on offering “solutions” to problems they may have caused in the first place. Maybe it’s time to consider a simpler alternative to the shoes than we’ve been used to. Vivobarefoot is showing how the future of footwear can, and should, be better for us and the planet. The sensation of being barefoot – walking on cool grass, a soft carpet, warm sand – speaks of freedom. “When you have to wear shoes, wear Vivobarefoot,” says Jackson. “But when you can, take them off and go completely barefoot. Get on the earth, get connected to nature.” To start your barefoot journey, head to vivobarefoot.comAs Covid infection rates surged again across Europe, Boris Johnson spoke this week of “storm clouds gathering” over parts of the continent and said it was unclear when or how badly the latest wave would “wash up on our shores”. The situation in some EU member states, particularly those with low vaccination rates, is indeed dramatic. In central and eastern Europe in particular, but also Austria, Belgium and the Netherlands, case numbers are rocketing. But missing from the prime minister’s remarks, and from much of the media coverage of them, was the fact that Britain’s rolling seven-day average of daily new coronavirus cases is still higher than the average of the EU27, and has been since June. According to figures from OurWorldInData, the EU’s average has quadrupled in recent weeks, from just over 110 daily new cases per million people on 1 October to 446 on Thursday. The UK began that same period with a daily infection rate of 505 per million people, nearly five times the EU27 average. After peaking at nearly 700 in late October the rate fell to 495 on 10 November, but for the past week it has been climbing sharply again. The headlines made much of Angela Merkel describing Germany’s situation as “dramatic”, but at 536 per million, its infection rate is lower than Britain’s 581 – which remains 30% higher than the average for the EU27. Slovakia and Slovenia are currently the EU’s hardest-hit countries, with rolling seven-day average rates of 1,643 and 1,581 per million respectively. Not far behind are Austria – western Europe’s least vaccinated country, with 64% of the total population inoculated – on 1,395, Croatia on 1,275, and Belgium, the Czech Republic and the Netherlands, all with rates of more than 1,000. Other EU members including Ireland, Hungary, Greece and the Baltic states also have infection rates higher than the UK’s. But several – mainly those with high vaccination rates and relatively strict social distancing rules – do not. They include France on 201 daily infections per million, Italy on 138 and Spain on 95, as well as Portugal, Finland and Sweden. Infection rates in Romania and Bulgaria, previously the EU’s worst-affected countries, are now also much lower. The WHO has said repeatedly in recent weeks that its 53-country European region is again at the centre of the pandemic, and no one knows whether those continental countries that have so far kept rates relatively low will continue to do so. Britain’s infection rate, meanwhile, has climbed by about 15% over the past 10 days, from a base that for the past six months has been consistently higher than the European average – something the prime minister does not often mention.Blistered, bunioned and often labelled smelly and ugly, it’s fair to say our feet are rarely treated with the respect they deserve – especially given that they’re pivotal to how we function, not to mention our connection to the ground. Our feet are, in fact, at the core of our senses; the primary receptors that tie us to Earth. Each foot is made up of 26 bones, more than 30 joints and over 100 muscles, tendons and ligaments, all of which work together to provide support, balance and mobility. They also have more than 200,000 nerve endings, which help determine the terrain they are stepping on. They are, simply put, an evolutionary masterpiece. Yet, shoes can often prevent our feet from really doing their job, which has sometimes had disastrous consequences, says Ben Le Vesconte, head coach at Vivobarefoot. Founded in 2012 by Galahad and Asher Clark, two cousins who are seventh-generation cobblers, Vivobarefoot footwear are wide, thin and flexible – designed to replicate the barefoot experience as closely as possible and help wearers reconnect with nature. The bones in our feet don’t fully form until our teenage years and the cells are constantly regenerating, which means the shoes children wear literally shape their feet. When the bones are restricted by badly fitting shoes, it can cause problems. “As we start wearing shoes, our toes are narrowed and we begin disconnecting from our natural movement,” says Le Vesconte, who was formerly a running technique coach. “When kids first learn about movement, they need to learn about it in a way that is as connected as possible. If you think about the best runners in the world they are usually in places where they run barefoot, such as Kenya or Ethiopia. They start running barefoot as children and continue into adulthood. It’s not long ago that kids ran cross-country barefoot or in thin, flexible pumps and they were more resilient because of it.” The quick-fix nature of modern cushioned shoes isn’t doing our children any favours, he says. “These sorts of shoes trick your brain into thinking you’re moving around on soft ground, leading to less shock-absorbing behaviour and higher-impact forces.” The big toe is central to our balance, coordination and strength, and needs to grow and develop properly. If it’s restricted, it can cause a plethora of problems including poor posture, knee and back pain, and bunions. “Do you remember that scene in Kill Bill where Uma Thurman punches her way out of a box?” asks Le Vesconte. ”That explosive power starts at the big toe.” This is backed up by a number of significant scientific studies. A study of 620 pre-school children in Japan found that just over three-quarters of recipients were wearing shoes that were too short in length and “did not allow the children’s feet the extra space that is recommended for healthy podiatric development and function”. The shorter the shoe, the bigger the risk of developing hallux valgus, otherwise known as bunions. The study concluded: “Going barefoot can possibly help to counteract the increased hallux angle caused by regularly wearing shoes of insufficient length.” “If shoes are tapered on the big toe it’s irrelevant if they are the ‘right’ size or not, they will still deform the big toe,” says Le Vesconte. A separate 2020 study suggests that school-based barefoot running classes may improve aspects of sprint biomechanics and develop the fast stretch-shortening cycle ability in children. Vivobarefoot footwear are not only created to be flexible, but the thin puncture-resistant soles on the children’s range allow the nerves in the foot to connect with the ground and, quite literally, put a spring in their step. ”Our footwear has space for the big toe to move unrestricted, unlike other shoes that are tapered and deform the big toe. Our footwear is designed with plenty of wiggle room and flexibility, which strengthens feet,” says Le Vesconte. So how have we got to a point where the shoes we make, wear, and buy are actually hindering us? Fashion has a great deal to answer for, says Le Vesconte. “In the 1100s, the Count of Anjou first wore pointy shoes to hide his deformed feet – and because of his royal status, everyone copied him. That went on for hundreds of years, but during Henry VIII’s reign shoes got wider when everyone started getting gout. So these conversations have been going on for hundreds of years. And now we have the understanding, the science, and the materials to get things right,” says Le Vesconte. “We know wearing Vivobarefoot footwear improves balance, makes feet stronger and even reshapes big toes – bunions are not hereditary, they are caused by narrow shoes – and we hope that kids who wear our shoes will be better connected to nature and move more skilfully throughout life.” One thing is clear, the people at Vivobarefoot put a great deal of soul into their soles. • This article was amended on 26 January 2022. An earlier version referred to 200,000 neurotransmitters, rather than 200,000 nerve endings. To start your barefoot journey, head to vivobarefoot.comFive years ago, Galahad Clark was on a quest to find the world’s most perfect feet. His search led him to the crimson sands of the Namibian Kalahari desert, where he met a wizened cobbler from the San bushmen tribe making ersatz sandals from old car tyres. The improvised material may have been rudimentary – hunting restrictions meant the shoemaker couldn’t use his usual eland antelope skins – but the sandals were thin soled, tailor-made for each individual tribesperson’s feet, and adapted to the rugged environment that the wearer would be running or hunting in. “San bushmen are arguably as close to original humans as it gets – with perfect natural movement, plus healthy feet and posture,” says Galahad, co-founder of the ethical shoe brand Vivobarefoot. “They run on hot sands at pace, but the only pain they experience is when wearing [conventional] shoes. Many of the younger people there are starting to wear crap secondhand trainers from charities – ‘dead white man’s clothing’, as they call it – and you can see their feet are starting to develop different shapes to older generations who have only gone barefoot or worn sandals. The elders [moan]: ‘Bloody kids, they won’t move in the same way that we do!’” Galahad may have stumbled upon flawless feet in the San tribe, but his lifelong mission to find the perfect, most sustainable shoe continues. Just like the Namibian cobbler, Galahad’s family has been making shoes for generations, but he was inspired to produce shoes that replicate the sensation of walking barefoot in the early 2000s. An old friend, Tim Brennan, showed him a pair of trainers he’d modified to make more anatomically correct by shaving the soles. The epiphany led Galahad to the conviction that conventional, cushioned trainers, produced by “big shoe” manufacturers, were nothing more than a podiatrist’s nightmare, with brands “operating blind when making shoes – they have little understanding about how the foot works, keeping podiatrists profitably selling foot cures caused by shoes themselves”. For the past 10 years, Galahad has come close to realising his ambitions via his brand: lightweight shoes with thin soles that are designed to promote natural movement and help the feet grow stronger. By incorporating learnings from indigenous groups such as the San tribe into its shoes, the brand is carving out a new future: one that doesn’t just result in healthy feet, but “takes customers on a transformative back-to-nature health journey”, too. As such, the brand now offers experiences to jolt us from our sedentary lifestyles, ranging from bushcraft retreats to open-water swimming. “The message we’re trying to deliver to our customers is to reject the cushioned life, get out of your comfort zone,” says Bayarma Clark, Galahad’s wife, who heads up their children’s range. “We know mass consumerism and corporations are killing the planet, and we’re trying to provide an alternative.” Vivobarefoot co-founder Galahad Clark Vivobarefoot wearers regularly report feeling more attune to their environment. The brand’s footwear allow customers to literally feel the ground underneath their feet, in a way that “big shoe” wearers can’t. “The part of our brain that gets information from our feet is the same size as the part of our brain that gets information from our hands,” says Galahad. “This sensory feedback is essential to our overall vitality as humans – it’s how we’ve been designed for two million years – and walking around in padded shoes in a concrete world effectively cuts off this part of the brain. Studies have even linked it to neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s.” Embracing being barefoot can also make children calmer. Research by Bournemouth University professor Stephen Heppell found that shoeless schools (which are commonplace in Scandinavia) reported better behaviour in children, and even a decrease in bullying. “It seems to be difficult to be a bully with your shoes off,” says Heppell. Vivobarefoot also wants shoes to be more sustainable: more than 90% of the 24bn pairs of trainers produced each year, the majority made from harmful petrochemical plastics, end up in landfill. “Shoes aren’t meant to be recycled,” says Galahad. “Because they consist of hard bits stuck to soft bits – they’re different materials that stick together extremely well, making them difficult to dissemble.” To address this, Vivobarefoot has introduced Revivo, an e-commerce marketplace that repairs 1,000 pre-loved shoes a week, before selling them on at a reduced price. As part of its plans to become “fully regenerative”, Vivobarefoot has an impact investment hub, the Livebarefoot Fund, which invests in philanthropic research and supports community projects in developing nations. From December, 1.5% of the firm’s turnover will be used to back the scheme. “We work with indigenous communities to set up workshops to preserve craftsmanship and local enterprises, before bringing them to market,” says Dulma Clark, head of the Livebarefoot Fund. “We didn’t want the craftsmanship of the elderly guy making sandals in the Kalahari to die out, so we raised money to train eight other cobblers in the area, while also launching collaborations using their techniques.” Vivobarefoot has also produced limited edition Jean-Michel Basquiat shoes bearing the artist’s work, handmade in Ethiopia using material sourced from smallholder farmers. The brand’s principles (it’s a B Corp company, too) can be traced back to the Clark family’s Quaker traditions – doing good deeds is a key tenet of Quakerism. “Vivobarefoot was definitely founded on Quaker values of equality and peace,” says Dulma. “Galahad’s forefathers were involved with the abolition of slavery, prison reform and the suffragette movement: anything to do with creating a more peaceful, fairer world.” The brand also aims to start using 3D printing to create more sustainable shoes. The team took foot scanners to the Cop26 climate summit in Glasgow to demonstrate its potential. “3D printing offers us a chance to go back to making bespoke shoes from local sustainable materials,” says Galahad. “Using LiDAR scanners on your smartphone, you could scan your feet, regeneratively design a shoe and then print it out in your local depot … Modern technology will bring humanity back to having footwear like we did 10,000 years ago with shoes made bespoke for people’s feet.” This synthesis of cutting-edge tech and ancestral traditions will be crucial, says Galahad (a hip-hop fan whose career includes collaborating with the Wu-Tang Clan and Dutch architect Rem Koolhaas on shoe lines). “The real goal for us is being like the San bushmen or cobblers from 10,000 years ago, where people were making shoes, person by person, foot by foot. Let’s get back to having shoes that are locally made, as and when you need them. ‘Big shoe’ isn’t working. We need a radically different system to protect people’s feet.” To start your barefoot journey, head to vivobarefoot.comThere are still days to go before House of Gucci lands in cinemas, but the fashion industry may as well go ahead and hail Ridley Scott’s thriller as the most successful fashion film for a generation. Certainly, there is no denying the fact that the actor who plays the protagonist is the axis around which the entire fashion world is circling at the moment. Undoubtedly, she is the woman designers are desperate to dress. With 12 Grammys, an Oscar and perhaps the most explosive red carpet wardrobe in history already nestled safely under the waistband of her fishnets, Stefani Germanotta – or Lady Gaga as she is known stratospherically – has levelled up from style icon to become the most powerful woman in fashion. Instagram confirms her as the most visible. On Wednesday, the cover of an issue of Hollywood Reporter with Gaga on the cover received half a million likes in a matter of hours. This month, her dual Vogue covers – she features in British and Italian Vogue – incited similar hysteria. In her role as Patrizia Reggiani – the ex-wife of Maurizio Gucci and socialite who, in 1998, was convicted of arranging the hitman who shot him dead – Gaga wears a slew of fur coats and cleavage-boosting shift dresses. She also works Gucci’s world-famous monogram motif like it has never been seen on screen before. But few will need to spend 2 hours 38 minutes in the cinema to recognise the pop queen turned Oscar-nominated actor’s role as the most significant woman in fashion. They can watch the trailer instead. The two-minute teaser sent the internet into overdrive when it was aired in July and remains on YouTube’s most-viewed chart. With a wardrobe masterminded by the costume designer Janty Yates, the film has piqued the interest of fashion fans around the world. The fashion platform Lyst accredits a surge in searches for Gucci (up by 173%) to Gaga. Gucci’s bosses, who have an apparent vested interest in the film reporting an 86% increase in revenue for the second quarter, could not have dreamed of better publicity for their brand. Of course, Gaga’s influence extends beyond the horse-bit loafers and vintage silk headscarves she wears in House of Gucci, or indeed, one fashion brand. She’s a money-spinner for many. After her performances at Radio City Music Hall in New York this year searches for her signature platform boots increased by 60% and boosted searches for Valentino – she wore a couture look on stage – by 117%. Her vegan makeup line, reported to pull in more than £100m a year, is further proof of her mass-market appeal. For Daniel Roseberry, the artistic director of Schiaparelli who was behind the sweeping red faille skirt and cashmere jacket Gaga wore to sing at the presidential inauguration in January, her influence has been life-changing. His vision for haute couture is now the most coveted in the world, with celebrities lining up for a Roseberry creation. She worked similar wonders for Magda Butrym. The Polish designer went from relative unknown to fashion super force when Gaga was photographed in New York wearing one of her body-skimming slip dresses. “Gaga has brought many designer names to a wider audience than would ever have been possible before”, said Alexander Fury, fashion features director of AnOther Magazine. “It’s a bit like the Madonna-Gaultier effect – only Gaga, fabulously, has no loyalty and wears all kinds of different designers.” This reluctance to build alliances with one particular brand or designer is what makes her red carpet outfits so compelling. Gaga spoke in an Italian accent for almost a year while working on the movie and showed the same steely dedication to prepare for the accompanying press tour. She has said her clothes are performance art. Certainly, there was evidence of method dressing on the red carpet with Gaga dialling down the OTT (over-the-top) style to perform in the role of “actor at a film premiere”. The floor-sweeping Gucci gown she wore to the London premiere was understated by Gaga’s standards. After all, this woman wore raw meat to the MTV awards in 2010 and famously rode a horse made entirely from Chanel bags down a red carpet. Gaga’s ability to shapeshift – whether she’s adopting the role of Hollywood screen siren or her fictional male alter ego, Jo Calderone – is what is immeasurably appealing to designers. While the pressures of running a successful fashion brand are about carefully balancing creative intellect with the need to sell clothing, working with Gaga provides the opportunity to run with their wildest ideas. Moreover, a collaboration with Gaga is the opportunity for a designer to put the purest and most experimental version of their aesthetic on a global stage. In a filmed interview made to accompany the new issue of Vogue, the singer describes the extreme lengths she will go to achieve the result she wants on the red carpet. “I’m not interested in fashion being functional for everyday life,” she said. “It’s about being functional for art. I love becoming art.” This ethos has endeared her to fashion editors who can work with her to push boundaries in the way they cannot with other celebrities. “She has always been deeply involved in the creative process of building all of her famous looks,” said Edward Enninful, British Vogue’s editor-in-chief and European editorial director. “She is a true global icon.”Rewilding is having a moment. From the successful reintroduction of beavers in Devon (and potentially, soon, the rest of England), to Chris Packham’s plea to the royal family to rewild their estates, conservationists are working hard to re-establish the natural world that’s been lost due to human intervention. But rewilding doesn’t just have to apply to the great outdoors; it’s a concept we can all use to invigorate our personal connection with the planet and our innate abilities. Here, six experts share their tips for how to get started. 1 Ditch the digital map “The beauty of natural navigation is that it requires no tools aside from the Mk1 eyeball and half a brain,” says British explorer Ed Stafford. “Phones smash and phones die. While they’re the best multifunctional survival tool in the world, you shouldn’t rely on them entirely. “Understanding where north is, is the key,” he says. “If you know the sun rises in the east, and it’s currently sunrise and you are facing the sun, you can safely assume that north is to your left. If you struggle with the compass points, then an easy acronym is ‘never eat shredded wheat’. “Nature’s nuances are bent blades of grass that give away prevailing wind direction, or puddles on the north side of an obstruction that haven’t been dried up by the warm afternoon sun,” says Stafford. “Eventually, you are so aware that you gain an extraordinary overview of nature that makes you feel like up until now you’ve been wearing a blindfold to all its interwoven facets.” 2 Forage for your dinner “Foraging requires us to spend time engaging directly with nature,” says Ben McNutt, a wilderness skills instructor and expedition leader. “Legally you can forage for the ‘four Fs’: flowers, foliage, fungi and fruit. I advise beginners to stay away from mushrooms until they start to build up their knowledge, confidence, library and experience. Instead, start with edibles with really obvious ID features such as leaf shape, flower, colour or smell – for example, wood sorrel, wild garlic, nettle, rosehips, mint and dandelion. “Just like in a supermarket, pick the healthiest, best-looking produce, and exercise common sense – don’t over-pick and strip out an area, make sure you leave some to flower and seed for the future,” says McNutt. 3 Free your feet “There’s a reason why martial arts, gymnastics, yoga, and anything that requires ultimate balance is done barefoot,” says Ben Le Vesconte, a functional exercise specialist and coach at Vivobarefoot. “When we first learn to stand and walk, we do it barefoot. Our bare feet are our movement sensors. “Cushioning has the opposite effect of what we think it does; it changes the way that you move and increases the impact force, rather than decreasing it. Wearing barefoot shoes day to day makes for much stronger feet. You’re investing in your foot health, you’re investing in your balance, your posture – you’re rewilding your feet to help your movement.” For those wanting to make the transition to barefoot shoes, Le Vesconte advises: “Build up slowly. Walk in your shoes for six weeks before moving on to running and other activities. If you tune into your feet and move differently, you can rebuild.” 4 Release your inner explorer “We are part of nature, and expressing our curiosity through exploring is innate in us as humans,” says adventurer Sarah Leighton. “You’ll be amazed at what you’ve overlooked in the places you think you know,” she says. “Some of my favourite adventures have started from my doorstep after work. Start inside your comfort zone and work your way out – get a map of your local area and start looking at it on a micro level.” For anyone feeling nervous about the challenge, Leighton says: “Go with a friend, join a social group, or do a guided experience to begin with. If you gain some basic skills and a bit of confidence from others, you’ll feel so much more empowered to get out and explore the wild on your own. If you have children, geocaching is an awesome way to discover new outdoor places. You don’t need any fancy kit, but a good level of waterproofing is helpful.” 5 Eat like your ancestors “Rewilding your diet is about reconnecting with our food ‘at source’ as much as possible,” says nutritionist Tamara Bennett. “Reintroducing the foods that our great-grandmothers grew, prepared, preserved, cooked and ate. “The less we process our food – stripping it of its naturally occurring nutrients – the more nutrients will be available to us when we consume it, and the more likely we are to be nourishing ourselves,” she says. “Where possible, tick as many of these criteria as you can when making a food choice: seasonal, locally grown, minimally packaged, minimally processed, with ingredients that you recognise and might have in your own larder. It is also worth noting that there is no one-size-fits-all with regards to our gastrointestinal tolerance. If you’re feeling cautious, the support and guidance of a registered nutritionist or dietitian can be a very worthwhile investment. “We would do well to reconnect, to revisit the wild, to remind ourselves of the cornucopia of good things in nature’s basket,” Bennett says. “It would help our own health and the health of our planet.” 6 Reawaken your natural movement “Natural movement is what we’re designed to do from an evolutionary perspective,” says Danny Clark, performance director at MovNat, a physical education and fitness system. “It’s the movements that were instinctual that were lost along the way and suppressed by having to sit still or being funnelled into certain sports. “At MovNat, we visualise it like a tree and grow outwards. Certain movements are the roots, foundational: so we start on the ground because that’s where we start as a kid and it’s where we earn our stability. Ask yourself: can you sit on the ground with good posture? Can you kneel? Can you squat deeply? “We want to reawaken the instinct to move,” he says. “Natural movement is going to invite you to explore nature at different levels, go on adventures, find things that might be inspiring, go to places you wouldn’t otherwise go.” To start your barefoot journey, head to vivobarefoot.comDark chocolate is a “joy” when it comes to keeping your heart healthy, coffee is likely protective, but wine is at best “neutral”, according to one of the world’s leading cardiologists. As editor of the European Heart Journal for more than a decade, Prof Thomas Lüscher led a team that sifted through 3,200 manuscripts from scientists and doctors every year. Only a fraction – those deemed “truly novel” and backed up with “solid data” – would be selected for publication. After stepping down from his role in charge of the world’s top cardiovascular medicine journal, Lüscher has given his verdict on one of the most frequently asked heart health research questions: are wine, chocolate and coffee good or bad for you? Writing in the European Heart Journal, Lüscher, a consultant cardiologist and director of research, education and development at the Royal Brompton and Harefield hospitals, says the answer is “more complex than a simple yes or no”. Lüscher also cautions that the evidence should be considered “seriously”, given the large numbers of people worldwide that regularly enjoy a cup of coffee, a glass of wine or a piece of chocolate. There are pros and cons to each of them, he suggests, and these can differ depending on how often and how much of each is consumed, as well as by whom. “Are wine, chocolate, coffee forbidden joys? Well, wine is truly a joy but at best neutral when consumed in moderation. Chocolate is a joy for our CV [cardiovascular] system, if consumed in dark, bitter form. And coffee? It wakes us up, less so if you drink it regularly, and at that dose of up to four cups a day, might even be protective.” Speaking to the Guardian about his article, Lüscher, who has himself published extensively with more than 500 research papers, more than 200 reviews and book chapters on cardiovascular medicine, said despite the keen interest in the merits or otherwise of coffee, wine and chocolate for health, there is much that is still not known. “The optimal dose of chocolate, ie dark, bitter chocolate, is not known as this has not been properly investigated.” The most beneficial ingredient of chocolate were flavanols, he said, which can boost heart function and reduce inflammation. But he added: “It is important that chocolate contains little sugar and fat, which are obviously not healthy. In particular, white chocolate is not healthy at all.” Lüscher warned that while years ago chocolate was considered a “rare joy”, its easy availability today had contributed to an “obesity epidemic”. He added: “I myself, I am not a chocolate eater, but I do get it from patients quite often.” Lüscher has several espressos a day, and while he really likes “good red wine”, he has cut his intake recently and now mainly enjoys one or two glasses at the weekend. Prof Tim Chico, a professor of cardiovascular medicine and honorary consultant cardiologist at the University of Sheffield, said he agreed with Lüscher “that the evidence suggests coffee and chocolate are associated with a slightly lower risk of heart diseases, while alcohol is not”. Prof Paul Leeson, a professor of cardiovascular medicine at the University of Oxford, said: “When I see patients in the cardiology clinic they often assume wine, chocolate and coffee are going to be bad for them. There is obvious relief when you tell them this may not be the case. This article by a respected European senior cardiologist presents a very balanced, evidence-based assessment of the associations between these three elements of life and heart disease.” Tracy Parker, a senior dietician at the British Heart Foundation, said: “To keep your heart healthy, a healthy lifestyle is what really matters rather than how much coffee, chocolate or alcohol you consume. That means getting regular exercise, giving up smoking and eating well. “When it comes to our diet, it’s the balance of your whole diet that has the most impact. Try to eat more of the good stuff like fruit and vegetables as well as wholegrains, beans, nuts and seeds, and less of those foods high in salt, sugar and saturated fat like cake, biscuits and sweets.”The numbers are difficult to absorb. According to a new IPC report, a record 27 million Congolese – roughly a quarter of the Democratic Republic of the Congo’s (DRC’s) population – are facing hunger, with 860,000 children under five acutely malnourished. The DRC is home to more starving people than any other country in the world. This could have been prevented. Without faith that their own president Félix Tshisekedi will act, people are turning to the US president, hoping that lobbying using the hashtag #CongoIsStarving on Twitter will urge Joe Biden to back the creation of an international criminal tribunal for the DRC to end the impunity fuelling violence and famine risk. Shockingly, it could be that simple to bring an end to this suffering; we are asking for solidarity, not charity, to save lives and end this nightmarish crisis. When I first wrote about famine in the DRC in 2017, 7.7 million people were on the verge. Then the UN said the crisis was on the scale of Syria and Yemen. Earlier this year, the World Food Programme said 22 million Congolese were close to starvation, surpassing Yemen to become the world’s biggest and fastest-deteriorating food crisis. In a little more than nine months, an additional 5 million Congolese have become food insecure. For the first time, there are similar levels of hunger in towns and cities as remote rural areas, where conflict has pushed things close to breaking point; with more than 40 local and foreign militia gangs fighting for control of minerals that make mobile phones and “green’” cars. The forecast remains bleak through 2022 – suggesting that the worst is yet to come. Anyone who has studied the DRC will know the cause of this hunger is not drought or the economy, but a calamitous culture of impunity. The problem has worsened since Tshisekedi took office in 2019 because not only has he refused to take action against the war criminals responsible for the violence and the displacement of more than 5.5 million Congolese people, which fuels the hunger, he has promoted them. How can you protect civilians from violence if the very men who caused it are in power? Less than a year after becoming president, Tshisekedi told France’s TV5Monde: “I am not here to try crimes that happened before me.” Since then Tshisekedi has rewarded and promoted army officers under UN, US and EU sanctions for human rights violations including Gen Gabriel Amisi – who a 2012 UN report accused of running a network supplying arms to rebel groups – and Gen Muhindo Akili Mundos, under UN sanctions for his part in organising and carrying out civilian massacres. According to a 2015 UN report, not a single individual under Akili has been prosecuted for civilian deaths. Tshisekedi has promoted other known human rights violators labelled the “red generals” by senior UN officials, including Fall Sikabwe Asinda, Thierry Ilunga Kibambi and Egide Ngoy. In August, Tshisekedi appointed another former rebel leader Tommy Tambwe. Less than three months later, Tambwe’s militia gang M23 attacked Bukavu. This culture of impunity fuels insecurity and violence, which forces people off their land, closes markets, leads to loss of jobs and income and school dropouts. Food prices spiral upwards and poverty deepens in a country where the most recent figures show 73% of the population live on less than $1.90 (£1.40) a day, creating food insecurity and pushing a country already on the edge of crisis, off the cliff. Every day this goes on, more and more Congolese are killed, raped, displaced and pushed into poverty. The last mortality report published by the International Rescue Committee was in 2008 and placed the death toll at more than 5.4 million, since 1998, with 45,000 dying every month due to the violence, disease and famine that follow it. The UN Food and Agriculture Organization is asking for $65m (£48m) to help 1.1 million of the most vulnerable Congolese who cannot survive without food assistance, including mothers who are too malnourished to breastfeed their babies. So far only $4.5m (£3.3m) has been raised, leaving countless men, women and children facing desperate choices: should they join one of the many militia gangs to access their land so they don’t starve – compounding the violence – or become displaced, walking vast distances in search of security? Without an international criminal tribunal for Congo to end this calamitous culture of impunity, the survival of millions of people is at stake. And because our president has chosen to side with killers, the little hope left now lies with Biden to sponsor a UN security council vote for a UN tribunal to act to end the suffering.Exhibition of the week Lubaina Himid Painting, conceptual critiques and robust satire influenced by Hogarth all help make Himid one of the crucial artists of our time. • Tate Modern, London, 25 November to 3 July. Also showing David Shrigley The surreal commentator on modern life invites you to bring your old tennis balls to swap for new ones in an installation he claims is a celebration of trade - but there’s bound to be a darker side. • Stephen Friedman Gallery, London, until 8 January. Howardena Pindell Survey of this radical artist that sets her abstract canvases alongside more polemical interventions, including her 1980 video Free White and 21. • Fruitmarket Gallery, Edinburgh, until 2 May. Dürer’s Journeys The timeless genius of Dürer’s prints is undimmed by this slightly meandering trawl through his travels. • National Gallery, London, from 20 November to February. Fabergé in London A trip to the gilded Edwardian age when wealthy Brits fell in love with Russian luxury. V&amp;A, London, from 20 November to 8 May. Image of the week An assistant at Sotherby’s displays Frida Kahlo’s self-portrait Diego y yo (Diego and Me, 1949), which went under the hammer on Tuesday and sold for $34.9m (£25m). This made it the most expensive Latin American work of art ever sold at auction – ironically beating the record previously held by Kahlo’s adulterous husband Diego Rivera, whose likeness occupies the position of Kahlo’s third eye in the painting. Read the full story here. What we learned Downing Street signalled a softer stance on returning the Parthenon marbles Jesus College, Cambridge, wants to remove a memorial to a patron with links to slavery … … and the Museum of the Home, in London, may move a statue of its founder for the same reason Battles are looming over the use of works by long-dead artists Dürer’s Journeys at the National Gallery in London opened to a sedate plod Ai Weiwei’s memoirs are an assault on the censors David Hockney finds wellness boring, bossy and ridiculous Artist Yang-tze is making calligraphy cool Celebrity beasts in art are being explored in Birmingham Art from an acrimonious divorce raised $676m at Sotheby’s in New York The Guardian gave its view on the true worth of Frida Kahlo Japanese photographer Eikoh Hosoe’s vision is intense Photographer Gordon Parks is celebrated a new HBO documentary Alain Le Garsmeur’s best photograph was of a children’s funeral in Belfast Terence Abela has photographed the abandoned spaces of the former USSR A street art installation in Madrid has caused a political row Katherine Anne Rose photographed the protest art at Cop26 Global heating is destroying rock art tens of thousands of years old The documentary No Straight Lines explores the history of LGBTQ+ comic books A documentary on mould-breaking queer New Zealand photographer Fiona Clark has been released The north of England is full of exquisite treasures we don’t hear about The royal family are putting their collection of Japanese art and artefacts on show Wolfgang Fischer, co-founder of London gallery Fischer Fine Art, has died Artist Nuits Balnéaires told the stories of N’zima Kotokô tribe families in Ivory Coast Bangladeshi architect Marina Tabassum has won a medal for her humanitarian buildings A New York billionaire want to build a controversial “temple for a titan” overlooking Central Park Top photographers have donated prints to raise funds for a scholarship in photojournalism Why pottery is enjoying a revival … … and pictures of public benches are more popular than you may think Music photographer Mick Rock, ‘the man who shot the 70s’, has died aged 72 Stained-glass artist Patrick Reyntiens, who realised Coventry Cathedral’s baptistery window, has died aged 95. Masterpiece of the week Parade Shield (northern Europe c 1470) You can’t get a more perfect embodiment of late medieval chivalry than this painted shield in the style of the Bruges artist Hans Memling. A knight in full armour bends his legs down to pledge himself to his lady, vowing according to the shield’s French inscription: vous ou mort – “You or Death.” She gravely accepts his proffered love, standing over him in a long dress and a pointed hat called a hennin. They are enacting courtly love, the medieval ritual in which it was hard to tell fake passion from the real thing. Yet the game is given terrible intensity by the actual presence of Death. Taking the form of a skeleton, the reaper stands behind the knight, ready to snatch him at a moment’s notice should he fail to fulfil his vow. By mentioning Death, he has invited it. • British Museum, London Don’t forget To follow us on Twitter: @GdnArtandDesign. Sign up to the Art Weekly newsletter If you don’t already receive our regular roundup of art and design news via email, please sign up here. Get in Touch If you have any questions or comments about any of our newsletters please email newsletters@theguardian.comIt arrives with all the subtlety and secrecy of a great wildebeest migration. Opposing teams know it’s coming, head coaches can just about set their watch by it, but that very rarely dilutes its impact. The Bomb Squad, the menacing moniker given to South Africa’s replacement forwards, has become so mythologised in the psyche of Springbok supporters and players alike that it feels as if it has always been there. Relying on a cohesive pack of heavies that outmuscles and outlasts the opposition in a battle of attrition is not a departure for South African rugby. Stereotypes exist for a reason and the Springboks take great pride in their aggressive approach to the game. It is not always pretty, but it is effective, and brutality has a beauty of its own. It was during the last World Cup in Japan that the concept of the Bomb Squad gained prominence. Rassie Erasmus may divide opinion, and his character is currently under a microscope, but there is no denying his pedigree as a master tactician. He realised the potency of his scrum and maul and devised a way to keep his set-piece motoring at full capacity throughout the 80 minutes. “Our front-row guys did not have heavy loads,” he said after the 32-12 win over England in the 2019 final. “They tended to play the same number of minutes in the tournament and that helped today.” He achieved this by viewing his front row as comprising two distinct units. Barring injuries or a particularly poor performance, the plan was to rotate the entire front row in as little time as possible. If he could switch it up all at once, even better. In four of their past five games, South Africa’s scrum has packed down with a new set of faces staring at the opposition by the 46th minute. Against Wales and Scotland, Ox Nché, Bongi Mbonambi and Trevor Nyakane were replaced by Steven Kitshoff, Malcolm Marx and Vincent Koch before the half-time whistle. Interestingly, the starters are all close to the same height, ranging from 173cm to 178cm. Their replacements are significantly taller, between 183cm and 189cm. This forces their opposite numbers to completely change their angles of engagement. Some supporters in South Africa and on social media have considered this to be an indictment on the starting trio and, like it or not, the optics of three black players being replaced by three white players still touches a nerve, but the results are self-evident. In all but two of their past 23 matches since November 2018, South Africa have outscored or equalled their opponents in the second half. Marx has scored three tries from the bench, picking up where Mbonambi left off in steering a devastating maul. Maintaining that foundation throughout the contest is a major contributor to the pack’s staying power. “There’s a lot of pride [in being part of the Bomb Squad],” Kitshoff said. “It’s part of the team’s plan and we’re willing to execute what’s best for the team because the Springboks come first.” In the Chasing the Sun documentary, which chronicles the side’s transformation into world champions, Marx confesses to having his ego bruised by the prospect of opening the match sitting down. This is why a psychological recalibration has been key to the Bomb Squad’s success. “I think it’s important that there’s absolute transparency and clarity in terms of the plan,” the forwards coach, Deon Davids, said. “The players have a big buy-in. They understand the tasks. In our training sessions, there’s always good competition.” During the World Cup the Springboks gambled on a 6-2 bench split, opting for an additional forward. In the series-clinching win against the Lions in the third Test, as well as their four most recent outings, the coach, Jacques Nienaber, has reverted to a 5-3 split. Interestingly Eddie Jones has gone 6-2 for the clash at Twickenham. Bevan Rodd and Jamie Blamire, starting at 1 and 2, have five caps between them with the uncapped Nic Dolly on the bench. All six English front-rowers have a combined 138 Tests, swelled by Joe Marler’s tally of 73. By contrast Marx, Kitshoff and Koch have 133, supplementing an additional 108 from the starters. “I’ve got a lot of confidence [in our front row],” said England’s scrum coach, Matt Proudfoot, who fulfilled the same role for South Africa in the 2019 World Cup. He also stated he had no intention of replicating the Bomb Squad with his new charges. He has already created the “Fight Club” among his pack, declining to shed any insight as to what they get up to. However they do it, this comparatively inexperienced English unit will have to find a way of countering one of the most potent threats in world rugby. Ready or not, the Bomb Squad is coming.We would like to hear from people who are housebound in the UK about their experiences of getting the Covid-19 booster vaccine. Has you received your booster jab already? Or have you had any difficulties receiving it? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.West Ham, with 12 points from their past five games, have recently beaten Liverpool and could hardly feel better about life. Their co-chairman David Sullilvan clearly wants to keep up that momentum as he reportedly has just spent £100,000 on a private jet to bring Michail Antonio back from international duty with Jamaica. He scored in their World Cup qualifiers in El Salvador and at home against the United States, with his goal against the latter a wonderful long-range strike. A continuation of that form against Wolves would make it money well spent. Bruno Lage’s side are in decent shape too, with three wins in their past five, and they will be hoping to recover quickly from their 2-0 defeat at Crystal Palace a fortnight ago. Conrad Leach Saturday 3pm Venue Molineux Last season Wolves 2 West Ham 3 Referee Mike Dean This season G7 Y25 R0 3.57 cards/game Odds H 2-1 A 6-4 D 12-5 WOLVES Subs from Ruddy, Hoever, Boly, Dendoncker, Cundle, Campbell, Podence, Traoré, Silva, Marçal Doubtful None Injured Jonny (knee, unknown), Mosquera (hamstring, unknown), Neto (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y21 R0 Form WWWDWL Leading scorer Hwang 4 WEST HAM Subs from Areola, Randolph, Dawson, Fredericks, Diop, Masuaku, Coufal, Kral, Noble, Lanzini, Vlasic, Ashby, Chesters, Yarmolenko, Baptiste Doubtful None Injured Ogbonna (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y14 R1 Form WLWWWW Leading scorer Antonio 6Across 1 William WILL + I AM 5 spicery SP  Y 9 imago I  AGO [monarch butterfly] 10 set pieces pieces in chess set 11 despondent D(uke) + PE(r)SON (anag) + DENT 12 spam SPA + M(onarch) 14 princeliest PRI  CE/LI  ST 18 Machiavelli MAC (computer) + I/HAVE (anag) + ILL (rev) 21 rook double def 22 usurpation A in I TURN UP SO (anag) 25 liability I (not ‘we’) in LABILITY 26 Eliza ELIZA(beth) [H Higgins &amp; E Doolittle] 27 shebang (Queen of) SHEBA + N(o)G(ood) 28 loyalty (L/r)OYALTY Down 1 weirdo WE  DO 2 liaise regaLIA IS Edwardian (hidden) 3 isomorphic MOORISH P(r)I(n)C(e) (anag) 4 mused We are not (a)MUSED 5 satanical A LAST INCA (anag) 6 iris SIR(knighted)/I (rev) 7 encipher PRINCE HE (anag) 8 Yosemite E(nglish)/TIMES/(r)OY(al) (rev) 13 ultimately U(hom) + MAY TELL IT (anag) 15 investing double def 16 emeralds ER in DAMSEL (anag) 17 accolade AC  E 19 filial FIL&lt;1/A(nswer)&gt;L [she is his daughter] 20 uneasy ‘Uneasy lies the head that wears a crown’ (Henry IV) 23 royal tabloid &amp; royal are paper sizes 24 Aida AID/A Across: 1 William, 5 Spicery, 9 Imago, 10 Set pieces, 11 Despondent, 12 Spam, 14 Princeliest, 18 Machiavelli, 21 Rook, 22 Usurpation, 25 Liability, 26 Eliza, 27 Shebang, 28 Loyalty. Down: 1 Weirdo, 2 Liaise, 3 Isomorphic, 4 Mused, 5 Satanical, 6 Iris, 7 Encipher, 8 Yosemite, 13 Ultimately, 15 Investing, 16 Emeralds, 17 Accolade, 19 Filial, 20 Uneasy, 23 Royal, 24 Aida.Nationwide Building Society has said there could be a “cooling” of the UK’s red-hot housing market because of rising inflation and interest rates. Robert Gardner, the chief economist at the UK’s second-largest mortgage lender, said the housing market is currently “remarkably robust” despite the end of incentives such as the government’s stamp duty holiday at the end of September. However, he said that in the coming months a lot would depend on the performance of the wider economy. “There are a few things that could moderate [housing demand] a bit in the coming quarters. For example, there are not many homes on the market at the moment. That is likely to hold back activity. “If you look at rising inflation squeezing household budgets a little and if interest rates rise, then that is likely to exert a cooling influence as well. But if the recovery holds up, then activity is likely to remain pretty solid.” Earlier this month, Halifax said house prices had hit a new record high in October, climbing above an average of £270,000 for the first time. However, while the Bank of England this month decided to keep interest rates at a historic low of 0.1%, it could raise borrowing costs as early as December, against a backdrop of falling unemployment and higher inflation. Last month the Bank’s chief economist, Huw Pill, said he expected to see inflation top 5% by early next year. Earlier this week, the Office for National Statistics reported that inflation in October hit its highest level in a decade. A sharp increase in gas and electricity prices pushed up inflation – as measured by the consumer prices index – to 4.2%, up from 3.1% in September, the highest rate since November 2011. The Bank of England’s official target for inflation is 2%. Gardner made his comments as Nationwide reported that profits for its half-year to the end of September more than doubled to £853m compared with £361m the previous year. Nationwide said it had benefited by continuing to lend during the early stages of the coronavirus pandemic, while others stopped. Profits were also boosted by the release of £34m that had been set aside to cover possible losses caused by Covid-19 that did not materialise. Joe Garner, Nationwide’s chief executive, said its policy of allowing its 13,000 office-based staff to work from anywhere in the UK was faring “tremendously well”. He said: “We continue to see enhanced productivity. The area we are paying careful attention to is how to build culture and cohesion [with staff remote working].” Nationwide said it operates about 650 branches across the UK backed by a pledge to keep at least one in every town or city until at least 2023. Sara Bennison, Nationwide’s chief product and marketing officer, said the society had closed 5% of its branches in the last five years compared with an average of 30% by high street banking rivals. Garner has expressed a desire to step down as chief executive but on Friday said there was no update on succession plans. “I remain entirely focused on leading Nationwide and will until the very last second,” he said.When husbands Mika Johnson and Dan Hardman were put on furlough, they re-evaluated their priorities and launched their own coffee shop Starting one business during a pandemic is hard. Starting two seems inconceivable. Yet that’s what Mika Johnson and Dan Hardman did, first creating an online baking business from home and then setting up a coffee shop in Macclesfield, where they have lived for the past eight years. “It just felt like the right moment to do it,” says Johnson. Both the bakery and coffee shop came into existence because of the pandemic. When the country was plunged into lockdown in 2020, the couple, who both worked in hospitality, were placed on furlough – and Hardman was later made redundant. Like almost everyone else, he spent lockdown baking and sharing pictures of the results on social media. “People were asking me: ‘When are you going to start selling them?’” Spurred on by the positive response, Hardman spent the month after his redundancy planning, before deciding to pursue his passion with the launch of his own online baking business. Johnson, meanwhile, went back to his job as the manager of a local pub when Covid restrictions were loosened. It was a tough readjustment. “I stopped drinking in October 2019 and over lockdown I realised that I didn’t want to be around alcohol or people drinking in that way any more,” he says. “I knew that I didn’t want to go back to my old lifestyle.” Opportunity for change arose when the pair heard that a local baker was looking for someone to start selling coffee alongside his market stall. “I really wanted to do it,” Johnson recalls, “so I talked to a local coffee roaster, Kickback Coffee. They loaned us a coffee machine, gazebo and a stand.” Hardman and Johnson called their new business Yas Bean, a play on drag queen slang that conveyed a sense of fun and queerness. Within a few weeks, they had started selling coffee – and Hardman’s bakes – in a mini outdoor market. “We were in deepest lockdown in December and January. It became a focus for so many people in town,” says Johnson. “So much so that we would have queues.” As restrictions began to ease, however, they realised that they would need to expand. “Selling coffee from a gazebo in winter in the pouring rain wasn’t easy,” says Johnson. Quickly signing a lease on a permanent space, they worked with Millie Humphries, a local interior designer from Back to the Future Interiors, to create an aesthetically enticing and chic space. “I knew that our products were good,” says Johnson, “but ... people are also looking for somewhere that looks cool, too.” Once the coffee shop was decorated, Johnson began a push to get the word out. He started a Google Business Profile for Yas Bean, uploading key information and some inviting shots of the cafe’s retro pink and teal decor. “It was easy to get to grips with, it’s very user-friendly. From the business end it helps you step by step, whether that’s allowing you to post your opening times, your menu or your photos, it’s pretty straightforward. So you can now search for us and it looks legit. Also, having the images there makes people want to engage with us,” he says. “We’ve had the shop for under two months and we’ve already had so many reviews on Google, which is fantastic.” Johnson can’t stress how important it’s been for Yas Bean’s growth to have a digital presence through social media accounts and a Google Business Profile. “Word of mouth for our produce is great, but, visually, people really grab on to our colours and interiors,” he says about sharing pictures online. “You might have a good product, but that only goes so far. But if you can share a really cool interior or a cool coffee cup, it spreads so much further.” Hardman and Johnson have already had young LGBTQ+ people come into the cafe. Reflecting on what this means to him, Johnson says: “So much of queer life revolves around clubbing and drinking. Part of the next step is that I would love to run some queer sober events.” They’ve also started selling locally made arts and crafts, something they hope to do on their website, too. More than anything, though, they are just glad that their lockdown gamble paid off. “We always wanted to do something together,” says Hardman. “Now that we’re doing this, it’s the dream.” To discover more, visit yasbean.co.uk ‘Women are not being provided for or understood’: the startup helping to tackle health inequality Emilie Lavinia, founder of EKHO Wellbeing. Photograph: Circe Hamilton/Guardian Determined to address the biases in healthcare, Emilie Lavinia started her own wellness business Emilie Lavinia set up EKHO Wellbeing to help address inequalities in healthcare for women. In a paper published by Europe PMC, it was found that critically ill women older than 50 are less likely to receive life-saving interventions than men of the same age. EKHO Wellbeing’s website delivers health resources that focus on reproductive, hormonal and sexual wellbeing to help empower women to advocate for themselves, while also working with corporations to ensure that health inequalities are a thing of the past. Here, Lavinia explains how using Google Digital Garage tools have helped her build her business’s visibility online. What is EKHO all about? The idea was to create an educational platform for women who felt like they had gaps in their knowledge about intimate health issues – members can access the content for a monthly or yearly fee. Women are consistently in a position where they’re on the back foot in terms of healthcare discrimination. That’s even worse for women of colour or trans women. That’s why we decided to also look at the systems and processes that allow health discrimination to occur, such as workplaces. That inspired us to go in and teach C-suite executives how to advocate for their staff. What gave you the idea? I’ve had my own experience of health discrimination. But as an able-bodied white woman, I was thinking about what I had been through and what it must be like for black women or women who don’t have any education about their bodies. Then you look at things such as menopause campaigns, maternity and postpartum leave, and you realise that women are really not being provided for or understood. What hurdles did you face developing the product? It was quite difficult to know how accessible the videos we made should be, whether we should be doing audio bites and offer language options. When it comes to women discovering and interacting with us online, we only really had the website and our private social group to grow the community. Reaching a larger audience and making ourselves visible was a challenge. How has this been addressed? I’ve attended Google Digital Garage training on how to build a business online, how to be visible and how understanding SEO is so essential for a content-based company, as is understanding how to reach niche communities with short, sharp Google Ads. It’s been really, really useful for us; Google even tells us what images we should be using. What has the response been like from EKHO users? We check in with our users to make sure they’re happy and that everything works. As a result, we’ve changed the product here and there, which is great because it’s all learning for us. Mainly it’s just been women saying: “Wow, I didn’t realise how little I knew.” How would you like to see EKHO grow? We’re hoping we can continue to create these courses, so we end up with a library that is accessible and affordable. We also want to partner up with other like-minded organisations and grow beyond the UK so we can enact change on a global scale. That also depends on our partnerships and on how many people get behind the idea. I think we’re on the right track. To learn more about EKHO, visit ekhowellbeing.com Discover the tools, training and support Google provides to help businesses across Britain grow at g.co/growbritain‘A shiny brand new kind of show, a fresh new take on the one you know,” we hear in a spoken prologue to Barokksolistene’s new version of Schubert’s Die Schöne Müllerin, the first half of their double bill at Middle Temple Hall. The driving force behind this re-imagining is singer-director Thomas Guthrie, who argues that the song recital as we know it today was unheard of in Schubert’s time, and that Lieder were primarily performed in an informal, usually domestic setting, accompanied on occasion by instrumental improvisations as well as piano. Schubert’s song cycle has consequently been reworked as a music-theatre piece for singer (Guthrie himself) and ensemble. Three directors (Guthrie again, Laura Caldow and Patrick Dickie) are credited for a staging that swings between inventiveness and stasis. Schubert’s tragic Miller is represented by a wide-eyed, life-size puppet operated by Guthrie and Sean Garrett, and a narration is added, spoken by Guthrie, Garrett and Rhiannon Harper-Rafferty. It suffers however from a lack of focus. Guthrie doesn’t quite have the requisite colouristic or dynamic range to project the cycle ideally well, and his charismatic presence and skills as an actor mean we end up watching him rather than the puppet, which presumably should be the focus of attention. The narration, not always distinctly spoken, and arrangements, for string quintet and two guitars, are clever but add little to our understanding. After the interval comes one of the Alehouse Sessions for which Barrokksolistene are now rightly famous. Devised by the group’s wonderful leader-director Bjarte Eike, these are joyous reconstructions of the musical world of 17th-century British taverns, in which folk music, European as well as British, rub shoulders with music by Purcell and his contemporaries. The musicians swigged beer on stage as they played, sang and danced. Guthrie, also a violinist, seemed more at ease here, leading the audience in a singalong of Hey Jolly Broom Man, and soprano Mary Bevan, sitting in the audience, made a cameo appearance after being brought onstage during Raggle Taggle Gypsy. The performances were simply terrific throughout. Tremendous stuff. • Broadcast on Radio 3 on 24 NovemberSouth Africa’s plan to build new coal-fired power stations during the climate crisis is being challenged in court for breaching the rights of current and future generations. Three civil society organisations have launched a constitutional lawsuit in the North Gauteng high court against the South African government, arguing that its energy policy is incompatible with the national constitution. Coal makes up about 80% of South Africa’s energy mix, and the government intends to add 1,500MW more over the next six years as part of its 2019 integrated resource plan. The fuel is the single biggest contributor to the global climate crisis, and also causes serious local environmental problems such as air and water pollution. Earlier this year, the International Energy Agency said no new coal-fired power stations could be built if the world is to stay within safe limits of global heating. Although South Africa has not explicitly agreed to phase out the fossil fuel, it was one of 197 countries to commit to “phasing down” coal at the Cop26 global climate summit in Glasgow last week. Cyril Ramaphosa, the South African president, admits the climate crisis is “the most pressing issue of our time” and that developing economies are particularly vulnerable. As well as the direct dangers of rising temperatures, the climate emergency poses a particular threat to South Africa because of its existing water and food insecurity. But, despite being given about $8.5bn (£6.3bn)_from European countries and the US to help it move away from coal, Gwede Mantashe, the energy minister, said it would continue to play a significant role in the nation’s electricity generation. Campaigners say the problem is not being taken seriously enough, pointing to research by the University of Cape Town and the Climate Equity Reference Project that shows the coal plans are not compatible with South Africa meeting its climate commitments. The youth-led African Climate Alliance, the Vukani Environmental Justice Movement in Action and Groundwork argue that continuing coal development breaches constitutional rights to life, dignity and equality, the right to a healthy environment and children’s rights. The campaigners say there is no justifiable basis for limiting their constitutional rights because renewable energy is a feasible alternative and is cleaner and cheaper than new coal power. Gabriel Klaasen, youth coordinator at the African Climate Alliance, said it was “beyond time” that young people and vulnerable communities are taken into account and their needs prioritised. “Without this, I can’t imagine a future that is not defined by continued and increased suffering.” Nicole Loser, the head of the pollution and climate change programme at non-profit Centre for Environmental Rights, which is representing the claimants, said climate litigation had already put significant pressure on the country’s coal industry. Permission for the Thabametsi coal plant in Limpopo province had to be resubmitted after EarthLife Africa Johannesburg showed climate change had not been taken into account in its environmental assessment. Although the permit was reissued, the project has since been scrapped. The energy minister and the national energy regulator of South Africa have been approached for comment.Dean Smith did not stay out of work long after being dismissed at Villa Park and takes over a Norwich side in relatively scorching-hot form despite being bottom. Yes, they ride into battle fresh from a first win, with the bonus that Smith will be out for revenge as defeat against Southampton led to his sacking. Ralph Hasenhüttl will be acutely aware, however, that Norwich still look seriously undermanned on paper and that his side are fit, firing and fresh from the international break. Three wins from four is a serious upturn in fortunes and the Saints have a fully fit squad aside from Jack Stephens. Hasenhüttl also has Smith’s number, with four wins and one defeat in five meetings against him. Another victory could take his side as high as seventh if other results go Southampton’s way. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Carrow Road Last season n/a Referee Martin Atkinson This season G8 Y18 R2 2.5 cards/game Odds H 27-10 A Evens D 28-11 NORWICH Subs from Gunn, Dowell, Tzolis, Sørensen, Idah, Placheta, Normann, Giannoulis, Sargent, Dowell, McLean, Kabak, Hanley Doubtful None Injured Byram (match fitness, unknown), Zimmermann (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y21 R1 Form LDDLLW Leading scorer Pukki 3 SOUTHAMPTON Subs from Lewis, Forster, Obafemi, Simeu, Valery, McQueen, Lyanco, Long, Tella, Walcott, Diallo, Perraud, Djenepo, S Armstrong Doubtful None Injured Stephens (knee, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y20 R1 Form LLWDWW Leading scorers A Armstrong, Broja, Ward-Prowse 2A rare surviving copy of the US constitution has sold at auction for a record $43.2m, with an unknown buyer beating a crowdfunded bid by a cryptocurrency group. The document, one of 13 original copies dating from 1787, sold for almost three times its lower estimate of $15m, and more than 260 times the amount it achieved when it last sold for $165,000 in 1988. The bidding at Sotheby’s in New York took eight minutes. The identity of the new owner was not disclosed, but they were bidding against “ConstitutionDAO”, which had amassed more than £47m, or 11,600 of the cryptocurrency ether, in a few days on its online crowdfunding page. The group, which had committed to putting the document on public display “in the hands of the people”, promised to refund its 17,437 contributors after deducting transaction fees. DAO stands for “decentralised autonomous organisation”. The document was described by Sotheby’s as an “exceptionally rare and extraordinarily historic first printing of the United States constitution”, which was adopted by America’s founding fathers in Philadelphia in 1787. Five hundred were printed originally. Sotheby’s had estimated the document to be worth $15m to $20m. It has now become the most expensive book, manuscript, historical document or printed text to be auctioned. It had been bought 33 years ago by Howard Goldman, a collector of historical American books and manuscripts. The proceeds of the sale will benefit a charitable foundation in the name of his wife, Dorothy Tapper Goldman, to promote understanding of democracy, according to Sotheby’s. David Brigham, the chief executive of the Historical Society of Pennsylvania, which owns another of the 13 copies of the constitution, said: “The monetary value is what the market says it is, but this auction and the interest in it reflects something much deeper – the intrinsic value of the US constitution and the fact that it remains the force that binds this nation together. “The earliest written copies of the constitution serve as a reminder of where this country came from and where it can go, and that is priceless. What’s more, it illustrates that even in a digitised world, being able to see and hold a real document from the time of the Constitutional Convention is a powerful thing.” In a post on Twitter, Alice Ma, one of the people behind the crowdfunded project, said: “While this wasn’t the outcome we hoped for, we still made history tonight with ConstitutionDAO. This is the largest crowdfund for a physical object that we are aware of – crypto or fiat. “Sotheby’s has never worked with a DAO community before. We broke records for the most money crowdfunded in less than 72 hours. We have educated an entire cohort of people around the world – from museum curators and art directors to our grandmothers asking us what ether is when they read about us in the news – about the possibilities of web3. “And on the flip side, many of you have learned about what it means to steward an asset like the US constitution across museums and collections, or watched an art auction for the first time.”The scent of victory was in the air. As tractors rolled through the protest camp on the outskirts of Delhi set up by farmers almost exactly a year ago, rousing cries of “long live the revolution” and “we defeated Modi” rang out. Old men with trailing silver beards and rainbow turbans danced on tractor roofs and flag-waving children were held up high. “For one year we have been at war,” said Ranjeet Singh, 32. “We have suffered, people have died. But today farmers won the war.” Just hours before, India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, had made an unexpected address on national television, announcing his intention to repeal the three farm laws that had been at the heart of one of the most sustained and dogged protests India has recorded in decades. The agricultural reforms had been called the “black laws” by the farmers, who feared their livelihoods would be put into the hands of vast conglomerates that would crush them. It was 358 days ago, that hundreds of thousands of farmers marched on foot and in a convoy of tractors hundreds of miles from the neighbouring states of Punjab and Haryana to the Delhi border with a single demand: repeal the farm laws. On the way, they were met with police batons, teargas, water cannons and concrete barricades, but still they persevered. Once they got to the edge of Delhi, they dug in, and have stayed put ever since. Around them, where it was just a dusty roadside a year ago, something resembling a shantytown now stands. Concrete buildings have been erected alongside bamboo huts, community kitchens, libraries and shipping containers turned into homes for the farmers, complete with air conditioning units, bathrooms and fridges – set out by the farmers who vowed they would not budge until Modi backed down on the laws. And on Friday morning, to the surprise of many, backing down was exactly what he did. The news was greeted with cautious optimism among many farmers who have spent the year living in the Singhu border camp. While most took it as a triumph – “the farmers beat Modi when nobody else could” could be heard everywhere – many said they did not trust the prime minister at his word and would only be celebrating when the repeal had been approved by the president and parliament, and their farmer union leaders had the documents in their hands. Over the loudspeakers booming out across the camps, speeches made by activists and farm union leaders spoke of their deep mistrust in the prime minister. “We are not leaving here until we the repeal papers have been stamped. Modi could be playing us but farmers are not fools,” declared one speaker. “Why should we believe Modi just because he says something on the television,” said Avtar Singh, 65, a farmer from Ropar in Punjab. “Only when we have seen the official documents repealing the laws will I be happy.” Like many, Singh spoke of his anger that it had taken Modi a year to repeal the laws, which had never even been implemented due to the backlash. A morbid tally of the number of farmers who had died in the year of unrest hung outside one tent, a figure that now stands at 719 by their count. “They knew these were bad laws, why did they make us suffer here for a whole year?” he said. “I am an old man, it has been hard living here in the dust and pollution and heat and summer rains. Over 700 people lost their lives. Modi should not just take back the laws, he should come down here and apologise to all of us.” The apparent victory over repealing the farm laws also emboldened many in the camps, who said they would not leave until other significant issues in the agriculture sector had been resolved, particularly around the varied minimum prices that farmers in different states receive for their crops which are seen by some as vastly unfair. “I’m not going anywhere,” said Sardar Gurmukh Singh, 53, from Hoshiarpur in Punjab, pointing to the concrete house he had erected for himself, complete with air conditioning units. “Repealing the farm laws is just the beginning.” While Modi’s tone in his speech had been unusually remorseful for the strongman leader, accepting that “something had fallen short”, most in the Singhu camp felt that this was a move that had been done purely for political strategy, not out of concern for the farmers. At the beginning of next year there will be an election in the state of Uttar Pradesh, now governed by Modi’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), which it is crucial for them to hold on to. However, the race is already looking tight and they had begun to pay a heavy political price in the state for the farm laws and their perceived mistreatment of farmers. “We all know this is political strategy, it’s because Modi is scared of losing the state elections,” said Surinder Kaur, 60, from Punjab. “But that still shows the power of the farmers: we are more powerful than Modi.”House Democrats have vowed to vote on Friday on an expansive domestic policy package that would overhaul large swaths of the American economy, after the Republican minority leader, Kevin McCarthy, derailed a vote planned for Thursday evening with a rambling, hours-long speech. After months of fits and starts, gridlock and intra-party warring, Democrats had been on the verge of passing the centerpiece of Joe Biden’s economic vision on Thursday. But final passage of the measure was ultimately delayed by McCarthy, who used his leadership privileges to rail furiously against the legislation, the administration and the Democratic party in an overnight speech that lasted an extraordinary 8.5 hours. Democrats eventually dispersed and Steny Hoyer, the House majority leader, announced they would return early on Friday to vote on the bill, known as Build Back Better. If it passes the House, the measure would next go to the Senate, where additional hurdles await in the evenly divided chamber. McCarthy’s protest speech enraged Democratic lawmakers who taunted and jeered, underscoring the deep animosity between the two political parties a day after the censure of Congressman Paul Gosar, a Republican from Arizona who shared a video depicting himself killing congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez and threatening Biden. At one point during his discursive and angry monologue, McCarthy quoted the Democratic congresswoman Abigail Spanberger: “Nobody elected Joe Biden to be FDR.” “I did,” Ocasio-Cortez shouted. House speaker Nancy Pelosi’s office derided McCarthy’s speech as a “temper tantrum”, accusing him of making “unhinged claims” about the bill. Shortly after midnight, Democrats began to file out of the chamber. “I’m not going to stop,” McCarthy said as they left. “I’m really not talking to them. I’m talking to the American people.” The planned vote follows the release of a cost estimate from the non-partisan Congressional Budget Office, as requested by a band of centrist Democrats with concerns about the legislation’s impact on the federal deficit. The analysis found that the bill would spend $1.7tn over 10 years, increasing the deficit by $367bn over the same span of time. The score did not include estimates of Democrats’ plans to raise revenue by increasing enforcement of federal tax laws. The budget office separately predicted that boosting funding for the Internal Revenue Service by $80bn would raise $207bn in revenue, shrinking the deficit to $160bn over 10 years. The estimate was far less than the $400bn the White House said would be raised by tougher IRS enforcement. With the analysis complete, the treasury secretary, Janet Yellen, said in a statement that “Build Back Better is fully paid for” and would ultimately reduce the country’s debt by enacting “reforms that ask the wealthiest Americans and large corporations to pay their fair share”. The budget score appeared to be enough to placate worried centrists, at least for now. Congresswoman Stephanie Murphy, co-chair of the centrist Blue Dog coalition, said she would vote for the bill, despite “reservations about the overall size of the legislation”. “I will work with my Senate colleagues to improve this bill, and I hope to vote on – and enact – a more streamlined version of the bill once it returns from the Senate,” she said in a statement. The package is ambitious: it aims to dramatically reduce childcare costs, provide universal pre-kindergarten for children, lower the cost of prescription drugs for seniors, expand Medicare to cover hearing aids, extend work permits to millions of undocumented immigrants and provide the largest-ever investment in efforts to combat the climate crisis. The House version of the legislation also includes four weeks of paid family and medical leave, though the provision faces opposition from Senator Joe Manchin, a Democrat of West Virginia. With a paper-thin majority, Democrats can spare only a handful of defections on the package. Only one House Democrat, Jared Golden of Maine, was expected to vote against the bill. Pelosi had twice attempted to bring the spending bill to the floor for a vote, only to see those plans unravel amid a standoff between progressives and moderates over Biden’s double-barreled legislative agenda. A truce brokered by the president and the Congressional Black Caucus helped secure the passage of a sprawling public works bill earlier this month and paved the way for Friday’s vote. Two of the Senate’s 50 Democrats, Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona, have not yet committed to supporting the package, even as negotiators reshaped the climate and tax portions of the package to meet their demands. “This was like a Rubik’s cube, trying to get all the different provisions together,” Congressman Joaquin Castro of Texas said at a press conference highlighting the immigration reforms contained in the bill. “You move one piece and there’s a constituency or a caucus in the House or Senate that is unhappy.” Opening the House floor debate on Thursday, Democrats touted the historic nature of the legislation. Congressman John Yarmuth of Kentucky, the chair of the House budget panel, which played a critical role in shaping the package, said any single element of the bill by itself would be significant, but together they represented the “most consequential legislation for American families since the New Deal”. “It’s a hell of a bill,” he said. Democrats and Republicans sparred on the House floor over the economics of the plan. Republicans assailed it as reckless spending that would exacerbate the trend of rising inflation and slow economic growth. Democrats argued the opposite, that the bill would actually combat inflation while relieving many of the financial stressors Americans face, such as the cost of childcare and prescription drugs. Though many of the bill’s initiatives remain broadly popular among voters, including among Republicans, boiling economic discontent have sent Biden’s approval ratings tumbling. Facing daunting challenges in next year’s midterm elections, Democrats are hopeful that enacting Biden’s agenda in full will bring something of a reversal of fortunes for the party. But McCarthy, who hopes to be speaker if Republicans take back control of the House next year, predicted otherwise. “Could she be the speaker in modern history, one of the few to lose the House twice and lose the most seats?” he said, breaking her record for the longest House floor speech in history. “I don’t know.”Melanie Sykes described the experience of her autism diagnosis at the age of 51 as “life-changing” and one that helped her make sense of previously unexplainable struggles she had faced. It is also part of a wider trend, with an exponential rise in the number of women being newly diagnosed with autism in adulthood in the past two decades. Experts say the increase is being driven by a growing awareness that autism is not, as was once the perception, a “male condition” and that there can be subtle differences in how autism presents in females. Francesca Happé, the director of the Social, Genetic and Developmental Psychiatry Centre at King’s College London, said: “It’s a phenomenon at the moment. There’s been a lot more awareness and a lot of women coming for a first diagnosis in mid-life.” This is reflected in the shifting male-to-female ratio of autism diagnoses. In 1998, 18% of new diagnoses in England were of females, increasing to 23% in 2018. Studies based on active screening of children rather than diagnostic records suggest that the ratio for those meeting current diagnostic criteria is closer to 3:1. Happé says that diagnostic criteria themselves have been skewed towards identifying autism in males because until recently most scientific studies have recruited only boys and men. “Because we thought there were so many more males than females affected, for neuro-imaging studies females were just seen as noise in your sample,” she said. “In recent years there’s been an active seeking out of women for research.” From this new body of work, evidence is emerging of subtle differences in how autistic traits present in males and females. “Cognitively, females might have some advantages in terms of memory and mental flexibility which means they’re better able to perform in social situations, in effect masking their autism,” said Hannah Belcher, an autism researcher at King’s College London. “We also know that this group is more likely to camouflage, possibly due to socialisation pressures to ‘fit in’ with others, and so will attempt to compensate for their autistic traits.” This does not necessarily mean that the core traits are different – but they may be perceived differently by others. Recent research by Belcher suggests that, for instance, non-autistic people view the social behaviours of autistic women more favourably than they do those of autistic men. The increasing awareness that autism affects women is set against a huge increase in diagnosis across the board. A recent analysis found that in 1998 just 3,072 people in England were newly diagnosed with autism. By 2018 the figure had risen to 65,665, with the steepest rises in females and adults. “The main reason for this is that the criteria for diagnosis has changed over time – it has expanded,” said Ginny Russell, of Exeter University, who led the research. “As time has passed, less severe traits have been required.” “It’s good to remind ourselves that autism isn’t a fixed object – it does morph over time,” she added. This shift is a point of contention in the autism research community. “Some question the clinical utility of the broadening diagnostic criteria,” said Russell. “For people like Mel [Sykes] it has been personally helpful. It can be an explanation for why people have never fitted in.” However, Russell said that the broadening of the criteria might mean that a diagnosis was “not that useful” for recommending a clinical pathway because the group is now so diverse. Some point to the potential risks of failure to diagnose autism, which is linked to a range of other mental health issues, including anxiety. One small study found that 23% of women receiving hospital treatment for anorexia met the diagnostic criteria for autism, although it did not establish whether the women’s social and communication difficulties predated their eating disorder. Another study, published this year, suggested that women diagnosed with autism in adulthood were more likely than men to have previously been misdiagnosed with personality disorders or other conditions. Belcher, who was diagnosed at the age of 23, had anxiety as a child and dropped out of school before her GCSEs because of mental health problems. She believes she would have received more support if she had been diagnosed earlier. “The difficulty is that these women are also more likely to have mental health issues, and we think that’s because of the exhaustion from camouflaging and lack of support they’re receiving,” she said. In Belcher’s experience, autistic women are often told “but you don’t look autistic”, because the image of autism has been biased towards males and children. “Previously we weren’t visible … but with people like Mel Sykes coming out, so to speak, it gives the others courage to do the same,” she said. “This is really positive for raising awareness of different autism presentations.”The Hollywood actor Richard Gere has revealed for the first time the full story behind his mercy mission to the NGO rescue boat Open Arms as he prepares to testify as a witness against Italy’s former interior minister and far-right leader, Matteo Salvini, who is on trial for attempting to block the 147 people onboard from landing in Italy. In an exclusive interview with the Guardian, Gere, 72, who lawyers have listed as a key witness to the situation aboard the NGO rescue boat Open Arms, described the scenes of desperation he saw when he arrived on the vessel being held off the Italian island of Lampedusa in the summer of 2019 with conditions rapidly deteriorating. “We saw more than a hundred people on board,” Gere told the Guardian. “I felt ashamed that we have so much and are not able to embrace these fellow human beings, our brothers and sisters who were starving, traumatised. If they were told the boat was going back to Libya, they would jump in the water and drown themselves, and I felt it was our responsibility to bring as much light as we could.” The trial of Salvini over the incident, for which he faces a maximum of 15 years’ jail if convicted on charges of kidnapping and dereliction of duty, began in Palermo last month. The judge, Roberto Murgia, has allowed Gere’s testimony after the actor said he was willing to testify on behalf of the refugees. A date has not yet been set for the testimony. Magistrates consider Gere, who was on the boat but neither a refugee or member of the crew, an objective observer who can lend credence to what they have described as an “explosive situation aboard” with asylum seekers forced to remain on deck for 19 days without receiving medical attention before eventually being allowed to disembark. The blocking of the Spanish tugboat Open Arms became one of the most notorious consequences of Salvini’s recently introduced security decree that aimed to put an end to NGO rescue missions in the central Mediterranean by imposing fines of up to €50,000 (£42,700) for boats that brought migrants to Italy without permission. Gere’s journey to the boat began with a holiday in Tuscany. “I was visiting a friend that summer who asked me if I was aware of this new law in Italy, so I asked him to explain it to me. He said: ‘It’s going to be a criminal offence to help people in distress.’ “‘You’ve gotta be kidding me! This is not possible!’ I mean, in deeply Christian Italy, how could this happen? It’s criminal to help people in need? It was mind-boggling to me.” He put the holiday on hold to fly to Sicily with his son and on 9 August, with a tiny boat packed with supplies of food and water, the Hollywood star made it to the Open Arms vessel. The final leg of getting to the rescue ship was far from straightforward. When he arrived in Lampedusa from Sicily, Gere and other volunteers from the NGO bought food and water supplies. But there was a problem. The Italian authorities would not allow any boats to get close to Open Arms, which was still at sea. “There was this man,” Gere says. “He was told by the police that they’d destroy his business and that he’d end up in jail if he helped us. We had the food, but we didn’t have the boat to get the food out to these people.” Finally, an islander recognised the actor and offered to help. His boat was small, but there was no time to waste. The situation on Open Arms was growing increasingly dire by the hour. With the boat packed with supplies – so many that Gere and the others sat on top of the provisions – the team set off. After an hour on rough seas, they reached the vessel. Gere and the others immediately distributed food to the migrants. Accompanied by an interpreter, he spoke to almost every person on the ship. “I introduced myself,” he says. “I introduced them to my son. I looked them in the eyes. Most of them didn’t know me or who I was. To them, I was just a worker guy who brought some food and did his best to smile and be kind. We brought water and food, and maybe a sense of hope. “We were a lifeline to a world of non-torture, of possibilities and dreams. Then I asked them who they are, where they come from. There was a mother with her young daughters who had to navigate the militias trying to make her way to Libya. Of course, these young girls were easy prey, and she had to give herself on every border, she had to give herself to gangs of militias, sexually, to protect her daughters and to take her family to the Mediterranean, where there would be hope and safety. And there she was, 20 miles from safety but unable to reach the shore.” Gere, who has been engaged in numerous humanitarian causes over the years, began to use his contacts to see if he could get the refugees further help. “I called the Spanish PM [Pedro Sánchez] from the boat and asked him to take some of these people, and as much as he felt the situation, he was politically constrained because of how much the right were pulling strings in Spain. He told me: ‘Look, we’ve been taking a lot of people from Morocco, they come across the water from Morocco. We take too many.’ But basically he said he could only do what his people would allow him to do. “I called my contacts in Germany, and [Angela] Merkel was obviously the most courageous person in Europe. They were taking in over 1 million refugees, but at that point she felt constrained. In the end, no one was taking responsibility.” The experience on board the ship would leave an indelible mark on Gere and, as Salvini went on trial, the actor agreed to testify on behalf of Open Arms. It was a not a decision received well across the Italian political spectrum and some on the right have accused him of grandstanding. “You tell me how serious a trial is where Richard Gere will come from Hollywood to testify about my nastiness,” Salvini said. Giorgia Meloni, the leader of the nationalist Brothers of Italy party, declared that Gere was just an “actor seeking visibility”. Gere, who began his Hollywood career in the 1970s and rose to be one its most bankable leading men, chuckled when asked what he thinks about Meloni’s jibe. “Visibility? Actually I have been searching for anonymity. It’s the opposite,” he says. “First of all, I don’t know these people. I’ve never met them, but I highly doubt they’ve taken the time to go on a boat and have a human experience and understand the real people they have their influence over. If they did that, then I think there’s probably another conversation to have. You see, I don’t see myself as a movie star. I’m one of 7 billion human beings on the planet, that’s it, no more. I’m no better or worse than anyone.” He says his motivation was to say what he had seen on the boat. “Look, I don’t know anything about the politics, and I don’t know the defendants in this case. Frankly, I don’t wish him [Salvini] ill, but my concern is the people who are suffering so much. That’s what moves me. It’s possible, because I was there, in the middle of the craziness, my visceral human understanding of it is maybe a little deeper than most people’s. I was a witness, no more, no less. And I can share that with the rest of the world if I’m asked. “But in terms of the politics of it, I’m not advocating one way or another, of what the Italian people should do. That’s completely up to the Italians.” Advocating for refugees, poor, sick and homeless people, is a solemn endeavour for Gere. His Gere Foundation supports global development, global health and humanitarian initiatives with a focus in Tibet. He has been a longtime supporter of Survival International, an organisation that defends the human rights of indigenous peoples around the world. He is also on the frontline of the struggle against Aids. He has visited refugee camps from Kosovo to El Salvador. He first encountered Open Arms five years earlier in Barcelona when he met Oscar Camps, founder of the Spanish NGO. Since then, Gere would regularly check in with him to get real-time information on the status of refugees in the Mediterranean. “I’m inspired by Open Arms,” Gere says. “I’m deeply committed to their point of view of the universe. They’re dealing up close with these people, and that’s where you want to get your information. […] They said it was deeply serious, not only to them, but to other rescue boats as well. And that’s when I made a very quick decision. I said: ‘Look, I gotta see this for myself.’ I jumped in a car and arrived at the Rome airport in literally five minutes.” Gere says he is deeply aware that in Italy and in other places in Europe, more than 70 years after the defeat of fascism in the second world war, thousands of people are joining self-described fascist groups. Extreme rightwing groups have become higher profile in the US in recent years while in response to its own migration from the south, videos and photos from the Mexico border have shown Border Patrol guards on horseback chasing down asylum seekers from Haiti. “We saw during the time of the Nazis how easy it was to think of the other and do horrible things to them,” he says. “It’s a mentality of ignorance, cruelty, the mentality that thinks that we exist personally in our own bubble, and as a country we exist in a bubble – and it’s completely faulty and ignorant.” Gere is from Pennsylvania. His parents came from a very small town where his father grew up milking cows. And the actor said that the community’s values haven’t changed, with its honest, hard-working people who would do anything for their neighbours. “But,” Gere says, “they are 95% Trump people. It makes no sense to me. Trump, or the defendants in this case, exploit the people that the rest of us kind of don’t see. That’s what frightens me. We don’t see our own brothers and sisters in our own community deep enough to understand where that darkness is coming from. It’s important for us to really look and not marginalise them, but to embrace them.” He is most likely to appear via video link and is relaxed about the possibility he may be called at any time. In his Buddhist calm, he adds: “It’s very simple, I’ll just tell the truth, I’ll just tell what I experienced. I’m only here to speak for people who don’t have a voice. It’s not about me. I’m completely irrelevant here. I’m honest with you. I can be invisible. All I am is a witness.”The education system needs to be “torn down and rebuilt” so it can better support those who are autistic, the TV presenter Melanie Sykes has said. Discussing her recent diagnosis at the age of 51, which she announced earlier this week, Sykes reflected on the struggles she has faced throughout her youth and career, some of which she had previously put down to being northern and a “straight talker”. “I did a big live gameshow on a Saturday night, and I couldn’t read numbers like money on the autocue,” she told the Guardian. “I’d have to wait for the director to tell me what that number was, which on a live show is really stressful.” Other times, while using an earpiece, Sykes experienced difficulty with talkback, when she had accidentally responded to the director in her ear rather than an interviewee in front of her. “Then I did a chatshow with Des O’Connor (Today with Des and Mel), and he didn’t use earpieces, which was fantastic for me because we’d get all our cues from the floor. It was the first time in my career that I was able to be present with the guest and really listen.” Sykes has even failed auditions because she was not “able to do things in time and have talkback”, and received surprising feedback. “I’ve often been told, ‘oh, nobody ever says that’ or ‘nobody’s ever complained about that’ and now I know why. I used to think it was because I was northern, and was just a straight talker.” The presenter, who also hosted Let’s Do Lunch with Gino D’Acampo and Going Out with Alan Carr, had been working on a documentary about the failures of the education system with Harry Thompson, a writer and speaker on autism and PDA (pathological demand avoidance), when he recognised autistic traits in her and suggested she do an assessment. “That included things like not doing very well in school. Although I was an avid reader, I couldn’t seem to quite grasp what I needed to do. “I always put it down to being the youngest in my year. I left school at 15, and I just thought I was less mature than the others, but I now know the education system wasn’t set up in a way that I was able to function there. It crowbars you into a certain way of thinking and being, and if you don’t fit the bill you get left behind. That’s why we need to tear down the education system and rebuild it, so it suits everyone.” Sykes cited the autistic teenager Dara McAnulty, who wrote a book about immersion in nature, as an inspiration. “Learning shouldn’t be just sitting in a classroom and being forced to learn algebra or French when your brain doesn’t work like that. What a waste of your childhood. I can’t read a number that’s over five digits, and there’s no way that doing an hour of maths every day for five years would have changed that. When I could have learned, for example, that I’ve got a really good eye.” The neurotypical brain, she added, “might not be typical at all. So the system that supports those types of brains isn’t necessarily what should be the norm.” It is an issue Sykes feels strongly about, especially as her youngest son was diagnosed with autism at the age of three (he is now 17). Her documentary with Thompson is one of many projects she hopes to pursue after setting up her own production company. She says she’s keen to use her profile to incite change: “My activism has massively kicked in.” At the same time, she continues to edit Frank Magazine, which she launched two years ago because “women’s lives, and the quality of their lives, is extremely important to me”. Since revealing her diagnosis, she has been inundated with messages from people – including readers – thanking her for speaking out. “There were some women who were diagnosed and haven’t told anybody, because they’re embarrassed. Even today, somebody asked me how I was and I said, ‘Well, have you read the news?’ And they were like, ‘oh, I didn’t want to mention it’.” To Sykes, her autistic nature is something to be embraced. “How I speak, how I articulate myself, how I move around. I’ve been told many times to slow down, because everything is at top speed. I’m very proactive. I never leave anything unfinished, because I can’t relax until I’ve done it.” Other traits, she added, include “an inability to tell untruths, a huge sense of justice, and when I get really interested in something, I investigate it further and further.” Awareness of all this, Sykes said, was key to improving the system. “The way I see it is that all the reasons that I’m autistic, they’re the best things about me.”Giving a bottle is a good way to get you off the Christmas present hook, but picking the right one can be a bit of a minefield. If it’s the same bottle you give every year, it might look as if you just couldn’t be bothered to think of something more imaginative – the booze world’s equivalent of a pair of socks. And if it’s a drink on which the beneficiary is something of an expert – whisky, say – you might well choose the wrong thing. My strategy, then, is to focus on something I think the recipient would like, but not something they would necessarily expect. So, for example, if they’re into cream liqueurs, make it the stylishly bottled and wickedly good Kyrö (£19.95 for 500ml Master of Malt, 16%), which is a sort of grown-up Baileys; or the delectably nutty tawny port bottled under its own label by the Port of Leith distillery (£14.95, 19%). Even a small twist can make a bottle interesting: I can’t say I’d be over-thrilled to be given a bottle of tomato juice, but make it the Pickle House’s Spiced Tomato Mix with pickle juice (£4.95 Ocado, and perfect for non-drinkers and pickle-lovers alike), and I’d be more than chuffed. I also like the idea of supporting local drinks businesses, which in my case means Somerset. As you may have read a few weeks ago, I’m massively into cider at the moment, and the deeply appley Sandford Orchards Ice Cider (£19.50 for 500ml, 15%) would make a great companion for a Christmas cheeseboard. I’ve also been a long-time fan of the Somerset Cider Brandy Company, whose deliciously almondy Somerset Morello Cherry Liqueur (£14.50 for 35cl, £16 hometipple.com, 17.5%) is made with apple eau de vie and is, if anything, even better than the company’s pure apple-based products. The big drinks story this year, however, has been ready-mixed cocktails. M&amp;S has brought out its own range, the Marksologist (geddit?), of which I like the Espresso Martini best (£18 or online from Ocado, 17.5%; you can buy the full set of six for £108 from Marks &amp; Spencer online). Bear in mind, though, that Lidl’s perfectly decent 19% version is only £9.99. Lidl also has a bit of a bargain for us smoky whisky lovers in the form of its Abrachan Blended Malt for just £15.99 (41%). Laphroaig it ain’t, but it does hit the spot. For those who are looking for wine, small or large bottles feel like more of a treat than a standard-sized one. Châteauneuf-du-Pape is seen by many as the quintessential Christmas wine, and Marks &amp; Spencer’s very well priced magnum (£36, 14.5%) would go down a storm with anyone hosting you this Christmas. At the other end of the scale, few would turn up their noses at a half-bottle (or six) of champagne, and this year I’m impressed by the classy little Fourny &amp; Fils Champagne Blanc de Blancs Premier Cru (£17.99 The Solent Cellar, £20.45 The Whisky Exchange, 12%). You could almost tuck one into a stocking, as indeed you could a bottle of Sainsbury’s rich, malty and very affordable Taste the Difference Winter Warmer Ale (£1.50 for 500ml, 5.3%). The other big trend this Christmas is the boozy advent calendar, which have been around for a while, but suddenly everyone seems to be doing one now. If you’re tempted – and assuming they’re still in stock by the time you read this – Laithwaite’s has an impressive one for £79.99 that includes a nice surprise for Christmas Eve (no spoilers). • For more by Fiona Beckett, go to matchingfoodandwine.comThe first known Covid-19 case was a vendor at the live-animal market in Wuhan, according to a scientist who has scrutinised public accounts of the earliest cases in China. The chronology is at odds with a timeline laid out in an influential World Health Organization (WHO) report, which suggested an accountant with no apparent link to the Hunan market was the first known case. The latest report adds weight to the theory that the virus originated from wildlife sold at the market, rather than as a leak from a Wuhan virology lab, and raises questions about how the apparent error was overlooked in the joint WHO-China inquiry. The report, by Michael Worobey, the head of ecology and evolutionary biology at the University of Arizona, will reignite the debate about the origins of the pandemic, which remains unresolved and continues to fuel tensions between China and the US. In early 2021, a WHO-led team of experts spent four weeks in and around the central city of Wuhan with Chinese scientists and concluded in a joint report in March that the Sars-CoV-2 virus had probably been transmitted from bats to humans through another animal but that further research was needed. It all but ruled out the possibility that Covid-19 originated in a laboratory. The experts interviewed Mr Chen, an accountant, with no known link to the market, who had reportedly developed symptoms on 8 December and the March report described him as the first known case. However, the latest analysis, published in Science, highlights discrepancies in this timeline. In an interview with a Chinese news outlet, Chen described attending a clinic with a dental problem on 8 December, saying he only developed Covid symptoms around 16 December. Worobey concluded that the first known case was, therefore, a female seafood vendor who became ill on 11 December. Worobey was one of the 15 or so experts who in mid-May published an editorial in Science demanding serious consideration of the thesis that the virus had leaked from a laboratory in Wuhan. The latest paper, he said, “provided strong evidence of a live-animal market origin of the pandemic”. The analysis also addressed questions about whether early reports of a possible link with the Wuhan market had introduced a bias, with patients who had visited the market being more likely to be identified as Covid cases. No live mammal collected from Wuhan’s live-animal market has been screened for Sars-CoV-2-related viruses and Hunan market was closed and disinfected soon after the symptomatic cases began to rise. To revisit the question, Worobey analysed cases reported by two hospitals before the alert was raised and found that these, too, were largely linked to the market. Those patients with no direct link lived or worked nearby. Most early symptomatic cases were linked specifically to the western section where raccoon dogs were caged. “In this city of 11 million people, half of the early cases are linked to a place that’s the size of a soccer field,” Worobey told the New York Times. “It becomes very difficult to explain that pattern if the outbreak didn’t start at the market.”A doctor who died of coronavirus while helping others battle infection has been described as a “tower of strength” by friends. The death of Dr Irfan Halim came after a nine-week battle with the virus, which he contracted only two months after he joined the Covid intensive care unit wards at Swindon hospital. It is believed he contracted Covid at his place of work and collapsed during a shift on 10 September. He was in intensive care in Swindon before being transferred to the Royal Brompton hospital, where he received extracorporeal membrane oxygenation treatment. Halim was a consultant general surgeon who worked across a variety of practices during his 25-year medical career. He specialised in laparoscopic surgery and spent time working on Harley Street. His death occurred shortly after that of his father, Kamal, who also died from Covid, close friends of the family said. Siân Hughes-Pollitt, a family friend who met the doctor through a school fencing club, told the Evening Standard Halim’s death had left “an enormous gap in many places and spaces”. She said he would frequently commute for more than two hours from his home in Barking to Swindon to treat patients. “Irfan had a kind word for everybody,” she said. “It is so difficult to accept that a man who took every medical and clinical precaution against Covid died of the disease.” She added: “When I picture him now, I see him standing beside his wife and family – a tower of strength. He is the husband, the dad, the best friend. I see him living through his wife and children.” Hughes-Pollitt said she had spoken to Halim’s wife, Saila, hours after she watched her husband pass away in intensive care. “She was broken … The first thing she told me was: ‘He went out to work and he never came home. It was the longest shift.’ A GoFundMe page has been set up for Halim, already raising more than £80,000. The money will be used to help support Saila and her family. The page reads: “We have set up this fund as close friends and family to ease the burden of losing Irfan. Irfan was the sole breadwinner for his family.” His wife wrote: “Irfan went to work on Friday 10 September at Swindon hospital. He had spent the past two years saving Covid patients and Friday 10 September was just another day saving lives. He was on a ward round wearing his scrubs and collapsed at his workplace having caught this disease from work. “Irfan stayed in Swindon until the 23 September in ICU and was then transferred to the Royal Brompton to receive treatment on ECMO. He fought hard to be with his children every day. With a broken heart shattered in pieces beyond imagination I muster what little strength I have to write this message.” She said her husband gave her “15 magical years” of marriage and four beautiful children. “Irfan you were not only my best friend but a best friend to all our children and so many others,” she wrote.Less than 20 hours after asking women who had received a late diagnosis of autism, we received 139 replies from around the world. There were women whose lives had been scarred by victimisation, from bullying to rape, because without a diagnosis they did not know they were highly vulnerable to manipulation and abuse. There were women who were diagnosed in their 70s, who had known there was something different about them for 60 years. There were those who described the decades-long struggle to fit in as a trauma that pushed them to mental collapse, sometimes to the point of attempted suicide. Others had wasted decades being misdiagnosed, prescribed unnecessary drugs and forced to remain in mental health wards while experts failed to diagnose their condition – or refused to listen to the women’s accurate self-diagnosis because, the experts insisted, the woman did not “look” or “act” autistic. Women of colour and non-binary women seemed to find it particularly hard to get diagnosed. “I was around 20 when I started to question whether I could be autistic but quickly dismissed this possibility because as a young Black woman, I did not fit the stereotypical autistic presentation of a young, white boy,” said one 35-year-old woman who asked to remain anonymous. Almost every woman said they had known almost all their lives there was something different about them. As one put it: “I searched for 45 years for who I was. I had no identity – it was like looking in a looking glass with no reflection.” Finally getting the diagnosis was life-changing for many. “I am so utterly relieved to finally have an answer,” said Sarah Martin, 52, who was diagnosed last month. “I had no idea life could feel this good. Diagnosis is rebirth.” Sophie Meredith, 31, from Shropshire agreed. “Being told that there isn’t something inherently wrong with you and your brain is just wired differently is life-affirming,” she said. Erica Evans said her diagnosis at 50 unleashed “a wild mix of both positive and negative emotions”. “It was validation, confirmation, empowerment,” she said. “I no longer feel like a ‘broken’ neurotypical.” Many women felt conflicted by their diagnosis: they spoke of mourning the years they had spent misunderstanding themselves and being misunderstood by others. Kirsty Stonell Walker, 48, from Southampton, said she felt “utter relief that the way I am is not my fault – but a sense of depression that I will never be better at being a person than I am now”. Others spoke of the often crippling impact on their mental health of decades spent “masking” – pretending to be neurotypical. For others, a late diagnosis was devastating. A 61-year-old woman from Yorkshire, who asked to remain anonymous, said: “Learning I was autistic later in life made me feel I wasn’t a whole person. I felt disbelief, despair, sadness, loss and pain.” “Why tell me now? I can do nothing about it. What help is there for me? Nothing. Society doesn’t understand us. Government doesn’t help us,” she said. “And there is nothing I could do to improve that diagnosis.” Even for those women who go through the process of diagnosis, the NHS wait can be devastating: between four and nine years. But even once a diagnosis is secured, many women still struggle. Amber Affleck, 28, was relieved to finally get her diagnosis five years ago but also “confused as there was no help available to help me to deal with it”. She said: “I have been left to pick up the pieces and figure it out myself, with no help at all.” For some women, other people’s reaction to the diagnosis they craved has been a fresh trauma: relatives have ignored the diagnosis or viewed it as attention-seeking, friends have become wary, others have dropped contact. Most women, however, spoke ecstatically about the result of their diagnosis. “My life has been completely transformed,” said one. “It’s like realising that not everyone lives in a cage, like you; some people really just do find life easier, and that doesn’t make you a failure. “I’m finally living as an authentic version of myself, and it’s indescribably empowering. I am free.”It’s interesting to see people suddenly feel able to dismiss the whole racism-in-cricket horror show, because Yorkshire whistleblower Azeem Rafiq has now himself been found to have sent racist messages. Logically, this feels questionable. Presumably the fact that former England batsman Alex Hales was pictured in blackface in 2009 is further evidence that there is nothing to see here. If, in the coming days, some player is found to have had a passion for monkey chants or white hoods, then I think we could safely say there is absolutely no point discussing the subject of racism in cricket and beyond for one second more. If “they’re all at it”, then we don’t have a problem with “it” at all. Except, of course, we really do. On Thursday, two days after detailing his horrible and depressing treatment at Yorkshire, it emerged that Rafiq had himself exchanged horrible and depressing antisemitic messages on Facebook 10 years ago. Their discovery has drawn what at least looks like a sincere apology from Rafiq, which I suppose we have to be mildly grateful for in a saga notably short on apologies of any sort at all. But the scale of the problem is laid bare by the multitudes declaring with satisfaction that Rafiq has now “lost all credibility” – as though people who do racist things cannot themselves be victims of racism. And yet, they can. In fact, the one can occasionally even lead to the other. There are a whole range of reactions to being punched down on, and one of them is to find people to punch down on yourself. Whatever the underpinnings of the 19-year-old Rafiq’s bigotry, we should beware of those who wish to use it to bring the matter conveniently to a close. They are, at the very least, guilty of a failure of imagination. And what displays of imaginative failure we’re seen this week. Like my colleague Jonathan Liew, I was particularly struck by one of Jonathan Agnew’s comments on Tuesday about Rafiq’s second spell at Yorkshire. “Now, if it had been such a very dreadful experience the first time,” Aggers wondered rhetorically, “why did he go back there?” Well now. I imagine Agnew knows enough about what’s considered acceptable these days to never ask out loud why a woman might return to a relationship in which she had experienced violence or abuse. Or even to ask why she didn’t leave sooner. But he and many, many others like him still feel this is the type of reasonable insinuation one might make if the subject in question is racism. Having said that, other isms are very much available in the world of sport and those who cover and commentate on it. When I first began sitting in sporting press boxes, I was fairly blown away by the attitudes I personally encountered. And not in a good way. It often seemed like walking into a time warp, and I spent a long time trying to work out why things felt so backward. I concluded that some men, who were mostly travelling in a pack, and having their hotel rooms tidied after them for good stretches of the year, had clung on to certain “attitudes” – attitudes that were further along to being phased out in more balanced and conventional workplaces. I should say that the majority of sports writers were not like this, and in fact I had many thoughtful and often hilarious conversations about it with some brilliant and kind journalists who became great friends, and who could see all this about some of their colleagues as clear as day. But it did persist, and I often found it extremely boring and exhausting. Did it make me want to hang around and write more about sport than I did? Not much. Which I suppose is a vaguely telling thing to say about a job that lets you travel round the world to watch the best contests in incredible places on unforgettable occasions. I was lucky enough to have the luxury of other choices, other subjects I already wrote about. Say what you will about the relative pleasures of covering a UK general election over a world cup, but at least in the case of the former I wasn’t repeatedly invited to look up from my laptop and address some graphic deposit of “banter”. Having the patience for all that shit is perhaps a young woman’s game. I am very pleased that there are so many more young women covering sport now, and hope they are required to play this game rather less these days. I can’t even imagine how much more “tiresome” it is for the vanishingly few writers of colour who do the job. I have, however, heard so many stories, and you can see that a certain type of natural-born-better resents them being there, even if that resentment isn’t consciously realised. But those minimisers are another big part of why it takes so long for the stories of Rafiq and others to surface – and another reminder that whatever it likes to tell itself, sport isn’t the perfect meritocracy, either on or off the pitch. Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnistNobody really wants it to be 2021, do they? A vicious global pandemic is about to enter its third year, the world is on fire and populist politics threatens to overturn democracy as we know it. Some people have reacted to these terrible times by trying to change things. Others are willing themselves back to a more innocent era. By “others”, I mean Jennifer Lopez and Owen Wilson, who are doing their level best to make it 2005 again. How? By making a romcom, that’s how. If this was a decade and a half ago, then Marry Me would automatically be one of the biggest hits of the year, bringing together the unstoppable forces responsible for Maid in Manhattan and Wedding Crashers. But it isn’t 2005, it’s 2021, and the thought of watching Lopez and Wilson shuffle through a romcom together is baffling. Perhaps it’d help to go through the Marry Me trailer beat by beat. Meet Jennifer Lopez. In Marry Me she plays Jennifer Lopez; a hot, sexy pop star with millions upon millions of fans. She dances. She sings. She poses in self-consciously awkward ways in front of various logos, because she is not above gratuitous product placement. Her life is perfect. But Lopez’s biggest stunt is yet to come. Any day now she will release a single called Marry Me, performed with her fiance, and it will be launched at a globally livestreamed concert during which – you guessed it – she will marry him. Nothing can possibly go wrong. Now, meet Owen Wilson. In Marry Me, he plays a recently divorced maths teacher whose best friend is Sarah Silverman. I know what you’re thinking. This is going to be a film about Jennifer Lopez marrying her boyfriend and Owen Wilson falling in love with Sarah Silverman and all of them being very happy and never meeting. Of course you think that. That would be a good film. But this is Marry Me, so on the eve of her performance, Jennifer Lopez discovers that her fiance has been cheating. Again, I know what you’re thinking. You’re thinking that Jennifer Lopez is going to cancel the release of her single, call off the concert and work through her emotions in a healthy, private way until she feels better equipped to face the world again. Of course you think that. That’s what you would do. But this is Marry Me, so Jennifer Lopez walks out on stage in a wedding dress, arbitrarily points at a nondescript 50-year-old man in the crowd and asks him to be her husband. I know what you’re thinking. You’re thinking that Owen Wilson was divorced too recently to throw himself into another relationship, not least one that involves immediately marrying one of the world’s most famous women in the full glare of public scrutiny. Of course you think that. Only a psychopath would do that. But this is Marry Me. Instead, they full-on Married at First Sight each other and their lives are immediately ruined. Because this is a terrible idea, right? This is the stuff of psychological horror, right? No. This is the movies. What happens is that – brace yourself – their marriage actually works. Jennifer Lopez and Owen Wilson might have wildly different lives, but they are equally open to change and use their newfound situation to learn from one another. From Jennifer Lopez, Owen Wilson learns how to participate in press conferences that only exist to justify his wife’s decision to promote a middling new song by potentially destroying the life of a complete stranger. And in return, Owen Wilson teaches Jennifer Lopez to enjoy some of the world’s more humble delights, such as riding on a big wheel at a theme park that his wife has exclusively booked out for the night. See? It’s sweet. And this is a romcom, so you know how the rest of it goes. Their union is challenged in some way, but they work together to overcome it. And after six weeks, they have sex. And then Jennifer Lopez moos like a cow into a microphone. The end. Textbook romcom stuff, really.One of Afghanistan’s most prominent psychiatrists, who was abducted by armed men in September, has been found dead, his family has confirmed. Dr Nader Alemi’s daughter, Manizheh Abreen, said that her father had been tortured before he died. “Yesterday we have paid $350,000 [£260,400] to the abductors and they promised to release my father today. But this morning we have received his dead body instead.” Alemi, 66, who opened the country’s first private psychiatric hospital, was abducted in the northern city of Mazar-i-Sharif, after his car was stopped as he was being driven home from work. He had received threatening calls and messages in the months before his abduction. The kidnappers originally demanded a ransom of $800,000 (£600,000). Abreen said: “They told us to sell our house and hospital and we bargained with them and pleaded that no one will buy property in this situation. They weren’t listening. We collected money from our friends and family and sold the cars and jewellery we had. “We could only afford this much [$350,000]. Our father was old, plus he was suffering from diabetes, but those brutal people didn’t pay heed.” Abreen said her father’s body showed clear signs of torture. Alemi was a prominent figure in Mazar-i-Sharif, where he opened his hospital. He was believed to be the only Pashto-speaking psychiatrist in northern Afghanistan, and his patients had included Taliban fighters. Dr Khan Murad Muradi, one of the doctors in Alemi’s hospital, said he was a “kind-hearted man”. He said: “No one feels safe here in Mazar-i-Sharif.” An Afghan human rights activist, who declined to be named for security reasons, said: “The abductors and killers should be held accountable and the Taliban should provide security to the people of Afghanistan.”Palestinians are not just denied a state of their own, they are largely exiled from a debate about their own future. This was made clear this week in Keir Starmer’s address to Labour Friends of Israel. The Labour leader was right to use the speech to condemn the evil of antisemitism, embedded as it is in western culture and society, including among people on the left who – however unrepresentative – have caused hurt and distress to Britain’s Jews. This is one reason, after all, why many Jews see Israel as a lifeboat; across millennia, supposed social acceptance has given way to renewed persecution. Rightly condemning antisemitism is not incompatible with a passionate critique of Israel’s illegal occupation of Palestine – Starmer addressed both subjects in his speech. He dismissed a “Manichean view of the conflict”, saying he is a “friend of Israel and of Palestine”. This would make sense, given both Labour’s long history of supporting a two-state solution (even if that has too often been in word not deed) and the loss of trust in the Labour party among many British Jews. Starmer is trying to build bridges, but his strategy is misguided. His position may sound eminently reasonable, but there is a huge gulf in power between an impoverished, besieged and militarily occupied territory and a powerful state with a hi-tech military that is backed by a superpower. By trying to find equivalence, he downplayed the human rights issues at hand. He mentioned the killing of Israeli citizens in terror attacks, but only the “daily humiliations, constraints and restrictions” endured by Palestinians, even though 22 times as many Palestinians were killed between 2008 and 2020. The 54-year-old occupation was only fleetingly mentioned. He quoted a previous Labour leader, Harold Wilson, lauding the “social democrats who made the desert flower” – but did not mention that the “desert” was the home of Palestinians, 700,000 of whom were ethnically cleansed in the Nakba of 1948. Starmer also stated his opposition to the boycott, divestment and sanctions (BDS) movement. His predecessor, Jeremy Corbyn, did not support it either, but his condemnation of the global campaign for “targeting alone the world’s sole Jewish state” should be challenged, echoing as it does claims from Benjamin Netanyahu to the Trump administration that BDS is antisemitic. BDS is a strategy called for by Palestinians that seeks to end the occupation, grant the fifth of Israeli society who are Palestinian equal rights, and achieve justice for Palestinian refugees. This strategy is not unique to Israel, given that Britain has imposed sanctions against multiple human-rights-abusing states from Belarus to Zimbabwe and South Africa. Human Rights Watch and the Israeli human rights organisation B’Tselem recently published landmark reports that affirmed the accuracy of using the term “apartheid” to describe what Israel is doing; boycotting the South African apartheid state played a significant role in bringing about change. At the time, detractors asked why similar boycotts were not placed against other repressive states as a way to derail the debate, a position that looks ill-judged with the benefit of hindsight. Starmer suggests Israel is held “to standards to which no other country is subjected”, but many condemn British involvement in the crimes committed by Saudi Arabia – not least in plunging Yemen into humanitarian calamity – or indeed Turkey or Egypt. In all cases, British diplomatic support and arms sales render our government complicit, and activists have demanded an end to trade with these states too. BDS is an entirely peaceful strategy and yet it is still dismissed as beyond the pale, raising the question: what exactly is a legitimate form of Palestinian resistance? Moral pressure by western governments has achieved nothing: a 2018 “nation state” law enshrined the inferior rights of Palestinian citizens, while last month the Israeli government approved another 3,000 homes in illegal settlements on the West Bank. The west tuts as the vice around Palestine tightens. Indeed, this refusal to listen to Palestinian voices poses a serious question: if people support a Palestinian homeland, what does the path to it look like? Would a future Labour government tut a little louder about annexations as it continues to arm and back Israel and, if so, what incentive would there be for Israel’s rulers to change course? And so the Palestinian tragedy remains: as marginalised in the debate about its future as its people are in their own land. Owen Jones is a Guardian columnistUntil recently, the subject of criminal punishment hasn’t been a massive concern for the public (putting aside that small demographic committed to a “hang ’em all!” approach). But in the wake of Sarah Everard’s murder, calls for misogyny to become a hate crime have gone from a whisper to a roar. That change would give judges the power to increase sentences when misogyny was found to be an aggravating factor in a crime. But would harsher sentences do much to stop such crimes happening? I asked Penelope Gibbs, former magistrate and founder of Transform Justice, a charity campaigning for a more effective justice system. Did you hear about the Thai fraudster who was sentenced to jail for more than 13,000 years? I guess they needed a number to describe ‘throwing away the key’. Are long sentences becoming more common? I don’t know about across the world, but I can tell you that in England and Wales sentences have been getting steadily longer over the past decade, by roughly 20%. Is that because we’re somehow becoming more criminal? Actually the crime survey for England and Wales, which asks people if they have been a victim of crime, shows the prevalence going down over the past decade. Wait: if sentences are going up, and crime is going down, doesn’t that mean the job’s a good ’un? No – there’s no evidence that increasing imprisonment reduces crime. However, restorative justice has delivered promising results. That’s where the person who committed the crime has to hear the victim, and has to apologise. How are we quantifying effectiveness? Reoffending rates? Exactly. Right now, sentences are going up, but reoffending rates aren’t going down. Why are sentences getting longer? Many reasons. In parliament, there has been bill after bill changing the minimum and maximum sentences for crimes. New Labour upped the minimum sentence for murder, which arguably nudged up those for other violent crimes. Then there are changes to the official sentencing guidelines, and the culture of courts and the judiciary. A punitive government changes the courts’ behaviour. Don’t forget, too, that deterrence is enshrined in the principles of sentencing. Judges will say: “I’m giving you X, firstly for rehabilitation and secondly for deterrence.” Even though there’s no evidence that longer sentences deter crime. So I’m guessing making misogyny a hate crime wouldn’t achieve much? I’ve not seen any good evidence that the hate crime system is reducing offences. If we want to stop misogynistic behaviour – which we know comes from childhood peers, education, family, society – we need to start there But maybe putting misogyny into law is so victims feel heard. I understand why women want the criminal justice system to be the answer. But it never is. Think back to the campaign about upskirting – a terrible thing to happen, I agree with it being prosecuted. But some would say there were already laws to deal with it. Did getting a specific law stop upskirting? I’m surprised the party that always denies the existence of the ‘magic money tree’ would chuck public cash down the drain housing more prisoners. Who am I kidding? I am not surprised one smidge. Politicians know it’s popular with the public. We’re in some sort of arms race where both the main political parties are seizing on higher prison sentences as the answer. Labour’s calling for higher sentences for rape. The government has already reserved funding for hundreds more prison places. Ultimately they think it’s a price worth paying.Monday With a capitalist zeal I admire, New York is bribing young kids to get vaccinated, as it bribed their older siblings and parents before them. Not for these under-12s the lame promise of protecting grandma at Thanksgiving next week. Instead, a more reliable incentive: cold, hard cash. For every child who gets a Covid shot at a state school or city-run site, a guaranteed $100 payment. If you catch Covid and wind up on a ventilator, the American healthcare system will come for your house. But at prevention stage it’s all high-fives and free money. By American standards it’s thrilling. Two weeks after my six-year-olds receive their first vaccine, we head to Times Square to collect our bribe. The city is up to something with its choice of venues. There are 3 million under-18s eligible for the vaccine in New York, and if every one of them claims the cash it will murder the city’s finances. So it is that in each of the five boroughs there is a single, discouraging location from which to collect the pre-loaded debit cards. In Brooklyn it’s an obscure YMCA halfway to Coney Island. In Queens – a huge borough – it’s a single vaccination site in East Flushing. The Manhattan pickup site occupies the most revolting corner of revolting Times Square, a hard-to-spot building where the foot traffic outside looks like a Covid party. We will not be deterred. We take the bus to 57th street and walk 10 blocks, past the Platinum Dolls pole-dancing club, past the huge advertising hoarding decrying antisemitism, past the baffling line of people waiting to gain entrance to the M&amp;M store. Inside the test site we present ourselves to the vaccine incentive pickup table, show our vaccine cards and collect our winnings. One hundred dollars is a lot of money for a six-year-old, and in the run-up to collection I have been torn between using it to teach my kids financial literacy and downplaying it to preserve their innocence. As it turns out, I needn’t have fretted. Ten minutes after pickup they’ve both forgotten the whole thing, the excitement having apparently been entirely found in the journey. I activate the cards and start spending the money. Tuesday For the last 18 months, Ghislaine Maxwell has been a guest of the Metropolitan Detention Centre in Brooklyn, a facility, her lawyer Bobbi C Sternheim complained, that is “permeated with mould and vermin”, resulting in her client “sustaining hair loss” and other physical impairments. On Tuesday Maxwell appeared in a court in lower Manhattan while prospective jurors were selected for her sex trafficking trial. She had travelled in from Brooklyn in shackles, but appeared before the court unencumbered and in civilian clothing. According to the report in the Guardian, she was “relaxed” and “laughing” with her attorneys. No photos were permitted, but in a drawing by the court artist Maxwell looked like the heroine of a pulp fiction novel, peering slyly over the top of her mask. Her hair looked fulsome. It was a far cry from the parties of the early 2000s, or those months in 2019 between Jeffrey Epstein’s arrest and her own, which – after a ruling from the judge – the prosecution won’t be permitted to characterise as Maxwell being on the lam. (She wasn’t hiding, her lawyers insist; she was unaware she was being looked for, and it was mere coincidence that during that time she changed phones, email addresses, and ordered packages for delivery using a different person’s name.) Maxwell’s lawyers also asked the judge to prevent the prosecution from referring to her accusers as “victims”, a request he denied. Since Maxwell is, it’s assumed, intending to fight her case partly on the basis that she herself was exploited by Epstein – “like many people who achieve great power and wealth, Jeffrey Epstein exploited the ‘halo effect’ to surround himself with people who would serve his needs”, her lawyers said in an earlier court filing – Maxwell’s victimisation is surely dependent for its credibility on the wider victimhood of others. Her point, I suppose, is that she wasn’t the one doing the victimising. Like her erstwhile pal Prince Andrew, she may choose to use the defence that when it came to abandoning her friend the financier and sex offender, she was simply too honourable to walk away. Wednesday Ripple effects were felt midweek from the latest addition to a small but enjoyable sub-genre of New York stories, the blockbuster divorce. At Sotheby’s an auction triggered by the dissolution of Harry and Linda Macklowe’s marriage resulted in $650m worth of art sales, driven by works by Jackson Pollock, Mark Rothko, Cy Twombly and Andy Warhol. The pair separated in 2018, whereupon a judge ordered their $2bn fortune be divided and the famous Macklowe collection sold off. One piece of pop art missing from the auction was the 42ft billboard that Harry Macklowe, who made his fortune in real estate, affixed to the side of a building he owned at 432 Park Avenue a year after his divorce. It featured a photo of him and one of Patricia Landeau, the woman he married in 2019. The purpose of the billboard, he said, was to celebrate his new bride, although it wasn’t lost on observers that his ex-wife had been going to move into 432 Park. Who knows what revenge art this spectacular might have fetched. Thursday Most British confectionary imported to the US ends up in the niche British section of the supermarket, but I have high hopes that with Mr Kipling we may finally break through. The manufacturer, Premier Foods, which owns Bisto and Angel Delight, is pushing expansion into the US market after the success of its cake slice rollout in Canada. Unlike Colonel Sanders or Ronald McDonald, Mr Kipling doesn’t even have an avatar, and yet the company’s 80s marketing campaigns must have been very shrewd. Mere mention of the brand and, along with the indelible image of the battenberg squares, the phrase “exceedingly good cakes” wafts up from the past, accompanied by the vague smell of almonds. Friday My children have grabbed hold of the term “party bus” and every bus, coach and minivan we pass triggers the question: “Is that a party bus?” Times Square was very busy for this line of inquiry, but it doesn’t let up all week, culminating in the spotting of several party buses at 8am on the school run. “What do you think is inside a party bus?” I ask, finally. A child considers this carefully. “Wine,” she says. “And chairs.”Eight runners are due to go to post for the Betfair Chase at Haydock Park on Saturday when A Plus Tard (3.00) and Rachael Blackmore, the runners-up in last season’s Gold Cup, will start favourite to give Ireland a first success in this race since it achieved Grade One status in 2005. Henry de Bromhead’s gelding took his impressive form to a new level over staying trips last season and while several of Saturday’s rivals have hinted at potential Grade One quality, only two – Bristol De Mai and the inconsistent Waiting Patiently – have a top-level win over fences to their name. Bristol De Mai, going for a record-equalling fourth win in this race, will be a tough opponent but A Plus Tard’s run at Cheltenham gives him several pounds in hand over the course specialist and Blackmore will be alive to the danger of allowing her main market rival a soft lead. Haydock Park 1.50: Itchy Feet is an interesting alternative to the odds-on Bravemansgame. His close second in the Old Roan Chase was franked when third-home Midnight Shadow took the Paddy Power Gold Cup last weekend, and Olly Murphy’s runner, with eight chase starts behind him, can make experience count. Ascot 2.05: With question marks hanging over both Defi Du Seuil and Lostintranslation as they return after wind-ops, Dashel Drasher is the safest bet to extend his excellent record over track and trip. Haydock Park 2.25: A £57,000 first prize and a suitably competitive field, but Flight Deck makes plenty of appeal at around 8-1. He is up just 3lb after winning his seasonal debut at Wetherby last month, when first-time cheekpieces sharpened him up, and his strong form in two handicap hurdles last season is backed up by the clock. Ascot 2.40: Buzz was less than two lengths behind the winner in the Grade One Aintree Hurdle in April and landed the Cesarewitch off 96 on the Flat last month. He looks rock-solid for a Grade Two win here, not least as he gets 6lb from his main market rivals. Ascot 3.15: Amoola Gold and Monsieur Le Coq are closely matched on their form when first and second over course and distance in a strong time last month. Marginal preference is for Dan Skelton’s eight-year-old, who was making his seasonal debut there and has cheekpieces on for the first time. Haydock Park 3.35: Empire Steel could be a fair price at around 5-1 if Strictlyadancer finds this too soon after a win at Cheltenham last weekend. The seven-year-old had some decent novice form last year, including a win when fresh, and should be improving with just four chase starts in the book.The Grimm brothers’ Aschenputtel is far from the anodyne version of Cinderella we often see now. When the pair recorded the folktale in 1812, it was a gothic story – with an unforgiving Calvinist morality – of a magic tree planted on a dead mother’s grave and of stepsisters who sliced off their heels and toes to fit into the golden shoe and whose eyes were pecked out by birds as punishment for their misdeeds. Alan Pollock’s bewitching adaptation takes us back to that original but tempers its darkness – as the Grimm brothers themselves did in later, more child-friendly editions of their stories. Cinderella (Tanya Bridgeman) still charms the birds from the magic tree and violence occurs but with no visible bloodletting and plenty of comedy. “Is this your toe?” the Prince asks a stepsister politely after she has chopped it off. Exuberantly directed by Francesca Goodridge, the show begins with the brothers on stage, complete with hammy German accents. They conceive the Cinderella story that begins to railroad them, pushing them aside and taking on its own life. The production has more than a touch of Emma Rice, revelling in theatrical invention and mischief – a chase on stage turns into projected animation (by Bryony Collishaw and Benjamin Collins), a bird is a lovely puppet on a stick, flutteringly manipulated by Elzbieta Kalicka, and characters cut down a tree simply with words: “Chop chop chop.” Wilhelm Grimm becomes the Prince while Jakob tries to wrest back control of the narrative. It brings rip-roaring charm and humour rather than contrivance, but the meta nature becomes dizzying in the second half as Little Red Riding Hood intrudes into this tale and actors adopt different voices for asides that are not clearly defined. It feels like a surfeit of imagination, wonderful albeit slightly ungoverned. There are puffs of smoke that summon up the magic and sparkling showers of illumination in Sam Rowcliffe-Tanner’s lighting. The musicianship (clarinet, double bass, accordion and violins with composition by Tarek Merchant) is superb and some musicians double up dextrously in acting roles. The songs themselves are hit and miss, though, and there is an occasional voiceover that feeds the comedy but feels like one kitsch step too far. Jesse Ashby gives a standout performance as the bearded stepmother (among other characters) and with the stepsisters (Emily Panes and Anna Fordham), who are ribboned, giggling bullies, they make a fantastically toxic trio. The romance between the Prince (played with hapless charm by Matthew Romain) and Cinderella is beguiling – a young, giddy and stuttering kind of love. The comedy tips into cartoonishness in the second half, losing some of the earlier delicacy and veering more into panto mode. But this is turbo-charged stuff and the flat notes are forgiven for a greater sense of magic. At the Barn theatre, Cirencester, until 2 January.Catholics are being urged to return to mass in person after months of worship being largely conducted online. Bishops in England and Wales took the unusual step of issuing a statement reminding the faithful of the “importance of honouring Sunday”. They said: “We now encourage all Catholics to look again at the patterns which they have formed in recent months with regard to going to mass on Sundays. “This would include consideration and reflection about what we might do on Sundays, such as sports or shopping, or other leisure and social activities.” Some faith leaders are concerned that restrictions as a result of the Covid pandemic may have broken worship habits among their congregations. Nearly all the biggest faiths in the UK have offered online services and prayer sessions since March 2020 when places of worship were closed. The enthusiasm for virtual worship surprised many faith leaders. Since restrictions on in-person worship were eased and eventually lifted, a significant proportion of congregations have opted to continue practising their faith online. For some, continued anxieties about Covid transmission have been a key factor in staying away from places of worship. Others who are at home because of illness, disability or caring responsibilities have found a way of sharing in collective worship previously denied to them. But some have simply found online worship more convenient, and the bishops’ statement suggests concern that a number of Catholics may have discovered alternative ways of spending Sundays. A key part of Roman Catholic teaching is that the faithful must physically receive the sacraments from a priest. But during the Covid crisis, Pope Francis has urged people to celebrate a “spiritual communion”. The bishops’ statement, issued at the end of a meeting in Leeds, said Sunday mass was “the very heartbeat of the church and of our personal life of faith” and attending mass was “a personal response to the selfless offering of Christ’s love”. It added: “We recognise that for some people there may be certain factors that hinder attendance at Sunday mass. The pandemic is clearly not over. The risk of infection is still present. For some, there is legitimate fear in gathering together. “As your bishops, we recognise that these prevailing circumstances suggest that not everyone is yet in the position to fulfil the absolute duty to attend freely Sunday mass.” However, it added: “We now encourage all Catholics to look again at the patterns they have formed in recent months with regard to going to mass on Sundays. This would include consideration and reflection about what we might do on Sundays, such as sports or shopping, or other leisure and social activities. “This review, and the decisions which arise from it, fall to every Catholic and we trust this will be done with honesty, motivated by a real love for the Lord whom we encounter in the mass.” An international study of the effect of the pandemic on the faith of young people and families published this month found widespread disengagement and disconnection, and that many failed to return to church after lockdowns eased, the Church Times reported.It is perhaps no coincidence that Chinese state media published an email purportedly written by the missing Chinese tennis star Peng Shuai shortly after reports emerged that the Biden administration was considering a “diplomatic boycott” of February’s Winter Olympics in Beijing. China says the Games are apolitical and – in the words of its embassy in Washington – “a grand gathering for countries and a fair stage for athletes from all over the world to compete”. But in truth sports and global politics have collided this week, as calls grow for China to produce evidence of the wellbeing of one of its most high-profile international athletes. On Friday, the UN rights chief Michelle Bachelet’s office called for proof of Peng Shuai’s whereabouts and demanded “an investigation with full transparency” into her sexual assault allegations against a former senior politician. This is far from the first time that a Chinese personality has suddenly ceased to be seen in public. Other examples include the business magnate Jack Ma, the TV star Zhao Wei, and the once high-flying Chinese Interpol president Meng Hongwei. While the nature of their hiatuses may differ, all have fed into a narrative in the west that Beijing considers itself unbound by the rule of law and transparency. The new element in this case is the confrontational response from the Women’s Tennis Association (WTA). Up to now, sports associations, franchises and other entities that rely on the Chinese market to grow their businesses have rapidly backed down from rows with Beijing on politics and human rights. Two years ago, when the then Arsenal footballer Mesut Özil posted on Instagram about the treatment of minority groups in Xinjiang region, his club distanced itself from their midfielder by claiming it had “always adhered to the principle of not involving itself in politics”. The same year, when the general manager of the Houston Rockets basketball team, Daryl Morey, tweeted in support of protests in Hong Kong, the Rockets’ owner, Tilman Fertitta, reprimanded him. “Listen … @dmorey does NOT speak for the @HoustonRockets… we are NOT a political organization,” he tweeted. Though the circumstances are different – Özil and Morey were merely commenting on events in China – the message from the WTA that it is not backing down in the case of Peng presents Beijing with a problem it has not encountered before. Mark Dreyer, the Beijing-based founder of China Sports Insider, said the WTA’s response to Peng might reflect a calculation it has made about its ultimate dependence on the Chinese market. “It is true that in the last decade WTA had made tremendous investments in China, but since Covid, as China has cancelled all international sporting events, WTA has also learned to live without the China market,” Dreyer says. One worry for China, he thinks, is that the saga may ultimately turn out to be a Pandora’s box for sports and franchises reassessing the gigantic Chinese market. “A lot of people will be watching carefully to see what happens with the WTA over the longer term. Different leagues have different priorities, but as it becomes increasingly untenable to operate in both China and the rest of the world, China may be the market that loses out,” he said. For Mareike Ohlberg, of the German Marshall Fund thinktank, the release of the purported Peng email could in part be a blunt attempt by the Chinese state to remind people of its ultimate power. “[It shows] ‘we are telling you that she is fine, and who are you to say otherwise?’ It’s not meant to convince people but to intimidate and demonstrate the power of the state,” Ohlberg tweeted. With relations already frosty, the Peng saga will exacerbate the west’s mistrust of China even further. There have been precedents where the initial official line on missing people turned out to conceal the fact the persons involved had been held incommunicado. This is what observers of the Peng case ultimately fear.White nationalists “planned, executed and then celebrated” racially motivated violence that killed one counter-protester and injured dozens, lawyers for nine people hurt during the 2017 “Unite The Right” rally in Charlottesville said this week, as they urged jurors to hold some of the country’s most infamous white supremacists accountable. The jury is expected to begin deliberations on Friday in the trial of a civil lawsuit alleging that two dozen white nationalists, neo-Nazis and white supremacist organizations conspired to commit violence during two days of deadly demonstrations that rattled America’s conscience. Attorneys for the plaintiffs showed the jury dozens of text messages, chatroom exchanges and social media postings by the rally’s main planners, including some peppered with racial epithets and talk of “cracking skulls” of anti-far-right counter-protesters. “We sued the people who were responsible – the leaders, the promoters, the group leaders, the people who brought the army, the people who were the most violent members of the army. Those are the people who we ask you to hold accountable today,” said attorney Karen Dunn. Hundreds of emboldened white nationalists descended on Charlottesville in August 2017, ostensibly to protest the city’s plans to remove a statue of Confederate general Robert E Lee. Americans watched in horror as white nationalists surrounded counter-protesters, shouted “Jews will not replace us!” and threw burning tiki torches at them during a night march on the University of Virginia campus. There followed a day of horrific clashes around the park where the statue was located, before it was removed in the summer of 2021. Then in a terrible denouement, neo-Nazi James Alex Fields Jr rammed his car into an anti-white-supremacy protest, killing 32-year-old activist Heather Heyer and injuring others. Donald Trump, still in the early stages of his presidency, caused uproar by saying there were some “very fine people on both sides” of the protests. Fields is serving life in prison for murder and hate crimes for the car attack. He is named as a defendant in the lawsuit, which seeks monetary damages and a judgment that the defendants violated the plaintiffs’ constitutional rights. Roberta Kaplan – a lawyer for the plaintiffs famous for advancing same-sex marriage and reportedly counseling New York’s then governor Andrew Cuomo on sexual assault allegations against him – told jurors that if they find the defendants liable for the violence, it is up to them how much to award in damages. She suggested a range of $7m to $10m for each of the four plaintiffs who were injured in the car attack and $3m to $5m for plaintiffs physically harmed in street clashes or emotionally injured by witnessing the violence. Kaplan did not suggest a specific range for punitive damages. The lawsuit is being funded by Integrity First for America, a non-profit civil rights organization, and is part of a legal offensive to weaken the far right. “The bottom line is all of these traditional legal theories are tools to make people answer for their conduct, bring them out of the shadows, expose them for what they are and ultimately show they have less power than they think,” David Dinielli, the deputy legal director of the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), previously told the Guardian. Some defendants in the case used their closing arguments to distance themselves from Fields. While conceding that the plaintiffs’ lawyers have shown the defendants said “ridiculous” and “offensive” things, the defense has argued that their clients’ use of racial epithets and that their blustery talk in chatrooms before the rally is protected by the first amendment. “They’re racists, they’re anti-Semites. No kidding. You knew that when you walked in here,” said attorney James Kolenich, who represents Jason Kessler, the lead organizer of the rally. “What does that do to prove a conspiracy?” Kolenich said that when the defendants talked about violence before the rally, they were referring to fistfights, pushing and shoving, not plowing into a crowd with a car. “None of these defendants could have foreseen what James Fields did,” Kolenich said. Richard Spencer, a white nationalist who coined the term “alt-right” and represented himself at trial, told the jury he had no role in planning the events and did not commit acts of violence. Plaintiffs’ lawyers have portrayed Spencer as the leader of the torch rally. “The last thing in the world that I wanted by agreeing to speak at Unite the Right was an event that became a catastrophe, that involved the tragic death of a young woman, that involved the injuries to the plaintiffs and that will forever remain a stain on the cause that I sincerely believe in,” Spencer said. He also reminded the jury about Trump’s comments after the rally, when he failed to immediately denounce the white nationalists and said there were “very fine people on both sides”. That drew a warning from Judge Norman Moon, who said Trump’s remarks were not evidence in the case and could not be used. Spencer was warned again by the judge when he began to talk about Jesus, whom he described as a radical who was executed for his views. The white nationalist turned again to the jury. “Your task – and it’s a difficult one – is to apply the law fairly and precisely,” he said. “Even to those who you might despise.”The rejection of multiculturalism by successive governments has helped fuel “vulgar racism” of the kind experienced by Azeem Rafiq, according to the lead author of a seminal report. Bhikhu Parekh, the former chair of the Commission on the Future of Multi-Ethnic Britain, said he was deeply disturbed by the former cricketer’s testimony. Lord Parekh’s report, published in 2000 as part of a commission established by the Runnymede Trust, shaped much of New Labour’s policy on multiculturalism, with the then home secretary, Jack Straw, heralding it as “the most important contribution to the national debate on racial discrimination for many years”. On Tuesday, Rafiq told the digital, culture, media and sport select committee that phrases such as the P-word, “elephant washers” and “you lot” were commonplace and that players of colour were referred to as “Kevin”. He added that as a 15-year-old at Barnsley Cricket Club he had wine poured down his throat, despite this going against his Muslim faith. The testimony plunged English cricket into crisis. Parekh, a Labour peer who served as president of the Academy of Social Sciences from 2003 to 2008, said: “What we are witnessing is the crudest form of racism that you could ever imagine.” He added: “England has changed quite a bit as a result of Asian presence and black presence. Look at music, drama, theatre, corner shops opening late, family values, all of these things have changed British culture. And likewise, Asians have changed as a result of British culture. Those who do not want to accept it resort to this kind of vulgar racism.” Parekh was speaking 10 years after David Cameron’s first major speech as prime minister on the issue, in which he denounced multiculturalism. His sentiments were echoed by Angela Merkel and other political leaders at the time, and were a major departure from the new Labour approach to diversity. When asked if there was a link between people rejecting multiculturalism and theracist abuse of the sort experienced by Rafiq, Parekh said he thought so, but “not a direct link, as I can imagine people being one but not the other. I can easily see how it is easy to slide from one manner of thinking into the other.” He said people attacked multiculturalism without understanding what it meant. “They took it in a very crude way to mean that each culture is self-sufficient. It cannot be criticised by standards drawn from another culture and each culture therefore is sacrosanct and beyond criticism; therefore it has certain rights which the state should give it. Nobody in their right mind has ever advocated for this.” Parekh, who has written extensively on rethinking multiculturalism, added: “What we mean by multiculturalism is that no culture is perfect. Every culture is defective, it has to learn from others and therefore we want to encourage dialogue between different cultures, where each can learn to be critical of itself and learn also from the treasures of other cultures. It is the process of mutual learning.” He criticised the government for failing to issue a strong statement attacking racism. “No firm lead has been given on race. You need a clear policy on promoting equality, fighting discrimination and disadvantages. I don’t see any such policy.” He said the government’s report into racial disparities in the UK, published earlier this year, was disappointing because it failed to get to the root of many of the problems ethnic minorities faced today. Parekh said that while he was a little surprised that racism continued to plague different sections of society, “at the same time … the changes that have come about the last 20 years have been absolutely remarkable. Look at the number of MPs, not only from different ethnic minority groups, but also Muslims, Hindus and others.” He would not call Britain a racist society, he said, but one trying to fight and conquer, with uneven success, the legacy of its imperial past. When it came to racial equality, he did not believe the UK had gone backwards, “but it has gone one step and then stopped”. “I would say that this country has made some progress. But let us remember it is a country which has been slowly, slowly dragged into the new world. And we must therefore not be too impatient.” The national conversation on race had developed significantly in the past two decades, he said. “I think I will say that on the question of race there is a greater acknowledgment that it hurts people deeply, it is the worst form of treatment you can mete out to a human being. It exists in Britain and it should be eliminated. I think that is accepted.” That was only “halfheartedly” accepted 20 years ago, he added. “That change is largely possible because of testimonies like Rafiq’s,” Parekh said. “For a matter to become the subject of a public debate, there has to be some courageous players who are prepared to come out and talk about it.” • This article was amended on 20 November 2021. An earlier version referred to a 2011 speech by David Cameron as his “first major speech as prime minister”; the speech referred to was his first as prime minister to address the issue of multiculturalism.More than 40 senior academics and scientists have vowed not to work with the Science Museum as the row over its financial relationship with fossil fuel corporations escalates. In an open letter, prominent figures including a former chair of the UN’s climate body, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), and several leading scientists, many of whom have worked closely with the museum in the past, say they are “deeply concerned” about its fossil fuel sponsorship deals and they are severing ties with the museum until a moratorium is announced. “We are in a climate crisis and should not be doing anything to legitimise those companies that are still driving up emissions by exploring for and extracting new sources of fossil fuels when the science is clear that we need to be leaving them in the ground,” the letter states. It is the latest blow to the museum, which has faced several resignations and growing protests over its relationship with Shell and a newly announced deal with the renewables company Adani Green Energy, part of the Adani Group, which has major holdings in coal. This week the Guardian revealed how two scientists had refused to allow their work to be featured by the museum. Jess Worth of the campaign group Culture Unstained, which campaigns to stop fossil fuel sponsorship of the arts, said: “The Science Museum continues to dismiss all critics of its fossil fuel partnerships as wilfully misinformed activists, but in reality it is facing a profound crisis in confidence from the scientific community and losing the public’s trust.” Last month the climate scientist Prof Chris Rapley, a former director of the Science Museum, resigned from its advisory board, saying he disagreed with its “ongoing willingness to accept oil and gas company sponsorship”. A few weeks later two trustees – Hannah Fry, a professor in the mathematics of cities at University College London, and Jo Foster, the director of the Institute for Research in Schools charity – resigned from the museum’s board in protest at its deal with Adani. Fry said the Science Museum was “giving the false impression that scientists believe the current efforts of fossil fuel companies are sufficient to avoid disaster”. There have been several protests at the museum, most recently when youth activists occupied it overnight. As well as scientists and academics, many others who have worked with the museum group in the past – as speakers, advisers, contributors to exhibitions or participants in events and festivals – have also signed the letter. It says that although they have “excellent personal relationships” with “talented and committed members of staff” at the museum, they “can no longer be complicit in the policies adopted by the group’s senior leadership and trustees”. Dame Mary Archer, the chair of the board of trustees at the Science Museum Group, defended its stance on Friday. “Given the scale of the climate challenge, we reject the argument that we should sever all ties with the energy sector,” she said. “Energy companies involved with fossil fuels are causing climate change but they also have the skills, money and geographical reach to be a big part of some of the solutions. So where a company is showing a willingness to change, our leadership team believes it is valid to continue to engage, while urging these companies to show more leadership in accelerating the shift to renewables instead of fossil fuels.” Archer acknowledged there were “robust internal debates” on the issue at the museum and said she fully respected critics who disagreed with the management’s position. “Our door remains open for the dialogue that is integral to our work, both as part of the cultural community and as a science institution, and we’d encourage our critics to consider what is achieved by deplatforming,” she said. A spokesperson for Shell defended its relationship with the museum, saying tackling the climate crisis would need “unprecedented collaboration between business, government, consumers and civil society”. They said the company had a “comprehensive energy transition strategy” in place. Adani did not respond to a request for comment.The Chinese tennis player Peng Shuai has not been heard from publicly since she accused a former vice-premier of sexual assault. Peng is the latest in a long line of high-profile figures in China – artists, celebrities, high-ranking officials, and media moguls – who have disappeared in the past decade. Ai Weiwei, artist The dissident contemporary artist has been openly critical of the Chinese government, especially on issues of democracy and freedom of speech. In 2011, he was arrested in Beijing and spent 81 days at a secret prison facility. For years his passport was withheld. Ai is one of the few celebrities to have shown the world what it is like to be disappeared in China. In 2015, he took over the main galleries at the Royal Academy of Arts in London, building a mock-up model of his severely restricted life in prison. In it, menacing-looking guards oversee his every activity, from sleeping to eating, showering and defecating. Zhao Wei, actor In recent months, the Chinese government has launched an intensive crackdown on celebrities who it says lead young people astray and away from the ideals of the Communist party. The billionaire film star and pop singer Zhao Wei in effect vanished from public life in China in August, with her online presence erased. Her films and TV shows were also removed from popular streaming sites. It is not clear if Zhao is under house arrest or keeping a low profile. In September, she was spotted at her hometown in eastern China posing for a photo. Last week, the Chinese internet portal Netease spotted Zhao at an online shopping event. Meng Hongwei, Interpol chief A former vice-minister of public security in China, Meng Hongwei was among a growing group of Communist party figures caught in President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign, which is seen largely as a purge of political enemies. Meng rose to global prominence in 2016 when he was elected as president of Interpol, the international organisation that facilitates worldwide police cooperation. However, his term ended prematurely in 2018 when he disappeared during a visit to China. He was later accused of accepting bribes and expelled from the Communist party, and in 2020 Meng was jailed for 13 years on bribery charges. His wife, Grace, was granted political asylum in France last year after saying she feared she and her two children would be the targets of kidnapping attempts. Jack Ma, business magnate Beijing’s leadership has become deeply concerned about the rapidly growing power and influence of the country’s business elite. Jack Ma, the founder of the e-commerce giant company Alibaba, was the most prominent figure to have disappeared from public life after a crackdown on his empire. Authorities in Beijing had ordered an investigation into allegations of “monopolistic practices” at Alibaba. Ma’s vanishing a year ago, shortly after he publicly criticised government business regulations, had fuelled speculation that he may have fled China. However, he resurfaced three months later in an online video from his hometown. According to local media, Ma said he had been “studying and thinking, and we have become more determined to devote ourselves to education and public welfare”. In the past few weeks, Ma was seen in Hong Kong meeting business associates. He also travelled to Spain, where he was spotted on his luxury yacht. Gui Minhai, bookseller A Hong Kong-based publisher who specialised in sometimes gossipy books about China’s political elite, Gui Minhai mysteriously vanished from his Thai holiday home in October 2015. Held incommunicado for months, he reappeared in 2016 in mainland China on state television where he said in a seemingly staged announcement that he had turned himself in over a drink-driving incident. Two years later, Gui was partially released and allowed to make video calls, but in 2018, he was again detained by plainclothes officers while travelling with two Swedish diplomats to a medical appointment. As a Chinese-born Swedish citizen, Gui’s detention has caused a serious diplomatic rupture, pitting China against Sweden and other European Union countries, prompting concerns that their citizens could be next.Terrorism should be treated in the same way as ordinary crime when it comes to any connection to mental health issues, a terrorism laws watchdog has said, as more information comes to light about the dead Liverpool bombing suspect. It has become increasingly clear that Emad al-Swealmeen, who police believe blew himself up in a taxi outside Liverpool Women’s hospital on Remembrance Sunday, suffered from poor mental health, with detectives revealing on Friday they had gathered evidence from his brother on his “recent state of mind”. The Muslim Council of Britain (MCB) has criticised some in the media for rushing to speculate about the suspect’s ideological motives, adding that the picture is “complicated” by his “reported mental health problems”. An overlap between terrorism and mental health issues is becoming increasingly common. Lawyers for Khairi Saadallah, who murdered three men in Reading in 2020, unsuccessfully argued the attack was driven by a mental health disorder, not terrorist motives. Similarly, lawyers for Mahdi Mohamud, who injured three in stabbings at Manchester Victoria station in 2018, unsuccessfully argued that his schizophrenia had made him more vulnerable to radicalisation. Jonathan Hall QC, the independent reviewer of terrorism legislation, told the Guardian it was a complex area but that it was not unknown for individuals with a wide range of criminal offending to have mental health difficulties and they were not treated differently as a result. “The fundamental difficulty is: do you want to keep terrorism as part of the general criminal law? The answer is probably yes,” he said. “People find the criminal process obviously very frustrating and is full of delays but it commands confidence. “If you start saying mental health has a different impact on terrorism than on ordinary crime then you begin to unmoor it, don’t you? If one was to say in an intuitive way: ‘Surely it’s different?’ Well, I would just question that. “People who are mentally ill or have neurological or developmental issues, they may be as capable as you or I of holding down a job, falling in love, and I’m afraid also committing a crime or committing a terrorist offence.” Hall said the debate could get caught in “difficult definitional issues” but ultimately if someone used a suicide belt to kill innocent members of the public, it was highly likely an ideological cause that led them to take that step would be found. He agreed that part of the difficulty was that methods of terrorism had shifted from 9/11 style attacks directed by global networks to “self-initiators” – sometimes referred to as lone actors – springing attacks on the streets after being radicalised online in their bedrooms. “No one is truly on their own,” Hall said. “This guy obviously had access to bomb manuals. On the assumption he was radicalised, he’s networked through the internet. He could have been recruited or he could have decided to go down that dark tunnel by himself.” He added: “It would be a brave person to say in order to avoid the demoralising effect, to take the wind out of the sails of the terrorists, let’s not call it terrorism.” Police investigating the Liverpool bombing have said Swealmeen experienced episodes of mental ill-health and they were still trying to understand what part this played in the attack. A Mersey Care NHS foundation trust spokesperson confirmed he had previously accessed its services but was not a service user at the time of the incident, while those who knew him, such as Kate Hindley, who met Swealmeen through church, said he made “no secret” of his mental health struggles. The MCB has suggested the rush to pin an ideological cause on the attack when there are other factors at play has damaged relations with the Muslim community. A spokesperson said: “Since 9/11, there has been an unfortunate tendency to resort to feverish speculation once a suspected terrorist attack, or terrorist-style attack, occurs. This has taken a turn for the worse with social media amplifying or becoming the source of speculation. “Rather than allow the authorities to conduct a thorough investigation of such incidents, there are some divisive commentators and thinktanks who would much prefer that we rush to name, blame and shame the perpetrator.” They added: “After Sunday’s attack, we saw this again with newspapers suggesting this was Islamist-inspired, that Remembrance Day services were targeted and that Muslims were not doing enough. Now we are hearing that the situation is much more complicated for this Christian convert with reported mental health problems. “The desire to feed the beast of speculation has a real world impact on Muslim communities who fear backlash. The media has a moral obligation to resist speculation after such incidents and question those who seek to apportion blame.”Facebook is testing a feature allowing users to control how much content they view from friends, groups and public figures, amid accusations that the social media platform is not doing enough to curb inflammatory posts. Users will be able to reduce or increase the amount of content that they see from specific categories on their news feed, a customised scroll of content from friends, pages and groups that is a central plank of users’ experience of the platform. Facebook’s menu for managing the contents of users’ news feed will offer options to control the amount of content from friends and family, groups, and pages and public figures. People in the test can keep the amount of posts in their feed under those categories at “normal”, or have them reduced or increased. Users will also be able to do the same with topics. “This is part of our ongoing work to give people more control over [their]news feed, so they see more of what they want and less of what they don’t,” said Facebook’s owner, Meta, in a statement. Facebook’s news feed, and the algorithms that control it, is a regular source of controversy and attempts at adjustment by its owner. Documents released in recent months by a whistleblower, Frances Haugen, showed that a change to Facebook’s news feed algorithm in 2018, to promote reshared posts had the effect of pushing toxic and violent content as well as misinformation. Haugen has also accused Meta of not doing enough to curb harmful content in general, with some of the documents she has released pointing to Facebook’s struggles to contain misinformation before the 6 January riots in Washington. Meta has denied that Facebook pushes divisive content. Speaking at the annual Web Summit this month, Meta’s vice-president of global affairs, Nick Clegg, said Facebook’s content was largely “babies, barbecues and barmitzvahs” and that promoting toxic content went against the platform’s commercial self-interest. As well as announcing the content test, Meta said it was launching an experiment allowing some advertisers on Facebook to avoid displaying their adverts to users who have recently engaged with posts related to news and politics, social issues, and crime and tragedy. “When an advertiser selects one or more topics, their ad will not be delivered to people recently engaging with those topics in their news feed,” said Meta.Significant reductions in promised rail investment for the north of England make little sense economically, and damage the government politically. But essentially, rail investment in the north has fallen victim to petty Whitehall power struggles, led by the Treasury. After noisily insisting his priorities are “levelling up” and reaching net zero emissions, Boris Johnson is overseeing planned investment that, in the words of Andy Bagnall of the Rail Delivery Group, will “inevitably hold back the ability for railways to power the levelling-up agenda and the drive to net zero”. The loss of the HS2 extension to Leeds is a huge blow to the Yorkshire economy, depriving the county of substantial new rail capacity. Reducing the long-promised and much-needed Northern Powerhouse Rail from new rail construction to upgrades on existing lines means losing a potentially transformational transport investment. Anger across the north of England, not least in so-called “red wall” seats, is understandable. None of this was necessary. The planned investments are still substantial, with £96bn earmarked for rail projects across the country. But the amounts saved by scaling back Northern rail investments are small by comparison, totalling only £14bn. With government borrowing costs still close to the lowest they have ever been, there was no economic need for this relative penny-pinching. Disguised by the technicalities of public finance, however, there is a battle taking place over the government’s economic direction. It is clear from insider accounts that the integrated rail review “became a battleground to control spending by Rishi Sunak’s Treasury”. After a relatively generous spending review in October, with £150bn in increased spending over the next three years, there is now a pushback by fiscal hawks from that department. The Treasury’s primary weapon is a detail in the government’s “fiscal rules”. Fiscal rules are the set of targets that a government might choose to set itself for its tax and spending plans, typically focusing on its levels of planned borrowing and the level of future government debt. Formal rules were first introduced by Gordon Brown, then Labour chancellor, in 1997, and they were abandoned only as the global financial crisis erupted in 2008. But it was under the Conservative-led coalition government, formed in 2010 with George Osborne as chancellor, that the government’s fiscal rules were first used to reinforce a radical programme of spending cuts. By setting dramatically tight targets for reducing the government deficit – the gap between what it spends and what it receives in taxes – fiscal rules were a useful mechanism for the Treasury to argue for strict spending cuts for government departments. Austerity, as is now clear, did not work as he intended: while a huge amount of pain and misery was inflicted on the most vulnerable in particular, the weakening of the whole economy through spending cuts meant that Osborne consistently missed his own targets for the debt and the deficit. Sixteen different fiscal targets were announced over the decade, as growth consistently came in lower than forecast. By the time Boris Johnson became prime minister in summer 2019, austerity was deeply unpopular – not least in the Tories’ “red wall” target seats – and Johnson noisily committed to ending it, even claiming he had always been a secret opponent of spending cuts. His two chancellors, first Sajid Javid and now Rishi Sunak, have obliged, bringing in real terms spending increases in addition to the exceptional spending of the Covid-19 pandemic. They have updated the fiscal rules to match the new policy, introducing targets for the debt and the deficit that are strikingly close to those proposed by John McDonnell, then shadow chancellor, in early 2016 – but for some crucial details. Neither Sunak nor the Treasury are fans of public spending, but (perhaps until rather recently) this is very much Boris Johnson’s government, and the prime minister places winning the next election above either Sunak’s ideological preferences or the Treasury’s institutional biases towards spending cuts. The real terms increases in government spending since 2019 reflect Johnson’s power. Briefings against him showed the Treasury’s unhappiness. Better-than-expected growth forecasts allowed Sunak to spend more without borrowing much more at the spending review, temporarily defusing the row. However, the Northern rail farce shows it has not gone away. The Treasury has a longstanding institutional bias against investment in the north of England, as recent research has shown, systematically spending less there and across the country outside London and the south-east. The Tories, copying Labour, even promised to “rewrite the rules” of the department to remove the bias. However, details in the integrated rail plan show the old anti-north bias still at work – £1bn is earmarked for a tunnel in the Chiltern Hills, but similar amounts could not be found to provide Bradford with a high-speed connection. The instrument the north is suffering under is a crucial detail in the fiscal rule, which sets a 3% of GDP limit on government investment. After decades of underinvestment, this figure is clearly too low – only slightly above government investment today of 2.7% of GDP. Meeting net zero alone will, on estimates by the Institute for Public Policy Research, cost £33bn a year, or about 1.5% of GDP. There is no real economic justification for the 3% limit and none has been offered in public. But it does mean that the Treasury – opposed to investment spending, biased against the north, led by a chancellor predisposed to lower spending – can assert itself against demands for greater spending and borrowing elsewhere in government. It’s an economic loss for the north of England that may yet prove politically fatal for the prime minister. Immediately scrapping the 3% limit would at least help prevent future economic damage. James Meadway is director of the Progressive Economy ForumEvery year, a British Asian small business owner in West Yorkshire sends his neighbour a card and leaves a gift on his doorstep. And every year, without fail, that neighbour ignores him. “Ever since we moved in, he won’t look at me and my family; he doesn’t respond when we say ‘hello’. He even planted conifers so we couldn’t see into his garden and he can’t see us,” the man, who wished to remain anonymous, said. “But I still send him Christmas cards and buy him a gift. He won’t even open the door when I knock, so I just leave it on the doorstep.” Azeem Rafiq’s devastating testimony on the racism he experienced as cricket player has resonated deeply with the British Asian community in Yorkshire. The shocking allegations, in which words and phrases such as the P-word, “elephant washers” and “you lot” were commonplace and which stated that players of colour were referred to as “Kevin”, has shone an intense light on prejudice in the sport. But the issue of racism in the ethnically diverse Yorkshire region goes much further than just cricket. The business owner is one of many to have been prompted by Rafiq’s testimony to reflect on poisonous interactions that are part of daily life.. Atif Aslam, a 26-year-old youth worker in Sheffield, used to tell people he had not personally experienced racism. But he has a number of memories of walking home from the mosque as a young child wearing his traditional clothing, and white men in white vans shouting the P-word as they drove past. “You internalise it as that’s the norm,” said Aslam, who works for the Ellesmere Youth Project, which is part of Levelling the Playing Field, a national initiative that engages children from ethnically diverse communities in sport to prevent them from becoming involved in crime. “It was so common that it didn’t faze us. We never went home upset about it.” That disconnect finally ended this week after Rafiq’s appearance before a parliamentary select committee. It was described as a landmark moment for cricket and Rafiq, who was brought to tears as he recounted his racial abuse, won widespread praise for his resolve and courage. Haris Muhammad, a 33-year-old FA-qualified referee in Leeds, who volunteers for Muslim Engagement and Development, a nonprofit organisation that fights Islamophobia, said the testimony forced him to think about why good people said nothing. “There is a lot of apathy to people witnessing something like that. Although it may concern them internally, they’re not going to do anything about it.” But he believes people are now more receptive to being criticised for making hurtful remarks than they were a few generations ago. Mohamed Raje, 48, who was born in Batley, and owns The Studio, a popular barber shop in Heaton, Bradford, was keen to emphasise that “there are many good people” and he had friends and customers from all cultures, creeds and religions. Wearing his stylist’s apron with pride, Raje, who has run his own business for 28 years, said he knew from personal experience that institutional racism existed. “I’ve been a hairdresser since I was 13,” he said, “and I used to work in quite a prestigious salon, and would find that I never used to get promoted, but people behind me always would.” He recalled his school days, at an all-boys school where “at the end of term, there would be [P-word]-bashing from the white lads”. These days, people wouldn’t use the P-word to his face, but “people use it”. “If I’m in a room, white lads might refer to the [P-word] in the room,” he said. On a human level, Raje said he preferred to always rise above any hate he was shown, but, making reference to the British army’s colonial history in India, he said: “In some institutions, the Asian will always be the chaiwallah. Always the one bringing the tea and clearing up.” A customer who had just had his beard trimmed with his young son, but did not want to be named, said: “It’s not about cricket, love; racism is embedded. And the hierarchy starts at the government and goes all the way down to Joe Bloggs in the corner shop. “They need to really understand the history and we need to understand that we will never be accepted in this country. We were born here, we studied here, we spend our money here, we pay our taxes here, are we ever going to be accepted in society? We never will be.” A few doors down, Balquis Rashid, the owner of a cafe, Fresh Fillingz, while serving panini and lasagne, said she felt hopeful that times had changed. “I was a 70s child, there was a lot of it back then, with the National Front. But in 19 years of running this cafe, I’ve never had a problem. We’re always slated in the media, but Bradford is an amazing place.” A few miles away at Parkside sports centre, a community hub, an after-school session for the children of Afghan interpreters who had recently arrived in the ward was being held. For Talat Sajawal, the 42-year-old manager, and Haqueq “Aki” Siddique, 54, who runs the West Bowling Youth Initiative, which supports young people through volunteering projects, the conversation sparked by Rafiq’s experiences was nothing new. The pair, cricket-lovers who coach junior teams, took part in a documentary about the problems of class, race and cricket in Yorkshire back in 1993. In his office, Siddique pulls out a thick file of newspaper clippings, including several articles about racism in the sport dating back decades. When the former Bradford North MP Terry Rooney called out the club for racism in 2004, he was met with fury and calls to apologise. “It’s been there for years,” the youth worker said. Siddique described the challenges to hit his community as “A, B, C”, for austerity, Brexit and Covid. The ward of Little Horton has one of the highest rates of youth unemployment in Bradford, and 40% of the children in Bradford East live in absolute poverty, double the national rate. Alongside many in the community, he lost his mother to coronavirus in the early days of the pandemic. “There’s no space left in the graveyard around here,” he said. The community could also add D – for discrimination. “We just don’t need this,” said Siddique. Listing talented young cricketers whose dreams they had seen shattered by racism, both men dismissed past initiatives increasing representation as “box-ticking” exercises that did little to improve the situation. Siddique evokes Harry Enfield’s comedy character George “Integrity” Whitebread, a stereotypical Yorkshireman. “You know, that ‘I like what I say, and I’ll bloody well say what I like’ – there’s a lot of different types of Yorkies and there’s a lot of good folk … but there’s also a sense of territory, almost like a dog pissing on a lamp-post. That sums up Yorkshire in a way, very proud folk.” Sajawal, who is also an independent local councillor, described the generational differences in terms of attitudes to racism. “Our parents experienced the raw form first-hand,” he said, but they had believed for years that they would eventually return to Pakistan and so “just put up with it”. “In any Asian family, there’s always been a genuine fear that one day they’re going to kick us out of England. “The feeling from people in my generation is that we’ve always been the underdog, being south Asian.” He also sees the effect of discrimination in the young people he supports: “It’s had a knock-on effect to people’s confidence.” For Aslam, who is a level 2 cricket coach and runs sessions for young kids in the local area, Rafiq’s declaration that he would not let his son play was particularly agonising to hear. Many of the young people he works with have the potential to rapidly progress and play in local clubs. But he finds himself asking the same question that many others have this week: “How do I feel comfortable sending these kids to these places?”Crystal Palace are on a cracking run of form and will be eager to pick up where they left off with a third successive win at Turf Moor. Patrick Vieira’s side, already boasting Conor Gallagher and Wilfried Zaha performing at incredibly high levels, now welcome back a key attacking addition in Eberechi Eze for keeping their foot firmly on the gas in a promising run of fixtures against Burnley, Aston Villa and Leeds. Before eyes get too wide as to how far Palace can rise, they must get past a serious acid test in Sean Dyche’s side. Burnley blunted Chelsea spectacularly last time out, grinding out a 1-1 draw at Stamford Bridge, and now have some threat in Maxwel Cornet going forward. Graham Searles Saturday 3pm Venue Turf Moor Last season Burnley 1 Crystal Palace 0 Referee Simon Hooper This season G2 Y5 R0 2.5 cards/game Odds H 2-1 A 17-10 D 23-10 BURNLEY Subs from Hennessey, Norris, Pieters, Bardsley, Thomas, Barnes, Lennon, Long, Rodriguez, Westwood Doubtful Barnes (knock) Injured Stephens (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y26 R0 Form DDLDWD Leading scorer Cornet 4 CRYSTAL PALACE Subs from Butland, Kelly, Clyne, Tomkins, Riedewald, Banks, Hannam, Street, Rak-Sakyi, Mateta, Schlupp, Ayew, Olise, Eze Doubtful None Injured McArthur (hamstring, unknown), Ferguson (achilles, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y19 R0 Form DDDDWW Leading scorers Gallagher, Zaha 4To be in South Africa last summer, covering the British &amp; Irish Lions tour and witnessing Rassie Erasmus’ surgical dismantling of Nic Berry, was to be conflicted. On one hand it was disturbing, a line crossed and the human toll it has taken on Berry has been laid bare this week. On the other, Erasmus’ behaviour between the first and second Tests brought some colour to a series that was in need of some illumination. Forgetting the consequences for a moment, it was quite simply entertainment. And in no small part because the rugby did not live up to the same billing. Indeed, there cannot be another sport which engages in a “duty to entertain” debate quite as often as rugby union. It is often said that one of the beauties of the sport is that there are many styles with which to be effective, that to denigrate South Africa’s likely approach at Twickenham this weekend as somehow inferior is to misunderstand the sport. While that point is not without merit – and it must be said the three Lions tests were incredibly tense if turgid – there are times when the stars align. And in Paris on Saturday, there is every chance of something stellar. Put simply, New Zealand’s first trip to the Stade de France since 2017 – most likely their last before the 2023 World Cup opener and quite possibly their penultimate encounter before the final – has the potential to be everything the Lions series in South Africa was not. It is a quirk of the rugby calendar that clashes such as these do not come around very often – and World Rugby is seeking to change that with its plans for a Nations Championship – but sometimes the allure is in the rarity. Although it can be easy to overhype what is on paper a mouthwatering matchup, those currently turned off international rugby by England’s workmanlike performances would do well to tune in to events in Paris. For while France have not beaten New Zealand since 2009, losing all 14 of the subsequent meetings, there is a sense that the All Blacks’ aura is beginning to fade. Whereas once they could be accused of peaking in the middle of World Cup cycles the hope of New Zealand supporters must be that the opposite is now taking place. They have lost only twice this year and were again crowned winners of the Rugby Championship but, taking nothing away from Ireland, last weekend’s defeat in Dublin was chastening. As the assistant coach John Plumtree pointed out this week, France can sense their opportunity. “We know they’ve been waiting for us, like every team we play in this part of the world. We know what that challenge looks like. We know also it’s the last game of a very long tour, and then we get to go home.” Playing against New Zealand the week after they have been beaten is never easy, but there is a sense fatigue is creeping in and they will take to the field without Beauden Barrett among their number. That does give Richie Mo’unga the chance to start at fly-half and reprise a half-back partnership with Aaron Smith, who has belatedly joined the squad. How those two fare against Romain Ntamack, restored to the No 10 jersey, and Antoine Dupont will go a large way to determining the outcome. Smith has talked glowingly of Dupont of late – an acknowledgment that while the New Zealander has been the world’s leading scrum-half for a sustained period the 25-year-old Frenchman is assuming the mantle. Indeed, Dupont is the poster boy of this youthful France side, who are capturing hearts and minds. It has been a long time coming but the investment in academy-trained players, improved relations between the union and the Top 14 clubs and with the 2023 World Cup providing an obvious pot of gold at the end of the rainbow, France are resurgent under Fabien Galthié. They have still not quite rid themselves of their ability to snatch defeat from the jaws of victory, however, as demonstrated against Scotland in this year’s Six Nations and Australia over the summer, and even if the All Blacks are wobbling at the end of their season they still have an unprecedented ability to flick the switch, as shown against Wales recently. Put it all together and there are all the ingredients for both a match for the ages and a delicious hors d’oeuvre for the 2023 World Cup. After the week it has had, rugby union and the powers that be will certainly be hoping so.FAST EDDIE It’s Eddie Howe’s first match in charge of Newcastle on Saturday, reader, and the generally amiable chap was probably mighty relieved to be back on less bumpy ground at his Friday press conference after squirming through his unveiling, when he was asked countless times for his thoughts on Saudi human rights abuses. Back then a man who The Fiver has always considered an intelligent, calm and likable sort grew as red-cheeked as a fictional public schoolboy rotter as he repeated the phrase “it’s a football decision” so often he could have been mistaken for the pull-string puppet of a blood-soaked regime. What? Oh. With Friday’s press conference kicking off before the sun had barely risen, our proper news reporting cousin, Scoop Fiver, wasn’t able to ask any tricky questions so Howe was free to stick to what he prefers and “block out the noise” of that other stuff. After easing into proceedings with a bit of box-ticking – “I will treat the club like it’s my own family … I’m all in here” – he shifted on to the dire standard of performances, which have left them mired in the relegation filth. With the memory of failing to save Bournemouth still relatively fresh in his mind, is Howe having sleepless nights about another bottom-of-the-table battle royale? “I don’t tend to struggle to sleep,” he yawned. “At Bournemouth, every year we were in a relegation battle … so I’ve been in the position many, many times. It’s not nice … it’s not where I want to be but … drawing on past experience is going to be helpful. I’m under no illusions about our current situation and what we need to do.” What they need to do is start winning games, something they haven’t done in any competition all season – not even the Rumbelows Cup! With reports that Howe has worked players so hard in training that some have been on their knees, we can probably expect a little more zip in their play when they host Brentford. Though The Fiver’s eyebrows were raised to Ancelotti-like levels when we heard him reserve particular praise for legendary No 9 Joelinton and red-card magnet Jonjo Shelvey. “When you work with him you realise he’s an incredible technician and can play all sorts of passes, long and short,” honked Howe of a man The Fiver wouldn’t trust to deliver a letter, never mind a full 90 minutes on a football pitch. “In terms of our philosophy he’s someone who’ll be very important to us.” It’s a bold shout, given many Newcastle fans see him and Joelinton as liabilities, but Howe can only work with what he’s got until January so why not blow smoke up their backsides? The new man at St James’ Park also said he’s “only seen Newcastle in the dark so far”. For Howe’s sake we’re hoping he’s referring to the city and not the team, because watching this bunch of misfits in the harsh light of day might come as something of a shock. QUOTE OF THE DAY “If you think about me I never smiled on the pitch, I never smiled in 20 years. I never once saw football as a joy. Then, when I left football, I could become me and get rid of that. I used to take it home with me at night and it used to ruin my week, as it did all of us” – Gary Neville comes tantalisingly close to being a STOP FOOTBALL advocate. FIVER LETTERS “Has anyone been following the case of Edward McClung, 50, who is claiming he was turned down for jobs because of his diehard support for the Pope’s Newc O’Rangers? Ingeniously, he maintains this amounts to discrimination contrary to the Equality Act 2010 on the grounds that his support constitutes a philosophical belief. I know The Fiver treasures its philosophical credentials and will want to follow this story to its end with all the glorious consequences that may ensue for football supporters throughout the land” – Tom Harrison. “Continuing the theme of players lining up together to create a phrase (Fiver letters passim), in 2014 QPR signed Jordon Mutch to play alongside Richard Dunne and Yun Suk-young. Whether a commentator was ever able to reel off the special line ‘Dunne to Mutch, Mutch to Yun’ I don’t know, but it seems unlikely given that season’s QPR team were unable to string two passes together” – Richard de Winter. “If you create FiverCoin (yesterday’s Fiver), will transactions, security and payouts adhere to your current standards of punctuality and exactitude? Cuz if so … huh” – Seth Kleinschmidt. “With regards to Wayne Rooney making moves in the NFT world (yesterday’s Fiver), I’d point out that Roy Keane has been dishing out near-fatal tackles for years” – Declan Houton. Send your letters to the.boss@theguardian.com. And you can always tweet The Fiver via @guardian_sport. Today’s winner of our prizeless letter o’ the day is … Richard de Winter. NEWS, BITS AND BOBS Sydney Leroux’s mother says abuse and bullying in Canadian football drove her daughter to the US. Werder Bremen coach Markus Anfang has denied using a fake Covid-19 vaccination certificate after German authorities launched an investigation. “I very much hope this issue is cleared up quickly,” said Anfang. Meanwhile, Kevin De Bruyne has got Covid and will miss Manchester City’s games against Everton and PSG. The Premier League has sealed a deal with NBC worth 2bn big ones for rights in the USA! USA!! USA!!! Conor Gallagher can expect a Valentine’s card off Tommy T next year if these quotes are anything to go by. “I loved him from day one,” gushed the Chelsea boss of the midfielder he bundled off to Crystal Palace on loan. “Humble, nice, smile on his face and all the time ready to give everything.” Jürgen Klopp is a man after The Fiver’s own heart. “I hate international breaks,” he yelped before revealing that Jordan Henderson and Andy Robertson still haven’t trained after returning with knack. And Roger Lemerre, 80, [actually 80 – Fiver Ed] is back in the game, baby, after taking charge of Tunisian outfit Etoile Sahel. RECOMMENDED BOOKING No Christmas party again this year? Then you’re cordially invited to Football Weekly’s very own one on … checks notes … 30 November. Tickets are available now. STILL WANT MORE? Back by popular demand because the international fortnight is over: 10 things to look out for in the Premier League this weekend. “The game’s changed”: Philip Lahm channels Cutty from the Wire as he warns new Barça boss Xavi that physicality is trumping skill in modern football. What the hell is going on in the Cryptodragons’ den and should fans be wary of it, head-scratches Max Rushden. Eli Mengem went on the road with Scotland fans at Euro Not 2020 and made this film about it. $tevie Mbe still wants to win a Premier League title – and the path towards doing that begins with a fearless approach at Aston Villa, writes Nick Ames. And if it’s your thing … you can follow Big Website on Big Social FaceSpace. And INSTACHAT, TOO! WHO COULD HAVE PREDICTED THIS?The Cumbre Vieja volcano on the island of La Palma started erupting almost two months ago. The lava has caused widespread damage as it has poured into the ocean and solidified. We would like to hear from those living on the island about how they have been affected. What’s your experience been during the last few weeks? Share your experiences You can get in touch by filling in the form below or contact us via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here and privacy policy here.Not for Roger Norrington a grand and glitzy farewell in the capital surrounded by the metropolitan elite. Instead – good for him – arguably the most important British conductor of the last half century travelled north to bow out. The 87-year-old’s farewell concert took place in Sage Gateshead, directing the Royal Northern Sinfonia in an all-Haydn concert that effortlessly rolled back the years. It reminded us that this is a man who has changed classical music emphatically for the better. Everything about the event was quintessential Norrington: the choice of Haydn, whom the conductor has described as the composer he would most like to invite – “Joe’s the guy” – to his farewell party. Then the programme: not just two of Haydn’s London symphonies, Nos 101 and 103, but Haydn English language canzonettas sung by Susan Gritton with Steven Devine at the fortepiano, a wind band march, and one of the greatest of Haydn’s string quartets, Op 76 No 5. That mixed format deliberately evoked the single-composer immersion weekends – Norrington always dubbed them “experiences” – in which he led audiences through an archipelago of musical discovery in the 1980s. As happened so often in those now-distant weekends, this farewell concert, which topped out at nearly three hours, seemed to generate a special level of enthusiasm among players and audience alike. Back then, it was the English Classical Players, one of the many groups Norrington has founded in his career. Now it was the RNS, eloquently led by Maria Wloszczowska, and with a host of British chamber orchestral players who have grown up in a musical world that Norrington has helped to shape. Above all, though, this concert epitomised Norrington’s way with the music. When he and other contemporaries such as John Eliot Gardiner first started rearranging their orchestras on the stage – first and second violins placed opposite rather than next to one another, horns and trumpets ditto, wind players standing not sitting, double basses at the back to provide foundational earthiness, strings thinned down to the numbers the composers would have expected, and all playing without vibrato, “that wobbly stuff” as Norrington still mocks it – many were outraged, not least some music critics. Now, though, Norrington’s brisk tempi, historically focused approach and what he calls “pure tone” are the norm and it’s the old ways that today seem weird and wilful. Revolutionaries mostly fail rather than succeed. Norrington is the exception. He is also a great believer in talking to audiences. There has always been something of the enthusiastic schoolmaster about him and he wasn’t going to hang up his baton without giving us a talk. It was at least ten minutes before the music could get started with the thrilling drum roll at the beginning of the opening work, the symphony No 103. Before that, Norrington delivered one of the benign musical lectures that regularly precede his concerts – telling us about Haydn in London, about 18th-century performance practice and reminding the audience that Haydn was “a cheerful composer”. Norrington is a cheerful conductor too. For some years now, he has sat down to conduct – though he stood to direct the winds in Haydn’s March for the Prince of Wales at the start of the second part of the concert. Sitting down allows Norrington to swivel round and interact with the audience, encouraging them to applaud at the end of movements, to laugh along with Haydn’s wit, and generally to relax and enjoy the concert. “You are part of the team,” he insisted. At the end was an encore, literally: a repeat of the final movement of the Clock symphony, No 101. Then cheers and a standing ovation, a bouquet of flowers and a short tribute from the platform by the RNS’s director Thorben Dittes. A wave, a hug, and Norrington walked modestly off along with the rest of the musicians, part of the team to the last. • Martin reviewed this concert from the live stream; the concert is available on demand to ticket holders (who pre-brought tickets before the concert) until midnight on Saturday 20 November.Boiling lobsters alive could be banned if ministers act on a government-commissioned report that has found crustaceans have feelings. The study, conducted by experts from the London School of Economics (LSE) concluded there was “strong scientific evidence decapod crustaceans and cephalopod molluscs are sentient”. The finding follows a row over the animal welfare (sentience) bill, which recognises all vertebrates – animals with spines – as sentient beings. The Conservative Animal Welfare Foundation presented its own report to the government, arguing that crustaceans and molluscs also have feelings. This led ministers to commission an independent review of the evidence. After analysing the extensive research submissions over several months, the peer-reviewed LSE report has concluded that there is strong scientific evidence of sentience in decapod crustaceans and cephalopod molluscs, and recommends that they should be included in animal protection legislation. If they were to be included, the proposed legislation in the bill could protect them from being subjected to painful deaths. Research shows that decapod crustaceans have opioid receptors and respond to opioid painkillers in a similar way to vertebrates, strongly indicating that they feel pain. Their reaction to bodily assaults, such as trying to escape from boiling water, is further evidence of their capacity to suffer. There is a large body of research showing that cephalopods have complex brains and nervous systems, and are able to learn and avoid unpleasant experiences such as electric shocks, to solve problems and use tools. Several other countries afford these species protection in animal welfare legislation, including Norway, New Zealand, Austria and parts of Italy and Germany. Zac Goldsmith, the animal welfare minister, said: “The UK has always led the way on animal welfare and our action plan for animal welfare goes even further by setting out our plans to bring in some of the strongest protections in the world for pets, livestock and wild animals. “The animal welfare sentience bill provides a crucial assurance that animal wellbeing is rightly considered when developing new laws. The science is now clear that crustaceans and molluscs can feel pain and therefore it is only right they are covered by this vital piece of legislation.” Campaigners have welcomed the move. Claire Bass, the executive director of Humane Society International/UK said: “Recognition in law that animals like lobsters and octopus are sentient is a very welcome affirmation that this bill is underpinned by science. “It’s critical that animal sentience is not determined subjectively on the basis of political, economic, or cultural preference or convenience, but that it is determined on facts, and the LSE report leaves no room for doubt on that front. “This is an important first step to establishing more respectful treatment of these amazing animals. Knowing their capacity to suffer we cannot now turn a legislative blind eye to some of the appalling things that are done to them, such as dismembering or boiling them alive. We look forward to working with government, industry, and scientists to agree and implement humane solutions.” Juliette Booker of Crustacean Compassion said: “We are very pleased that LSE agree animals like crabs and lobsters can experience pain, and we applaud Defra for commissioning this groundbreaking review. The government now have all the information that they need to make animal welfare history, and we urge them to take immediate steps to protect decapods and cephalopods in animal welfare legislation.”“The strongman finally blinks,” was how one commentator put it. On Friday morning, India woke to a surprise announcement by the prime minister, Narendra Modi, that he was repealing the farm laws, which have been at the heart of one of the greatest challenges his government had faced in almost eight years in power. It was a significant turning point, not only for the farmers, but for Indian politics and the reputation of the Bharatiya Janata party (BJP) government. Since Modi was first elected in 2014, his modus operandi has been that of a tough, unyielding, authoritarian strongman leader who does not bow to public pressure. Modi did not apologise after the catastrophic policy of demonetisation in 2016, when millions of banknotes were suddenly taken out of circulation, strangling the economy. His response to opposition in the disputed region of Kashmir, after his government unilaterally stripped it of its semi-autonomous status in 2019, was to bring in hundreds of thousands of troops and implement an ongoing crackdown. He did not back down later that year when millions of people took to the streets after his government passed a citizenship law seen as prejudicial to Muslims. Nor did he apologise for the mistakes and government missteps during the devastating second wave of Covid in April. Yet on Friday, there was Modi, in a rare tone of contrition, apologising to farmers, “with a pure heart and honest mind, that something may have fallen short”. His conciliatory words of retreat have sounded hollow to many farmers. After millions of them rose up in opposition to the laws, Modi’s government has spent the past year throwing the full weight of the state at farmers to try to crush the dissent. There was police brutality, teargas and water cannon to stop them entering Delhi. There were hundreds of arrests and police cases against farmers and activists supporting their cause. There were government statements against figures such as the popstar Rihanna and the environmentalist Greta Thunberg, who had voiced support for the farmers. The government intervened to stop people tweeting to support the farmers. In parliament and at political rallies, ruling-party MPs repeatedly called the protesting farmers terrorists, Sikh separatists and anti-nationals who were conspiring against India and working for Pakistan. But for the first time, none of it worked. The proud and equally headstrong farmers, mostly from Punjab and Haryana, led by powerful unions, had made it very clear to Modi they would not be moved or disappear quietly. And unlike the other protests and challenges since 2014, this time the BJP had begun to pay a heavy political price. Modi’s climbdown is seen by most as strategic political manoeuvring before the state elections in Uttar Pradesh and Punjab next year, rather than driven by sympathy for the farmers. After recent poor performances in the West Bengal and Himachal Pradesh state elections, the BJP are already seen to be on the back foot. Keeping power in Uttar Pradesh, India’s most populous state and the heartland of the BJP, is crucial for Modi. But the farm laws, and the perceived mistreatment of the farmers – who hold a reverential place in Indian society – had clearly begun to erode BJP support in an already tight Uttar Pradesh election race, not helped by the farmers’ unions who had pledged to put all their efforts into taking votes away from the BJP. The situation became even more dire for the BJP after four peacefully protesting farmers were run down and killed in Uttar Pradesh last month, seemingly on purpose, and the son of a senior BJP minister was arrested in connection with the deaths. The attack repulsed even those not sympathetic to the farmers. Modi’s perceived surrender is sure to dent his reputation as a strongman to whom no dirt sticks. But for many, the greater significance is that it has reaffirmed that the power that sustained protest and struggle – the basis on which independent India was built – still holds. Under Modi, dissent has been systematically and successfully crushed through an authoritarian mix of draconian legislation and state machinery. Activists and critics are regularly jailed under terrorism laws, civil society groups have been hounded and shut down and protests are repeatedly met with force. Friday’s retreat was therefore hailed as a rare and much-needed triumph of democracy, in an India otherwise sliding fast towards authoritarianism. As one protesting farmer said proudly on Friday: “In us, Modi has met his match.”The personal dishonesty of the prime minister is serial and well documented. It’s the thread that has run through his career. It saw him fired from his first job, at the Times, for making up quotes, then saw him fired from the Tory frontbench for lying to his party leader – to say nothing of the anti-EU fabrications that made Boris Johnson’s name as Brussels correspondent of the Daily Telegraph. But dishonesty is no longer merely the character flaw of one man. It has become the imprint of his party and this government. Admittedly, the Conservatives’ collective dishonesty is less florid than Johnson’s individual variety. If you were being kind, you would call it intellectual dishonesty or, kinder still, magical thinking. Sometimes it takes the form of arguing two contradictory things at once; often it comes down to saying one thing and doing the exact opposite. So we have a Tory government publicly committed to reducing carbon emissions, one that just last week wrapped up Cop26 in Glasgow, where it urged the world to pursue net zero. But this week that same government broke its promise to extend HS2 to Leeds and abandoned the pledged high-speed rail link between Leeds and Manchester. Passengers and freight that would have moved on clean, swift trains will instead be burning up petrol on the roads. Indeed, buried deep in the government’s announcement was a telltale line. On page 23 of the new plan is the observation that the original scheme would have crossed various motorways 13 times: disruption to road users that, the document cheerfully notes, has now been avoided. Proof, says Richard Bowker, former head of the Strategic Rail Authority, that for this government the car is “still king”. That came less than a month after Rishi Sunak gave a boost to domestic air travel – surely one of the very easiest things for a nation of Britain’s size to cut down on. In other words, the government tells us it is pursuing net zero, even as it nudges Britons away from trains and into cars and planes. Of course, it was grimly predictable that it would be northern England that got shafted by Thursday’s announcement. The Conservatives’ breaching of the “red wall” in 2019 has let them pose as the party of working people, but their actions tell a different story. You had to examine the small print, but look at the government’s social care reforms, details of which were announced this week. Those who have little will lose 75% of their assets to pay for care if they need it. Those with £500,000 in the bank will keep more than 75% of theirs. The Tories talk a good game to voters in Bishop Auckland or Blyth Valley, but it’s still Bucks and Berks they’re looking after. The mother and father of these dishonesties remains Brexit, still the organising principle of this government and the adhesive that binds Johnson to his party. That project always rested on magical thinking – the belief that Britain could boost its economy by making trade with its nearest neighbours harder and more expensive – and it requires more and more such thinking to maintain the illusion. So you have a chancellor who simultaneously wants to shower red-wall seats with cash, cut taxes and reduce borrowing, all of it only possible with mighty economic growth – which is unachievable, thanks to an exit from the EU projected to drain 2.25% from our output by the end of 2022. Brexit entails all kinds of such deceptions, the contradictions never admitted let alone confronted. David Frost was in Brussels today, for the latest round of apparently never-ending talks with the EU over Northern Ireland’s post-Brexit arrangements. For all the technical details, the problem has always been both simple and obvious. Once the UK had resolved to leave the single market and the customs union, there had to be a border somewhere. It could be on the island of Ireland; the government promised it would not do that. Or it could be down the Irish Sea; the government promised it would not do that either. It has tried to wish away that fundamental conundrum, hoping it might disappear in a puff of magician’s smoke. That was delusional, but it was also dishonest – to the people of Northern Ireland above all. Wherever you look, this government is spinning similar fictions. It could be “global Britain” – evoking the long history of a free-trading nation at the very moment Britain slams the door on the largest free-trade bloc the world has ever known – or “levelling up”: slogans are the one commodity that’s never in short supply. But the government either does nothing to make those pledges real, or actively works against their fulfilment. All of this is personified by Johnson himself, who has turned breaking his word into a vocation. But now it has become a collective trait. The government has adopted Johnson’s notorious attitude to cake – wanting to have it and to eat it – and made cakeism its defining creed. The Tories want both to look good on climate and withhold cash from the transport system. They want both to spend big and keep taxes low. They want both to leave the EU and keep Northern Ireland exactly as it was. They want both to hold the red wall and keep giving preferential treatment to their own blue-wall faithful. If this were only magical thinking designed to deceive themselves, it would be bad enough. But the Tories are doing to the country what Johnson has done his whole life: making promises that cannot be kept and telling stories that are not true. Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnistIt looks like time could be up for the traditional British cup of tea, with thirsty consumers increasingly opting for coffee, fancy herbal infusions and even kombucha as a pick-me-up. The latest blow to the national drink is Unilever’s decision this week to sell its famous black tea brands, which include Brooke Bond, PG Tips and Lipton, to a private equity firm. The country’s switch away from tea and towards coffee is writ large in supermarket sales. In the year to June, coffee sales were more than double those of tea, rising 10% to £1.5bn, according to retail analysts Kantar, as home workers bought pods and beans to play barista. Tea sales rose 5% to £713m, but that was mainly thanks to increased demand for expensive herbal and fruit infusions promising everything from a good night’s sleep to putting a spring in your step. The volume of everyday teabags sold was unchanged. The hot cuppa is also facing growing competition from colder varieties of infusion. Unilever remains invested in a joint venture with PepsiCo selling iced teas, and kombucha, made from fermented tea, has become fashionable, with analysts predicting sales could rocket to £250m within five years. When Alan Jope, the chief executive of Unilever, set out his reasons for selling up last year he pointed to falling demand for so-called “builder’s tea”. Its drinkers were “getting older and consuming less and starting to fall over”, he said. Unlike younger consumers they were also not into “trying new products”, making it harder to see where growth would come from. It is a sharp contrast from when the consumer goods giant bought Lipton and PG Tips, in the early 70s and 80s, respectively, when there was no sign of the coffee culture that would displace teapots on high streets and in kitchens. The tea-break had been a British institution for at least two centuries, with the drink’s history going back further to the first advert for tea, which appeared in the London republican newspaper Mercurius Politicus in 1658. It announced that a “China drink called by the Chinese, Tcha, by other Nations Tay alias Tee” was now available in a coffee house. By the mid-18th century, it was the UK’s most popular drink – pushing ale and gin from their place in British hearts. The teabag arrived at the start of the 20th century and today 96% of cuppas are made with one. However, not everyone thinks tea has gone off the boil, not least CVC Capital Partners, the private equity firm paying €4.5bn (£3.8bn) for Unilever’s tea division, renamed Ekaterra. It thinks it can engineer a turnaround, describing the brands as “well positioned in an attractive market” with sales of €2bn last year. Other tea companies also see opportunities, with drinkers willing to spend more on brands with strong sustainability credentials. Companies such as Clipper – which claimed a first with its “biodegradable, unbleached, and non-GM teabag” – are among the names doing well. Yorkshire Tea has also managed to defy gravity, despite its reliance on the struggling black tea market. Dom Dwight, its marketing director, says there is “loads of life left in tea, provided you go about it with the right attitude”. “We won’t stop championing the brilliance of standard black tea – while it’s in decline, we’re the only major brand in long-term growth, which goes to show that there’s a lot of love out there for a proper brew,” he said. “Millions of us Brits continue to make it a part of our day, and the future lies in bringing black tea to more places and more people – finding clever ways to meet the changing needs of the modern tea drinker.”Seth Meyers On Late Night with Seth Meyers, the host started by discussing the differences between how the Democrats and the Republicans are spending their time. Joe Biden has been busy signing a groundbreaking infrastructure bill. “Why do they always give the most powerful guy in the world a tiny schoolboy desk?” he asked while watching a replay. He jokes that next time he will be “crammed into the middle seat on coach”. Meanwhile, Republicans have been busy defending Paul Gosar, the Arizona congressmen who has become the first member of Congress simultaneously censured and stripped of committee posts after tweeting a video imagining himself killing Democrat Alexandra Ocasio-Cortez. He has since compared himself to Alexander Hamilton. “For one thing, I would be terrified of hearing you rap,” Meyers said while complaining about the “theatre of the aggrieved from the dumbest people in politics”. Gosar has spoken like a martyr standing up for what’s right while colleagues have defended him. Support has come from Lauren Boebert, who “sounds like a Dilbert character who refuses to get vaccinated” and Louie Gohmert, who, in his defence of Gosar, sounded like a grandpa who “accidentally FaceTimes you when you’re on the toilet”. Matt Gaetz has also jumped in, saying that as the video was anime, it can not be taken seriously. “No one is objecting to the existence of cartoons in general,” Meyers said before adding: “If you did that at any other job you’d get fired immediately.” Donald Trump was also interviewed by the My Pillow CEO, Mike Lindell, this week and the pair continued to push lies about election fraud. Lindell suggested that melting down voting machines and turning them into prison bars would be a good idea and Trump concurred. Meyers joked that it “sounds like an idea that Magneto would reject for being too crazy”. Trevor Noah On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah spoke about the chilling story of Peng Shuai, the Chinese tennis champion who has been missing for weeks after accusing a former top Communist leader of sexually assaulting her. Her social media presence has since been scrubbed. “This is really disturbing,” he said. “Someone speaks out about sexual assault and the Chinese government just makes them disappear.” A state-run news network has now shared an email, claiming it came from her, which says she is safe. Noah referred to it as “bullshit” and “as legit as the letters I got from my supermodel girlfriend in sixth grade”. He continued: “It’s one thing for your government to come after you; it’s another to make you fully disappear.” Noah also joked that if you have a rocky past online, “just move to China and talk shit about the Communist party” and it will surely be erased. Jimmy Kimmel On Jimmy Kimmel Live!, the host played footage of Republican Marjorie Taylor Greene, who is proudly admitting that she isn’t vaccinated. “I think she’s lying,” he said. “I think she’s saying she isn’t to give stupid people street cred.” He moved on to Sesame Street, the “latest thing the anti-cancel crowd wants to cancel”, which was banned from the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC). On Twitter, they announced that Elmo, Big Bird and Ernie would not be invited. In speculating which of the cast members might be conservative, Kimmel landed on Sam the Eagle or Statler and Waldorf, whom he likened to “senators from Oklahoma”. Donald Trump Jr has also been selling T-shirts to provoke liberal family members this Thanksgiving, including one that says “Fauci kills puppies.” Kimmel joked that “just because your family doesn’t like you, doesn’t mean I want mine to hate me”.Only one place and two points separate Liverpool and Arsenal, which is something of a surprise given their respective starts to the season but also underlines the visitors’ impressive 10-game unbeaten recovery under Mikel Arteta. A true test of their improvement awaits at Anfield, where the past 20 meetings in all competitions have produced a remarkable 92 goals and Arsenal have suffered several comprehensive defeats since last winning here in 2012. Jordan Henderson, one of several injury worries for Jürgen Klopp, could make the 500th appearance of his club career. Andy Hunter Saturday 5.30pm Sky Sports Premier League Venue Anfield Last season Liverpool 3 Arsenal 1 Referee Michael Oliver This season G9 Y28 R1 3.22 cards/game Odds H 1-2 A 6-1 D 77-20 LIVERPOOL Subs from Adrián, Kelleher, N Williams, Phillips, Konaté, Robertson, Thiago, Morton, Origi, Minamino Doubtful Henderson (groin), Robertson (hamstring) Injured Milner (hamstring, 27 Nov), Keïta (hamstring, 27 Nov), Firmino (hamstring, Dec), Gomez (calf, Dec), Jones (eye, unknown), Elliott (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y12 R0 Form DDWWDL Leading scorer Salah 10 ARSENAL Subs from Leno, Hein, Okonkwo, Chambers, Holding, Soares, Marí, Tavares, Elneny, Maitland-Niles, Pépé, Balogun, Martinelli, Nketiah, Lacazette Doubtful Partey (groin), Balogun (illness), Aubameyang Injured Xhaka, (knee, Jan), Kolasinac (ankle, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y17 R1 Form WDDWWW Leading scorers Aubameyang, Smith Rowe 4This autumn series has not produced much in the way of conclusive Twickenham evidence so far but the mists are about to clear. While no global prizes are on offer it feels a significant weekend as England and South Africa meet for the first time since the 2019 World Cup final. For the home side, in particular, this is the game, for better or worse, that will define their calendar year. Defeat the world champions, currently unbeaten entering the last leg of their European tour, and there will be concrete proof of progress even in the absence of several familiar totems. Trail in a distant second and, having finished fifth in the 2021 Six Nations, the end-of-term report will write itself. There is a very decent England team in there somewhere and this would be an opportune moment to underline that fact. Consider, too, the outlook for the Six Nations in 2022. Scotland at Murrayfield in early February, with Owen Farrell still potentially recuperating from an ankle operation, followed by a daunting March double whammy against a pumped-up Ireland and France in Paris? Little respite on offer there if England were to stumble into Christmas not entirely certain about their best line-up or modus operandi. We have not even mentioned the lively pre-match build-up which has coated this fixture with some unusually fiery peri-peri sauce: the banning of Rassie Erasmus for his Lions video nasty, the associated South African unhappiness, the lingering regret Eddie Jones continues to feel two years after the World Cup final and the calculated ‘Fight Club’ soundbites drifting out of the home camp. Chuck all that in the pot and it is a spicy old mix. It is certainly fortunate for England that, for once, they do not have to spend the eve of the game scrambling to react to positive Covid results. That said, the stakes have been raised by the decision to place their faith in Jamie Blamire, Bevan Rodd and Nic Dolly rather than more experienced front-row options. If the youngsters buckle it could become messy. Stand collectively firm, though, and Jones’s developmental reshuffle will have paid handsome dividends. Because, ultimately, avenging 2019 or the Lions outcome matters less to Jones right now than finding the right cornerstones for the World Cup in 2023. If – and ifs do not come bigger – this selection can stare down the Springbok forwards it will be a coming of age triumph for many. “We’re looking forward to going into battle against South Africa,” emphasised Richard Cockerill, England’s forwards coach. “We’ll fire our own bullets and play how we want to play but there are always points in the game when you have to match the opposition physically. If they think we’ve got a weakness there that’s up to them, but we certainly don’t.” Behind the scrum an acid test also looms in terms of this ‘new’ England outwitting a top class defence. Within the home dressing room they did not need photos of Marcus Smith receiving training-ground advice this week from English rugby’s resident jedi master, Jonny Wilkinson, to be excited about the possibilities if they can secure enough possession and play at a sufficiently high tempo. “Marcus can go on to achieve great things and we all know that,” insisted the fly-half’s teammate Jonny May. “He’s going to be a great player for a long time.” Then again, sides who cannot compete physically up front could play Citizen Smith at 10 and it would make scant difference. Which is why, as two proud nations re-circle their wagons, there is a whiff of cordite in the air. “Physically, from a scrum, set-piece and lineout point of view, there isn’t a harder team to play against in the world at the moment,” reiterated Cockerill. “They make no apology for how they play. They almost put the gauntlet down of ‘We’re going to do this. Are you good enough to stop us?’ But it won’t be a challenge we’ll shy away from. We’ve got a couple of guys in our front row for whom it’ll be their first experience of playing against the quality but we’re very confident they’ll stand up to the job.” The same defiant theme was echoed on the eve of the game by Joe Marler, named on the bench despite having only emerged from Covid isolation on Thursday evening. Not only has Marler barely been able to train with his team-mates but he has yet to regain his sense of taste and claims to have limbered up this week by, among other things, doing shuttle runs inside an empty chicken run in his garden watched by his wife and drinking South African red wine. The prop’s appetite for the fray, though, sounded undimmed as he sought to compare England’s current mindset to that of early Neanderthal man. “It’s very much fight or flight….stay and fight or leg it because you’re really scared. That’s how I feel with the Springbok front rowers and their scrummaging and their passion for it. I want to test myself against the best in the hottest environment and I’m really excited about it.” It would be entirely understandable if the Springboks felt slightly less energised as they approach their 13th Test inside five months, not including the SA ‘A’ game against the Lions in which several frontline players featured. They have still proved too good, though, for Wales and Scotland and the omission of Lukhanyo Am, Eben Etzebeth, Siya Kolisi and Damian de Allende from World Rugby’s shortlist for player of the year would have revved up all concerned even before the Erasmus sideshow flared once more. Cockerill estimates that more than 80% of South Africa’s lineouts end up being driven, the idea being to sap the minds and bodies of opposing sides at the maul and march them steadily up the field. For Maro Itoje and Tom Curry, both Lions in the summer, the challenge is to stem that momentum without conceding the penalties that are the Boks’ staple diet. The aerial duel will be another pivotal area with no one anticipating any variation in Springbok tactics despite Freddie Steward and Joe Marchant offering unusual expertise in that area. “I can’t see them going away from what they do,” confirmed May. “They will think ‘These guys are good in the air but we are going to prove we are better’. They are going to come straight at us, that’s what I expect.” Game on. Among the downsides of watching rugby at Twickenham, aside from the sardine-can trains and the traffic queues on the A316, can be all those thirsty patrons whose bladders fail to hold out for 80 minutes. A word to the wise: shuffle off mid-game and you risk missing this autumn’s most eventful contest.A 52,000 sell-out crowd at St James’ Park will not, as it turns out, get to see Eddie Howe take charge of his first Newcastle match, as a result of his positive test. Although Brentford have stumbled of late, they do possess Ivan Toney, a striker with a point to prove to the club that released him after deciding Toney was “not good enough”. Shortly afterwards Joelinton arrived on Tyneside for £40m and it will be intriguing in due course to see if Howe can unlock the Brazilian’s talent. More immediately he and his assistants must find a way to extract maximum points from impending home games against not merely Brentford but Norwich and Burnley. Louise Taylor Saturday 3pm Venue St James’ Park Last season n/a Referee Robert Jones This season G3 Y10 R0 3.33 cards/game Odds H 32-19 A 24-13 D 27-11 NEWCASTLE Subs from Darlow, Fernández, Krafth, Schar, Manquillo, Lewis, Longstaff, Almirón, Willock, Gayle Doubtful None Injured Dummett (calf, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y31 R1 Form DLLDLD Leading scorer Wilson 4 BRENTFORD Subs from Cox, Sheppard, Goode, Forss, Thompson, Ghoddos, Valencia, Jeanvier, Onyeka, Fosu, Peart-Harris, Baptiste, Bidstrup, Roerslev, Zamburek, Racic Doubtful Wissa (ankle), Jørgensen (knock), Baptiste (shoulder) Injured Sørensen (knee, Dec), Ajer (hamstring, Jan), Raya (knee, Apr), Dasilva (hip, unknown) Suspended None Discipline Y19 R1 Form DWLLLL Leading scorers Mbeumo, Toney, Wissa 2The Belarusian leader, Alexander Lukashenko, has acknowledged that his troops probably helped Middle Eastern asylum seekers cross into Europe, in the clearest admission yet that he engineered the new migrant crisis on the border with the EU. In an interview with the BBC at his presidential palace in Minsk, he said it was “absolutely possible” that his troops helped migrants across the frontier into Poland. “Maybe someone helped them. I won’t even look into this,” he said. He denied being responsible for the migrant crisis but admitted to letting asylum seekers through Belarus to the EU’s borders “because they’re not coming to my country, they’re going to yours”. Belarusian state media teased the interview on Friday as Lukashenko has sought to showcase his direct contacts with western leaders and media despite his increasing international isolation. “You know perfectly well it’s going to be interesting,” a state media Telegram channel wrote, saying Lukashenko had spoken with a “major western news outlet”. Representatives of the opposition leader Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya criticised the interview as “giving the floor to a dictator”, the broadcaster reported. Lukashenko also gave an interview to CNN in September. In the BBC interview, Lukashenko also admitted that his security services severely beat people who had been imprisoned for protesting against tainted elections last year. “OK, OK, I admit it, I admit it. People were beaten in the Okrestina detention centre. But there were police beaten up too and you didn’t show this,” he said. Human Rights Watch last year said it had spoken to detainees who described “beatings, prolonged stress positions, electric shocks, and, in at least one case, rape, and said they saw other detainees suffer the same or worse abuse. They had serious injuries, including broken bones, cracked teeth, skin wounds, electrical burns, and mild traumatic brain injuries. Some had kidney damage”. EU governments have refused to recognise Lukashenko as the legitimate president of Belarus because of the crackdown on the opposition last year. Earlier this week, he had his first direct contact with an EU leader since the election when he spoke by telephone with Angela Merkel about humanitarian aid for the thousands of asylum seekers trapped at the border. The outdoor migrant camps on the EU border were emptied of people this week as Belarus moved thousands of asylum seekers to a logistics centre near the border. Videos showed that small fights had broken out at the centre, which was reported to be overcrowded. Lukashenko on Friday ordered his ministers to improve security at the centre, his press service said. The Council of Europe commissioner for human rights, Dunja Mijatović, on Friday called for Poland to allow human rights groups and journalists to access the border region to “end human suffering and violations of human rights”. Poland has declared a state of emergency on its borders with Belarus, giving police extraordinary authority to expel refugees without reviewing applications for asylum. • This article was amended on 20 November 2021. In an earlier version, Dunja Mijatović was described as the EU’s human rights commissioner, rather than the Council of Europe’s human rights commissioner.Medical experts regard with suitable caution the apparent cure of a man’s migraine once he adopted a plant-based diet (Man’s severe migraines ‘completely eliminated’ on plant-based diet, 18 November). They point out that he appears to be a one-off. I agree – my migraines disappeared once I got divorced. As my then GP said: “I’m happy for you, but I can hardly go round recommending divorce as a cure.” Angela Barton Bishop’s Stortford, Hertfordshire • One piece of advice missing from the experts in Zoe Williams’ article (Staying power! How to thrive in the great resignation if you don’t want to quit, 18 November) on jobs and work – join a union. Barry Norman Drighlington, West Yorkshire • When my aunt died in 2011, along with a roomful of Engelbert Humperdinck memorabilia and 48 jars of marmalade, I inherited a Harrods limited edition luxury Christmas pudding (Letters, 15 November). Its date is 2008. I am saving it for posterity. Kaye McGann Standlake, Oxfordshire • Not even subtropical East Anglia, but still enough lemons to make lemon curd and, before the marmalade saga begins again, 8lbs of satsuma marmalade, both from our own trees (Letters, 16 November). They will now be brought into the greenhouse for the winter. Irene Jones Broxted, Essex • Thank you, Rebecca Solnit (Ten ways to confront the climate crisis without losing hope, 18 November). Your article came at just the right time to help my 15-year-old granddaughter overcome climate doom and gloom. Jan Jeffries Brewood, Staffordshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Martin Rowson’s insertion of a Morris Traveller into a fossil fuel nightmare scene sparked my interest (Political cartoon, 12 November). Nostalgia is a powerful thing, but it is clearly recognised that it is about the past. The ownership of a classic car of any sort is primarily about past memories, family, holidays and a love of simpler technologies. It is not emblematic of a wish to reintroduce societal inequalities or to endorse a little Englander mentality. Most owners would recognise that the use of a Minor on a high mileage basis is definitely over, and some have already adopted plug-in electric as everyday transport. I am certain that most would support an economy that had repair and viable reuse at the core. Give us a break, Martin! Ian Allen Ely, Cambridgeshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Thank you for your double-page spread celebrating some of the wonderful journalism of David Lacey (Report, 17 November). One day in the late 1960s, while at university in London, I was reading the Daily Telegraph sports section in the university refectory. A fellow student put the Guardian down in front of me, open at one of David’s match reports. He told me to read it and assured me that, having read it, I would only buy the Guardian in future. Fifty-four years later, I’m still buying the Guardian every day. Graham Russell Market Drayton, Shropshire • How very sad to hear the news that the wonderful David Lacey has died. His writing was always the first I would turn to in the sports section. Richard Williams (David Lacey never wasted words – he used them to enrich the reader, 17 November) was spot-on. My favourite was a description of the efforts of Trevor Steven as “Stakhanovite”. I had to look it up, but have used it ever since. Robert Drake Oxford • How sad to hear the news about David Lacey. For many of us, his unmatched football writing was the reason we stuck with the Guardian through thick and thin. His easy style and witty analysis made one turn to him first. He was also impartial and never let his support for Brighton &amp; Hove Albion FC cloud his expertise – a trait lesser football scribes would do well to mimic. Max Bell Thame, Oxfordshire • I was so sad to hear of the death of the greatest football writer. His description of the former Nottingham Forest player Franz Carr as the player “with the Ferrari legs and the Skoda brain” still makes me chuckle. Kevin Burke London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Since 1992, schools’ relationship with Ofsted has shifted from one of suspicion to one of anxiety, fear and now near-paranoia. The government’s injection of £24m to accelerate inspections at a time when schools will have to cope with the long-term effects of Covid-related disruption will only enforce that paranoia (Plan to speed up Ofsted inspections of schools in England sparks fury, 17 November). The chief inspector claims that Ofsted is there, in part, to support schools, but that’s not what it feels like on the ground. The only “support” the cash injection will provide is to reinforce the rigidity of a 30-year-old inspection system badly in need of reform. What alternative universe does she and the education secretary inhabit? Prof Colin Richards Former HM inspector of schools • Having 10 grandchildren aged between three and 14, I have experienced close at hand the effects of lockdown on their development, both educationally and emotionally. One had just started school and two were to start secondary schools. One granddaughter, who attends a special school, had education and care withdrawn during the pandemic, which led me to relocate from Essex to Wales and subsequently move permanently to help care for her and her brother while shielding. It occurs to me that the entire Ofsted team could pitch in and assist with catch-up lessons, deliver mental health initiatives, and support teachers and schools. Possibly while living on a teaching assistant’s wage, the rest put back into the frontline. In doing so, they would learn first-hand the task each community faces. My daughter and I realised the difference that school, care and respite made to our whole family’s wellbeing. Name and address supplied • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Integrated rail plan? It’s more like a dog’s breakfast. When Grant Shapps blew the whistle to send a train from Okehampton to Exeter this week, he waxed lyrical about the reopening of a branch line that had been closed for 49 years, and told those listening to look out for more exciting developments. Leaving aside the fact that the line has been operating on summer weekends thanks to the dedication of volunteers, the 11 miles of replacement track laid by Network Rail appears to be significantly more than the people of Bradford, one of the UK’s largest cities, can expect from the revised plans (‘A betrayal of the north’: Tory MPs frustrated at downgraded rail plan, 18 November). This southerner certainly understands their fury. Les Bright Exeter • While Paul Salveson may be right that many people in the north were not interested in HS2 (Letters, 18 November), he says nothing about HS3, aka Northern Powerhouse Rail. I think Andy Burnham’s anger at that scheme being dropped fairly represents the views of the majority of people in the north of England. People are aware of the difference in investment in transport infrastructure between London and the north. The government had a huge hill to climb in convincing people that “levelling up” was more than a slogan. Dropping HS3 has just demolished any chance of the slogan being seen as reality. Ian K Watson Carlisle • Your correspondent’s claim that HS2 is “hugely unpopular in the north” is nonsense. To start, the north is not one homogeneous blob. There is no mass movement opposed to it, not even where I am in south Manchester, where the tunnels will go beneath our homes. Personally, I welcome the opportunity to travel to Europe quickly, and not depend on flights, and I know many people who share my view. Not that I claim to speak for “the north” thereby. Prof Bill Cooke Manchester • The prime minister said that his latest U-turn on “levelling up” was to ensure that the people in the north got the same train service as we do in the south-east. God help our compatriots in the north, then. Having lived and worked in France, Germany, Spain and Switzerland, I can assure you that Britain’s south-eastern trains are the dirtiest, most crowded and most unreliable. We’re the world leaders in bad trains. “We’ve seen nothing like it this century,” Boris Johnson said. Well, at least he got that right. Phil Davison London • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Almost £2bn was wiped off the value of UK airlines and travel-related companies on Friday as Austria’s decision to order a national lockdown stoked fears of the introduction of new pandemic restrictions across Europe. Austria will go into its third national lockdown from Monday, which could last until 12 December, in an attempt to arrest a surge in coronavirus cases and rising deaths. The potential for restrictive measures to be introduced in other European countries – there is a similar Covid resurgence in Germany – led to a sharp sell off UK-listed companies in the travel sector. IAG, the owner of British Airways, fell 3.8%, wiping almost £300m off the company’s market capitalisation. IAG, which also owns the airline Iberia, fell to a two-month low as investors washed out the gains seen when transatlantic travel to the US resumed last week. The biggest fallers on the FTSE 100 included Rolls-Royce, down almost 4%, with the Premier Inn owner, Whitbread, which also operates in Germany, and Intercontinental Hotels group also dropping. The blue-chip index fell to its lowest level in three weeks, closing down 32 points at 7223. “Surging case numbers [in Austria] have far surpassed last year’s peak,” said Craig Erlam, a senior market analyst at the trading company Oanda. “While fatalities remain well below the peak, they are accelerating and the government is clearly keen to arrest it before the situation potentially becomes much worse. With Germany seeing a similar trend, the question now becomes whether the region’s largest economy will follow the same path.” Businesses affected by negative investor sentiment on Friday also included the airlines easyJet, Ryanair, Lufthansa and Wizz Air, as well as the package holiday firm Tui and cruise operator Carnival. Shares in SSP, which runs the Caffè Ritazza and Upper Crust chains at transport hubs, and Restaurant Group, which runs chains including Wagamama and Frankie &amp; Benny’s, also took a hit. National Express and WH Smith, which operates in airports and train stations, also suffered share price falls. Jens Spahn, Germany’s health minister, said on Friday the country was “facing a national emergency” and did not rule out a similar national lockdown. “We’re in a situation where we can’t rule anything out,” he said. On Thursday, the head of Germany’s disease control agency said the country was heading for a “very bad Christmas” if drastic measures were not taken to curb the spread of the coronavirus. Erlam said: “The situation is not quite so severe in other countries like France, Italy and Spain but that could change in the coming weeks, as we saw around the same time last year. High vaccination rates mean the link between case numbers and fatalities is far lower but the former is rising at a remarkable rate, which is clearly making it very hard to ignore.” Oil also fell heavily on worries that winter demand for energy would be hit by new lockdowns. Brent crude tumbled over 3.5% to $78.31 a barrel, the lowest since 1st October and nearly 10% below last month’s three-year highs. Some economists warned that the US could be vulnerable to a new wave of infections this winter. Less than 60% of the nation is vaccinated, lower than some European nations. “The colder weather has already triggered a big resurgence in infection rates in Europe and, with US vaccination rates generally lower, there is a risk of a seasonal surge in the midwest and north-east,” said Paul Ashworth, chief North America economist at Capital Economics. Energy stocks, banks and industrial stocks fell on Wall Street, while a rally into tech companies – who are less vulnerable to lockdowns – pushed the Nasdaq Composite to a new record high.The Bank of England’s chief economist has warned that the UK’s buoyant labour market and rapidly rising inflation is pushing the central bank closer to raising rates at its next meeting in December. Huw Pill said the “burden of proof” was now in favour of increasing the cost of borrowing, though he said a rate rise would not be a quick fix that could bring down inflation in the short term. Pill, who joined the Bank in the autumn from the investment bank Goldman Sachs, added that there were still many uncertain trends in the economy and he was prepared to wait for the picture to clear before making a decision. Speaking at an economics conference in Bristol, Pill also hinted he could vote for a larger increase than financial markets expected, saying he was open to other options. “That reflects a genuine uncertainty at a personal level; that I will want to see how I will assess the situation,” he said, adding that rates could go up by another amount. While it would be convenient to raise rates to a multiple of 0.25%, there was no urgency to do so if a different scale of tightening proved appropriate, he added. Pill said it had been a “pretty uncomfortable time” to join the BoE in September, when inflation was already well above its 2% target and forecast to reach about 5% next year. “There’s no quick fix, and that lack of a quick fix means some patience will be required,” Pill told the conference hosted by the Economics Observatory and the Festival of Economics. Investors expect the BoE to raise rates from 0.1% to 0.25% at its next meeting on 16 December. At a meeting earlier this month the nine-strong monetary policy committee disappointed markets by leaving rates on hold, despite comments by the Bank governor, Andrew Bailey, that it was poised to take “action” to calm inflation. Since then, inflation has risen to a 10-year high of 4.2% with jobless data showing unemployment actually falling after the end of the furlough scheme. Pill is understood to be among a majority of BoE policymakers who fear most workers will be emboldened to demand inflation-busting pay rises to compensate for higher prices, triggering a wage-price spiral. He said concerns that the labour market would weaken and unemployment rise had proved unfounded. “The burden of proof is perhaps a little bit in the other direction … so now I’m looking perhaps for reasons not to hike rates,” he said.The international break seems to have cooled the heat on Ole Gunnar Solskjær a little but the temperature dial would be cranked right back up if Manchester United were to squander any more points at Vicarage Road. United’s form may be suspect – together with their defence and midfield – but they did sweep aside Tottenham in their last away game and a Watford side that have failed to score in four of their past five games would appear even less of a threat than Spurs were during the dying embers of Nuno Espírito Santo’s ill-fated reign. Stephen Hollis Saturday 3pm Venue Vicarage Road Last season n/a Referee Jon Moss This season G7 Y13 R1 2 cards/game Odds H 29-5 A 1-2 D 4-1 WATFORD Subs from Elliot, Fletcher, Gosling, Louza, Bachmann, Tufan, Hernández, Sierralta, Troost-Ekong, Ngakia, Masina Doubtful Tufan (leg) Injured Sierralta (hamstring, Dec), Etebo (quadriceps, Mar), Kabasele (hamstring, unknown), Sema (knee, unknown), Baah (ankle, unknown) Suspended Kucka (one match) Discipline Y24 R1 Form DLLWLL Leading scorer Sarr 4 MANCHESTER UNITED Subs from Heaton, Henderson, Shoretire, Matic, Mata, Hannibal, Van de Beek, Dalot, Mengi, Pereira, Jones, Lingard, Telles, Elanga, Martial, Cavani, Sancho, Bailly Doubtful McTominay (virus), Cavani (knock), Shaw (head), Rashford (match fitness) Injured Varane (thigh, Dec) Suspended Pogba (last of three) Discipline Y25 R1 Form LDLLWL Leading scorers Fernandes, Greenwood, Ronaldo 4David Runciman’s call to lower the age of enfranchisement to six (Votes for children! Why we should lower the voting age to six, 16 November) repeated many of the arguments made by supporters of votes at 16. He overlooked one significant difference, though. My research on voting age reform over the past decade reveals that while there is a majority of support for lowering the voting age to 16 among 16- to 17-year-olds and over-18s across the UK, there is no evidence of support among children and young people to reduce the franchise age below this age. Indeed, many express concerns that the right to vote would be an unwelcome added responsibility during their transitions to adulthood. Furthermore, young people who have been given the right to vote at 16 in Scotland and Wales regularly say that they do not receive adequate opportunities to learn about how and why they should vote. How a six-year-old would acquire such knowledge and skills is an important omission in Prof Runciman’s thesis. Dr Andrew Mycock University of Huddersfield • I am not an expert in child psychology, only of educational ways to overcome the damage that failure in childhood can do to the confidence of future adults. However, being a grandmother of two with four great-grandchildren, I have realised the incredible range of abilities and interests that children can develop at an early age – not just in music, mathematics and languages, which has long been known, but in all sorts of technical and cultural activities. But these developments do not come at a set age. Child psychologists stress the importance of child-centred play in the early years and criticise overstructured lessons or activities. Let children who develop an interest in politics follow that interest, but it shouldn’t become part of the curriculum for primary aged children, which it would need to become if they all had a right to vote. Teenagers don’t all take the same subjects, and at that age those interested in politics could be invited to vote, but it shouldn’t be a duty until at least 18. The challenge for politicians is to convince young people that it is worth bothering. Margaret Morris Haringey, London • David Runciman’s argument for letting six-year-olds have the vote is certainly thought-provoking, and I suspect it is something that can too easily be dismissed as a political impossibility. After all, we have a manchild running the country, and he and the rest of his kindergarten are busily moving towards rigging the system so they will be voted in again by an older electorate. But there is certainly an argument for allowing 10- or 12-year-olds to vote. Why? Because in England and Wales, 10-year-olds are held to be criminally responsible. In Scotland, the bar has been raised from eight to 12. When children of this age come into contact with the police and the courts, they are quite rightly dealt with differently from adults. But they are reckoned to be capable of understanding the seriousness of their offending. It is a logical step to extend that mindset to the ability to vote, and to understand the seriousness of their actions in doing so. I accept that 10 is too low an age for criminal responsibility. Elsewhere in Europe, most countries have a minimum age of criminal responsibility between 14 and 16. So for me, voting at age 16 is an achievable target, and I look forward to seeing some future government of grownups accepting this – and raising the age of criminal responsibility to suit the new reality. David Edwards Hulme Stockport, Greater Manchester • David Runciman makes an excellent case for extending the franchise to children and young people. The implications of his argument are widespread. For example, the democratisation of schooling would help to shift the narrative from parental choice to meaningful choice for children and young people. Nick Frost Denby Dale, West Yorkshire • Have an opinion on anything you’ve read in the Guardian today? Please email us your letter and it will be considered for publication.Kamala Harris on Friday morning became the first woman to wield presidential power in the US – temporarily, when Joe Biden had a colonoscopy under anesthetic. In a statement, the White House press secretary, Jen Psaki, said: “This morning, the president will travel to Walter Reed Medical Center for a routine physical. While he is there, the president will undergo a routine colonoscopy. “… The vice-president will work from her office in the West Wing during this time.” Biden left the White House before 9am. The White House said it would share results of his physical. Just after noon, Psaki said Biden had resumed power. The president “spoke with [Harris] and [Chief of staff Ron Klain] at approximately 11.35am”, Psaki tweeted, adding that Biden was “in good spirits and at that time resumed his duties. “He will remain at Walter Reed as he completes the rest of his routine physical.” Such temporary transfers of power have been made before. As Psaki pointed out, in 2002 and 2007, Vice-President Dick Cheney assumed the role of temporary president when George Bush had colonoscopies. Unsurprisingly, Donald Trump reportedly bucked accepted practice. According to his former press secretary Stephanie Grisham, the 45th president refused anesthetic when he had what was in all likelihood a colonoscopy – Grisham described a “very common procedure” similar to that which Bush had – in November 2019. Trump, Grisham wrote, refused anesthetic because he did not want his vice-president, Mike Pence, to be even temporarily in charge. She also said Trump “did not want to be the butt of a joke”. The health of all presidents is closely watched. Trump’s visit to Walter Reed – and its cack-handed cover-up – prompted reports he had suffered a heart attack. Past 70 when he was sworn in, Trump was the oldest president elected for a first time until Biden surpassed him. Biden will turn 79 later this month. After his last publicised physical, in December 2019, doctors pronounced him “healthy, vigorous” and “fit to successfully execute the duties of the presidency”. He has, however, survived two brain aneurysms, the second in 1988 when he was 45. Should he become incapacitated for longer than required for a regular procedure, the 25th amendment to the US constitution provides for his replacement by Harris. The amendment, which also dictates the means by which temporary power is passed, has never been invoked in full. In a book published this week, the journalist Jonathan Karl reported that senior cabinet officials discussed it in the wake of the Capitol attack, over concerns about Trump’s mental health. Harris is the first Black, Asian woman to be vice-president, but her short spell in power on Friday came amid reports she is struggling and often at odds with Biden. The White House has defended her. On Thursday, Psaki told Politico there was “no question” that racism and sexism were part of “attacks” against the VP. On Thursday night, it was reported that Harris’s communications director, Ashley Etienne, will leave her role in December. Amid intense speculation about what Etienne’s departure might mean, James Clyburn of South Carolina, the House whip and a close Biden adviser, told CNN: “People leave jobs all the time. “I’ve been a part of transitions myself at the state level. And I know that within the first several months – sometimes it takes a year – that people may find out, ‘This is not exactly for me.’ So these things tend to happen.” Biden was due to carry out a key duty on Friday afternoon: pardoning the White House Thanksgiving turkey.Bavaria is to introduce sweeping measures to curb the spread of coronavirus, including cancelling all Christmas markets and placing limits on household mixing, its leader, Markus Söder, has announced. Germany’s largest state by land mass, with more than 13 million inhabitants, has one of the lowest vaccination rates in Germany and one of the highest hospitalisation rates. “The situation is overwhelming and just keeps escalating,” Söder said. The cancellation of Christmas markets, which were due to open next week, will be a crushing blow for the public as well as vendors, for the second year in a row. The markets are a highlight of the German calendar and are of huge economic and social importance, attracting significant numbers of visitors from home and abroad. In other measures, the number of unvaccinated people who can meet in a private capacity will be reduced to a maximum of five people from two households, and nightlife venues will close. The rules are due to come into place next Wednesday and to last until 15 December. Schools are to stay open, Söder said, and shops as well, although only one customer per 10 sq metres of shop space will be allowed. Hairdressers, driving schools and music schools will be restricted to those who can prove they are vaccinated (geimpft) or recovered (genesen) from Covid-19 – the so-called 2G rule. Restaurants, while operating on the same basis, will now have to close at 10pm. At sporting and cultural events, the “2G+ rule” will apply, with people having to prove vaccination or recovery and produce a negative test certificate; Bavaria’s announcement noted that for 2G+ a rapid test is sufficient. Söder said: “Above all the unvaccinated will be affected. It is a real risk to be unvaccinated.” He said the measures would be “massively controlled”. Bavaria’s move came as neighbouring Austria announced it was to go into a nationwide lockdown from Monday and will introduce a national vaccine mandate in 2022. Echoing the words of the Austrian chancellor, Alexander Schallenberg, Söder said: “I believe we will not be able to escape a vaccine mandate for everyone. Otherwise, we will get caught in a continuous loop.” Earlier, Jens Spahn, the acting health minister, said he could not rule out a general lockdown across Germany, but added he was sceptical about a general vaccine mandate, “because I worry that it would tear this country apart”. Bavaria’s decision followed a warning earlier in the day from Lothar Wieler, the head of Germany’s disease control agency, the Robert Koch Institute (RKI), who said the country was in a “state of national emergency”. The RKI reported more than 52,000 new Covid cases on Friday, after 10 days in which the level of the virus continuously reached record levels not seen during the pandemic so far with daily deaths of between 200 and 300 for days. The national proportion of people who have been fully jabbed was just under 68% on Friday, well below the 90% experts say is needed to tackle the more virulent Delta variant. A campaign to encourage booster shots has been virtually non-existent with just 4m having been administered so far. Meanwhile, 14% of intensive care beds are occupied with coronavirus patients and increasing numbers of hospitals are having to move patients elsewhere. Wieler recommended the cancellation of large-scale gatherings, the closure of what he called “hotspots” such as “badly ventilated clubs and bars” and the reduction of social contacts. “We must put on the emergency brakes right now,” he said, comparing the virus to a “tanker heading towards a harbour wall, which if we all make an effort, might perhaps only ram the wall from the side, not smash into it full on”. Christian Drosten, the head virologist at Berlin’s Charité hospital and an expert on coronaviruses, said the virus had yet to reach the “endemic phase” in Germany as it was soon expected to do in the UK. In an interview in Die Zeit, he said: “You can see in the UK, which has round about the same vaccine level as us, and unfortunately twice as many deaths per head of population, that it is now in a ‘post-infestation’ stage, which has been ongoing since the late summer. Natural infections there are creating community protection. We’re not there yet in Germany, because there are too few people who have recovered [from the virus] and the elderly are not sufficiently vaccinated. If we let the virus spread uncontrollably it would lead to another 100,000 deaths if we don’t first close the vaccine gaps.” • This article was amended on 23 November 2021 to distinguish between locations due to operate under the 2G rule, including restaurants, and those such as sports events where a Covid test is also required (“2G+”). The new rule limiting private contacts to a maximum of five people from two households is for unvaccinated people, rather than everybody.And finally, the FTSE 100 has ended the day down 32 points or 0.45% at 7223. That’s its lowest close in around a month, as concerns over the lockdown in Austria weighed on travel and hospitality stocks. Oil stocks were also pulled lower, tracking the fall in the price of crude today. There were also losses across Europe, with Austria’s ATX tumbling by 3%, Spain’s IBEX down 1.7% and Germany’s DAX off 0.4%. That’s all for today. Goodnight, and have a good weekend. GW Oil continues to slide, with Brent crude at its lowest since 1st October on concerns that pandemic restrictions will hit demand for energy: Here’s a good round-up of the situation: The rally into tech stocks, the ‘winners’ of the pandemic economy, has pushed the Nasdaq Composite to a new record high. Jim Reid, research strategist at Deutsche Bank, also worries that the US could be vulnerable to a new wave of Covid-19 infections. His Chart of the Day shows daily cases per million for a selection of large countries and regions plus interesting other countries, especially those in eastern Europe that seem to be going through an aggressive wave. Reid explains: For most of the countries near the top, the spike in cases has occurred fairly rapidly over the last couple of weeks. The exception is the UK where cases have been high and steady since the summer as high vaccination rates plus high infection rates have seemingly provided some degree of herd immunity. It’s important to bear in mind that testing rates vary considerably (the UK does the most per person in the G7) and that can affect the relative rankings, but the overall trend higher is clear. The news is hitting European markets hard this morning as fears mount that the virus and restrictions will spread across the continent again. However the curveball might be the US. DB’s Robin Winkler has been pointing out that the vaccination rate in Austria (64%) is somewhat lower than the likes of Spain (79%), Italy (74%), France (69%), the UK (69%) and Germany (68%) but it is still higher than the US (58%). So although all the headlines are in Europe at the moment, will the US be more vulnerable than many European countries over the course of the full winter? Recent history suggests the US have a higher bar for economic restrictions related to covid but it also has a lower vaccination rate than their European peers. The jump in European Covid-19 infections is causing concerns that America could see a new wave too this winter. Paul Ashworth, chief North America economist at Capital Economics, says the possibility of another winter wave of coronavirus infections is a significant downside risk to activity over the next few months. He told clients: We wouldn’t expect a winter COVID wave to trigger the types of restrictions on activity now being implemented in countries like Germany and Austria, particularly not when new therapeutics should further reduce the mortality rate. But we would nevertheless expect such a wave to weigh on consumer spending on high-contact and travel services. Workplace outbreaks could also compound supply chain problems. Our baseline GDP forecasts don’t explicitly allow for such a wave, but it is one of the key reasons why we are happy to be below consensus on the near-term growth outlook and why we doubt that the Fed will accelerate the pace of its QE taper in the next few months, opening the door to an earlier interest rate hike next year. The New York stock market has opened rather gingerly, as the rise in Covid-19 cases in Europe weighs on investors’ minds. The Dow Jones industrial average has fallen by 218 points, or 0.6%, to 35,652 points in early trading, as anxiety over the pandemic hits banks, energy stocks and airlines. Chemicals company Dow Inc is the top faller on the DJIA, down 3.1%, with Goldman Sachs down 2.1%, oil major Chevron losing 2%, and Boeing and American Express both dropping 1.9%. Tech stocks are faring better, though, with the Nasdaq Composite up 0.3% or 54 points at 16,048 points. Fiona Cincotta, Senior Financial Markets Analyst at City Index, explains: Cyclicals are trading under pressure amid a rotation back into tech as COVID lockdown concerns rise. Austria has re-imposed full lockdown restrictions as COVIDA cases jump. Germany also recorded a record number of cases. With Europe the new epicentre for COVID could transatlantic travel see restrictions again before its really even taken off? The travel sector is likely to trade under pressure. Tumbling oil prices will also keep oil giants in the red. On Austria’s lockdown, Manuela Finger, partner at the Munich office of law firm, Gowling WLG, says: “While a disappointing move for businesses and retailers especially at time when pre-Christmas footfall and sales are key, the Austrian government has clearly broadly considered the varied needs at play and come up with a solution that causes minimal business impact while protecting the health prospects of the nation.” On the wires.... Nationwide Building Society has said there could be a “cooling” of the UK’s red-hot housing market because of rising inflation and interest rates. Robert Gardner, the chief economist at the UK’s second-largest mortgage lender, said the housing market is currently “remarkably robust” despite the end of incentives such as the government’s stamp duty holiday at the end of September. However, he said that in the coming months a lot would depend on the performance of the wider economy. “There are a few things that could moderate [housing demand] a bit in the coming quarters. For example, there are not many homes on the market at the moment. That is likely to hold back activity. “If you look at rising inflation squeezing household budgets a little and if interest rates rise, then that is likely to exert a cooling influence as well. But if the recovery holds up, then activity is likely to remain pretty solid.” More here: Back in the City, Ocado is defying the selloff with a 9% jump in its share price, to a two-month high. It’s lifted by speculation that Marks &amp; Spencer could acquire the remaining 50% of its retail joint venture with Ocado. Interactive Investor’s Victoria Scholar explains: Deutsche Bank raised its price target on M&amp;S from 195p to 265p and suggested that it could be positioning itself to complete the deal. The note said, “cash flow is no longer being squandered on an unsustainable dividend but saved to recover the investment grade credit rating that may be required to buy out Ocado.” In Marks &amp; Spencer’s latest results, Ocado customer orders grew by 19% but revenue fell because of tough comparables last year during lockdown. The 50% Ocado acquisition in 2019 was perfectly timed ahead of the pandemic and has provided M&amp;S with access to new customers concentrated in different geographies. The purchase has also contributed towards M&amp;S’ goal to encourage more family sized shops rather than top-up or convenience baskets. Ocado’s share price has been struggling this year with the stock down by around a third since the January peak. Mark Dowding, CIO at BlueBay Asset Management, argues that lockdowns will not derail the trajectory towards economic recovery, and that the current wave of Covid-19 is less scary than previous ones. Vaccination offers the answer, not lockdown restrictions, Dowding writes in his latest weekly market commentary. If anything, an acceleration in infections leads to an uptake in jabs and therefore much of this dynamic should be self-correcting, he says: Covid infections accelerated during the past week across Europe, prompting some government moves to impose renewed restrictions on mobility and working from home. However, we doubt these steps will be far-reaching and think it unlikely that a trajectory towards economic recovery will be derailed in the weeks ahead. The experience in the UK over the past couple of months has seen Covid cases rise materially, only then to plateau with hospitalisation and death rates far below prior waves of infection. Moreover, in the UK, it can be observed that the general attitude to mask wearing has been far less compliant than on the continent, with those of us using public transport observing less than half of users wearing face coverings, even during busy rush hour periods. In this way, the recent acceleration of Covid cases in the EU may appear concerning when viewed on a standalone basis, but it is much less of a worry seen in this context. Nervous investors are also diving into government bonds, pushing down the yield (or interest rate) on benchmark US Treasuries. The euro has now hit a fresh 16-month low, down 1% today at $1.125 for the first time since July 2020. Fears that lockdowns will be imposed in other European countries are hitting stocks and oil today, says Fawad Razaqzada, analyst at ThinkMarkets. Coronavirus has made an unwelcome return in the last few weeks, with cases rising to record levels in countries such as Germany and Austria despite the ongoing vaccination efforts. In response, the Austrian government has reimposed a full lockdown and has made vaccination mandatory. Meanwhile, the German health minister Spahn has also refused to rule out a return to lockdown in Germany. So, it is not necessarily about Austria, but concerns that similar lockdown measures might be introduced to other parts of Europe is what has weighed on sentiment today. There is now a risk for at least a short-term correction as investors wake up to the risks facing the Eurozone economy, after the major stock indices hit repeated all-time highs in recent weeks. Helge Pedersen, group chief economist at Nordea bank, also fears Europe could see more restrictions shortly, given the infection rates in Central Eastern countries. Stocks have fallen sharply in Vienna, after Austria’s national lockdown was announced. The Austrian Traded Index, or ATX, has tumbled 2.7% to a three-week low. Banks, energy and industrial stocks are worst hit. The euro has dropped close to a 16-month low, by Austria’s lockdown and the prospect that the European Central Bank will resist pressure to tighten monetary policy soon. The single currency is down three-quarters of a cent at $1.129, extending its losses against rival currencies. Fears of wider lockdowns are hitting the euro. Stephane Ekolo, global equity strategist at brokerage Tradition, says (via Reuters): “One thing is certain, if the whole of Europe had to go under lockdown once more, and depending on how long that would last, we would need to rethink our growth scenarios” Oil, a good gauge of growth prospects, has fallen too. Brent crude is down nearly 3%, or $2.40 per barrel, to below $79 per barrel (updated). Hospitality and travel company shares have fallen as Austria announces a new national lockdown will come in next week. Airline group IAG, which owns British Airways, have fallen 4% to a two-month low in London, as worries about European restrictions to fight the pandemic intensify. Rolls-Royce, which makes and services jet engines, is down 3.5%, with catering group Compass off 2.5%. Hotel operators Whitbread and InterContinental are both down around 2.5% too. On the smaller FTSE 250 index, SSP Group (which runs the Ritazza and Upper Crust outlets at travel hubs) are down 4%, with budget airline easyJet off 4.2% and package holiday firm TUI down 3.7%. Pub and restaurant stocks are also lower. Austria’s full lockdown, which starts on Monday, was announced just days after it declared a lockdown on unvaccinated citizens. My colleague Philip Oltermann explains: Austria will now go into its third nationwide lockdown for at least ten days from Monday, and make vaccinations mandatory across society from February next year. The new national lockdown is set to last until 12 December but could be reevaluated after ten days if the pandemic situation has improved. Schools are to stay open but children can choose to go into remote learning mode without a note from a doctor. Chancellor Alexander Schallenberg, who has only been in office for a month, said tightening vaccine pass controls and testing requirements has started to make a difference, but “hasn’t convinced enough” people to get vaccinated. Lockdown rules would end for those vaccinated from 12 December but would stay in place for those who have decline to take the jab Yesterday, the head of Germany’s disease control agency has said the country is heading for a “very bad Christmas season” if drastic measures are not taken to dampen the spread of coronavirus. Craig Erlam, senior market analyst at OANDA, says the new lockdown in Austria and the possibility of similar action in Germany wiped out earlier gains on the markets. The euro is also falling at the end of the week following the announcement that Austria will begin a 20-day full Covid-19 lockdown from Monday in response to surging case numbers which have far surpassed last year’s peak. While fatalities remains well below the peak, they are accelerating and the government is clearly keen to arrest it before the situation potentially becomes much worse. With Germany seeing a similar trend, the question now becomes whether the regions largest economy will follow the same path. Its Health Minister, Jens Spahn, today suggested nothing can be ruled out and that they are in a national emergency. The situation is not quite so severe in other countries like France, Italy and Spain but that could change in the coming weeks, as we saw around the same time last year. High vaccination rates mean the link between case numbers and fatalities is far lower but the former is rising at a remarkable rate which is clearly making it very hard to ignore. Spain’s IBEX is down around 1.3%, while Italy’s FTSE MIB has lost 0.7%, with smaller losses in France (-0.25%) and the UK (-0.15%), while Germany’s DAX is flat. Ryanair is pressing ahead with plans to delist from the London Stock Exchange because of foreign ownership and control rules that apply because of Brexit. The low-cost airline, which indicated earlier this month that it intended to become solely listed in Dublin, said that its last day of trading on the London Stock Exchange would be 17 December. Retail sales in Great Britain rose for the first time in six months in October as consumers started their Christmas shopping earlier than usual to avoid missing out if there was a shortage of goods. The total volume of goods bought rose by 0.8% last month, according to the Office for National Statistics, compared with flat sales in September, driven by a rise in spending on toys and clothes. Economists had forecast a smaller rise in sales of 0.5%. Retailers reported that early Christmas trading had boosted clothing store sales to within only 0.5% of pre-pandemic levels, while secondhand stores, toy shops and sports equipment stores also benefited from a scramble to avoid disappointment amid the global supply chain disruption. The rise in October followed five months of no growth in the longest spending slump since 1996 after the easing of coronavirus restrictions this summer. Food store sales volumes fell by 0.3% on the month, although they remain 3.4% above pre-pandemic levels. With the return of more people to town and city centres, online sales as a proportion of overall retail sales fell to 27.3%, the lowest level since the start of the pandemic. However, it remains significantly higher than pre-Covid, suggesting a permanent shift to higher levels of internet shopping after the pandemic. Here’s the full story, which also covers today’s UK government borrowing figures: The jump in retail sales last month has pushed the pound back towards 21-month highs against the euro. Sterling is approaching €1.19, the level it breached on Wednesday after UK inflation jumped even faster than expected. Victoria Scholar, head of investment at interactive investor, has the details: UK retail sales gained 0.8% in October, the first monthly gain in six as many consumers brought forward their Christmas shopping amid concerns about shortages and excitement after a lost family Christmas last year. Non-food items such as toys, sports equipment and clothing outperformed while fuel and food fell, although food is back above pre-pandemic levels. Consumers enjoyed getting back into physical stores in October with online sales accounting for the smallest proportion of overall sales since the height of the pandemic. However online shopping is still 20% higher than it was before covid, signalling a permanent change in preferences. The grocery tech business Ocado is trading sharply higher, flourishing at the top of the FTSE 100 as retail stocks catch a bid. Sainsburys and Next are also towards the top of the basket. The upbeat data provided a lift to the pound, which is inching closer once again to 21-month lows against the euro. EUR/GBP is a whisper away from breaking key support at £0.84, with a push below potentially paving the way for further sterling strength. The pound has gained nearly 3% since the end of September with advances accelerating this month. However, both the euro and the pound have dropped against the US dollar this morning. The greenback has strengthened as investors wonder how the Federal Reserve will react to US inflation hitting 30-year highs. The chief executives of Germany’s two top banks, Deutsche Bank and Commerzbank, warned about inflation on Friday, while the chairman of BNP Paribas said the real issue is growth, reports Reuters: The bankers were speaking at a conference in Frankfurt as investors closely watch the European Central Bank for its reaction to accelerating inflation. Deutsche Bank CEO Christian Sewing said inflation will “persist for longer” and Commerzbank CEO Manfred Knof said “we believe inflation is going to stay. Sewing also said a reaction from the ECB was needed earlier than ECB President Christine Lagarde had just suggested [see our earlier post]. But BNP Paribas Chairman Jean Lemierre said slightly higher inflation “would not be bad” and that there should not be an “endless discussion” about inflation. “The real question today is not inflation but growth,” he said. Inflationary pressures are continuing to mount in Europe’s largest economy, as gas prices soar and supply chain woes hurt manufacturers. German producer prices rose 18.4% on the year in October, the strongest increase since 1951, mainly due to a surge in energy costs. During October alone, prices rose 3.8% compared with September. Energy prices were up 48.2% compared to October 2020 and rose 12.1% on the month, the Federal Statistics Office said. Natural gas prices were 81.4% up year-on-year, while electricity was nearly 50% higher. Stripping out energy prices, the producer price index rose 9.2% on the year -- with metals prices up 37.8%, and sawn timber surging 91.8% compared with October 2020. Food prices also rose. Prices of crude vegetable oils were up 48.3%, butter prices rose by 18.8%, beef prices by 14.2%. Prices of bread, fresh pastry goods and cakes increased by 3.7%. By contrast, pork prices were down 5.1%. Producer prices are regarded as a leading indicator for inflation, as they show how much firms are charging for finished goods, or parts and materials used in other products. Neil Wilson of Markets.com warns that inflation looks ‘sticky’, as the pandemic continues. I’m sure that fresh lockdowns in Germany (only for the unvaccinated) will only add to the kind of pressures that businesses are reporting, so inflation remains sticky Over in Frankfurt, European Central Bank President Christine Lagarde has reiterated that it would be a mistake to tighten monetary policy now, despite inflation hitting 4.1% last month. She told the 31st Frankfurt European Banking Congress that the factors driving inflation to double the ECB’s target, such as supply chain problems side and energy prices, are likely to fade in the medium term. They will also probably slow the pace of the recovery in the near term, meaning the ECB should continue nurturing growth, by not withdrawing policy support too soon. Lagarde says: When inflation pressure is expected to fade – as is the case today – it does not make sense to react by tightening policy. The tightening would not affect the economy until after the shock has already passed. She added: Tightening policy prematurely would only make this squeeze on household incomes worse. At the same time, it would not address the root causes of inflation, because energy prices are set globally and supply bottlenecks cannot be remedied by the ECB’s monetary policy. The rebound in retail sales in October adds to the evidence that activity held up well in October. It will also raise expectations that the Bank of England will hike interest rates from 0.10% to 0.25% in December, says Adam Hoyes, assistant economist at Capital Economics. He explains: The retail sales data tally with the uptick in GfK consumer confidence overnight, and are another sign that the economy has held up fairly well at the start of Q4. What’s more, it doesn’t seem as though the increase in retail spending came at the expense of non-retail spending. Card payments data show that spending on socialising reached its highest level since the onset of the pandemic in October. UK public borrowing fell less than expected in October, as inflation drove up the cost of interest payments on the national debt. Public sector net borrowing was estimated to have been £18.8bn last month, just £200m less than a year ago, data from the Office for National Statistics showed on Friday. This was much higher than the £13.8bn forecast by economists polled by Reuters. Interest payments on central government debt tripled year-on-year to hit £5.6bn in October 2021, £3.8bn more than in October 2020, due to the jump in RPI inflation which sets the repayments on some gilts. It leaves the UK’s national debt at its highest level since the early 1960s, as a share of the economy [so growing GDP will bring this ratio down]. Although retail sales overall are above pre-pandemic levels, it remains a mixed picture, says ONS chief economist Grant Fitzner. Samuel Tombs of Pantheon also suspects that Christmas shortage fears pushed up spending in October.... Worries about shortages this Christmas may have spurred people into shopping early. Oliver Vernon-Harcourt, head of retail at Deloitte, explains: “Concerns around stock shortages have encouraged early preparations for the festive period, though purchases so far indicate a mixed bag of goods. In a sign of normalisation, food categories fell -0.3% month-on-month, despite consumers stocking up on Halloween treats and other foodstuffs for bonfire and Diwali celebrations. “However, non-food sales were up month-on-month by 4.2%. With larger Christmas gatherings expected as consumers intend to make up for 2020’s lost celebrations, we could see non-food sales accelerate further in the coming weeks, as consumers look for toys, partywear, and other seasonal goods. Clothing alone saw an increase of 6.2% in volume compared to the previous month, edging closer to pre-pandemic levels. Spending on Halloween also boosted spending in the shops last month, reports Helen Dickinson, chief executive of the British Retail Consortium: “Retailers will be relieved by the improvement in sales as they enter the final straight in the run up to Christmas. Footfall growth on UK streets is the highest among major EU economies, and this is clearly translating into consumer spend. Meanwhile online sales remain well above pre-pandemic levels as retailers ramp up their delivery and click-and-collect services. There were big improvements in clothing and footwear sales, including formalwear, as social calendars filled up and the public became increasingly confident about going out. Furthermore, with Halloween heavily curtailed by the pandemic last year, October showed chocolates and children’s costumes selling a treat as families made the most of the occasion. But... supply chain problems are still spooking the sector, and the cost of living squeeze is also hurting families. Dickinson says: “While retailers are putting in a gargantuan effort to ensure that essential food and gifts are ready for Christmas, they continue to be dogged by ongoing challenges supply chain problems. Labour shortages throughout the supply chains – from farms to distribution – are pushing up costs and creating some gaps on the shelves. Nonetheless, retailers are prioritising Christmas essentials, and many have laid out their festive offerings a little earlier to ensure everyone has time to buy treats and decorations before the big day. Retailers are hopeful that demand will continue right through the golden quarter, however, challenges remain, with higher prices looming and many households facing rising energy bills.” At 27.3%, online retail’s share of spending has fell to its lowest since the start of the pandemic. But it’s still much higher than in February 2020, when online shopping made up 19.7% of the pie, showing the structural changes in the sector. Jessica Moulton, senior partner and leader of the Retail and Consumer Packaged Goods Practice at McKinsey &amp; Company, says: “There appears to be some early Christmas buying compared to previous years, probably spurred by concerns about item availability. And a desire not to miss out on the festive season. “Notably, the split between online and physical shopping seems stable, with online 8 percent points higher than before the crisis. Consumers are taking advantage of all the improvements retailers made to their online offers during covid - but they still prefer stores for 7 out of 10 purchases.” And here’s Greg Wright, Yorkshire Post deputy business editor: The 0.8% jump in retail sales across Great Britain last month is better than economists expected... ..after a run of falling sales since April’s reopening boost: While Christmas shopping picked up, spending on fuel fell last month after the petrol crisis of late September. Automotive fuel sales hit their lowest level since April, down 6.4% in October, after panic buying left people with full tanks. Retail sales across Great Britain have risen for the first time in six months, lifted by an early Christmas spending boost on toys and clothes. Figures just released by the Office for National Statistics show that retail sales volumes rose by 0.8% in October, and were 5.8% higher than their pre-pandemic February 2020 levels. It was due to a 4.2% surge in spending at department stores, clothing outlets, and second-hand shops such as auction houses and charity shops. The ONS says: Clothing stores reported an increase of 6.2% over the month with feedback from some retailers suggesting that early Christmas trading had boosted sales. This is supported by analysis within the Coronavirus and social impacts release, which reported that the most common items bought or pre-ordered earlier than usual for Christmas this year included toys and clothes, shoes or accessories. The latest rise means clothing stores sales are now only 0.5% below their pre-coronavirus pandemic level. Retail spending had stalled in September, after falling since April (when non-essential retailing re-opened). But it appear that festive spending - and today’s rise in consumer confidence - is getting people back to the shops. However, spending at food stores, on fuel, and on non-store retailers (online) dipped during the month. Here are the details: Non-food stores was the only main retail sector that saw a rise in sales volumes, increasing by 4.2% in October 2021, lifted by growth at second-hand stores, toy stores and sports equipment stores, and clothing stores (6.2%). Department stores also saw a rise in sales. Clothing stores sales volumes in October 2021 were only 0.5% below pre-pandemic levels in February 2020, with some retailers suggesting that early Christmas trading had boosted sales. Automotive fuel sales volumes fell by 6.4% in October 2021 as they returned to more typical recent levels following strong growth in September; volumes were 5.0% below their February 2020 levels. Food store sales volumes fell by 0.3% in October 2021; despite the fall in October, volumes were 3.4% above pre-coronavirus pandemic levels in February 2020. The proportion of retail sales online fell to 27.3% in October 2021, its lowest proportion since March 2020 (22.5%) but still substantially higher than the 19.7% in February 2020 before the coronavirus pandemic. Good morning, and welcome to our rolling coverage of the world economy, the financial markets, the eurozone and business. It’s starting to look a little bit like Christmas. And, despite inflation rising to a 10-year high, consumer confidence across the UK has picked up in a boost for retailers. The UK consumer confidence index, which tracks how people feel about their personal finances and wider economic prospects, rose 3 points to minus 14 in November, according to research company GfK. That’s stronger than expected, and much higher than a year ago when the UK was facing lockdown restrictions. It could signal that spending will recover ahead of Black Friday later this month, and then Christmas. People said they were also more willing to purchase expensive items, even though household incomes are being squeezed by rising prices. However, consumers are less upbeat about their personal finances... Joe Staton, Client Strategy Director at GfK, explains: “Headline consumer sentiment has ticked upwards this month despite decade-high inflation, fears of higher prices and worries over rising interest rates, and as the deepening cost-of-living squeeze leaves UK household finances worse off this winter. “The view on the general economic situation over the past year and year to come is better this month (up six points and three points respectively) but consumers are slightly less buoyant on their personal finances. This weakness is important as it reflects day-to-day plans to save or spend and is a strong driver of overall UK economic growth. “However, one highlight for both physical and virtual retail is the seven-point jump in major purchase intentions in the run-up to Black Friday and Christmas. Is this a sign that shoppers are ready to bounce back, after last year’s cancelled family gatherings, with a Christmas splurge in coming weeks? That’s how it looks - but consumers also know that when the festivities are over it’s going to be a tough year in 2022.” Linda Ellett, Head of Consumer Markets, Leisure and Retail at KPMG UK, said: “As the Christmas adverts and lights went on, consumer confidence has gone up with them. This correlates with the picture that businesses we work with have reported over recent weeks, with consumers buying early for Christmas and once again enjoying what towns and city centres have to offer. “Businesses will be hoping that Black Friday, and the in-person festivities of Christmas and New Year, bring a further confidence boost that can be carried into 2022. “Whilst confidence will continue to be shaped by the pandemic, the impact of rising cost of living and supply chain disruption, equally there is pent up demand for certain purchases, particularly holidays and other feel-good experiences. “It will be interesting to see, post COP26, whether purchases are increasingly made with sustainability as a key consideration. Recent KPMG research shows that 68% of customers under the age of 34 say they will pay more for goods from companies who demonstrate a strong commitment to environmental and sustainability principles. But intentions and actions are not always the same.” The agenda 7am GMT: Retail sales across Great Britain in October 7am GMT: UK public finances for October 7am GMT: Norwegian Q3 GDP report 8.30am GMT: ECB president Christine Lagarde speech at the 31st Frankfurt European Banking Congress 2021 1.30pm GMT: Canadian housing report (October) and retail sales (September)One of England’s most senior police officers has apologised to the families of the serial killer Stephen Port’s victims over a “serious failure of policing” in investigating a string of murders in London’s gay community in 2014 and 2015. The deputy assistant commissioner Stuart Cundy said he was “deeply sorry” there were a number of opportunities missed to arrest Port, saying it was “quite astonishing” some officers did not follow instructions to get evidence in the case. He said things were “quite different now” within the police. Cundy was not in the Metropolitan police service (MPS) during the 16-month period when Port committed the murders but led a review of the investigations into the deaths of his victims, who were all young gay men, in Barking, east London. Giving evidence on Friday at inquests examining whether police properly investigated the deaths, Cundy said: “Every single one of you absolutely had a right to expect a professional investigation to the standards all of us expected. It’s fair to say those standards weren’t met.” Inquest jurors heard Cundy’s review highlighted concerns over the quality of the initial investigations into the deaths of Anthony Walgate, Gabriel Kovari, Daniel Whitworth and Jack Taylor. The review found police ignored intelligence, including from the victims’ families and friends, and that the Met’s murder squad turned down requests from borough officers to take over the investigations. The review also identified a lack of understanding of the use of the drug GHB – fatal doses of which Port gave to his victims – and a failure to properly engage with the LGBTQ+ community. Cundy said efforts had been made to better understand new and emerging drugs and usage patterns since the murders. The inquests further heard that there were substantial delays in analysing evidence on Port’s laptop, which was seized after his initial arrest over Walgate’s death. Cundy said the means of checking intelligence on a suspect were “immeasurably different” now. But he added: “When you hear things that didn’t happen when people have been told to do something, [it is] quite astonishing from my view that they weren’t done.” The jury previously heard evidence that the local policing team was overworked due to cuts following the 2010 government spending review and did not have the specialist officers to investigate homicides. Port, 46, a former escort and bus depot chef, will spend the rest of his life in prison after being given a whole-life jail sentence for murdering Walgate, 23, Kovari, 22, Whitworth, 21, and Taylor, 25. The inquests continue.Plans are being developed within football for the creation of a permanent workers’ centre in Qatar that would support the rights of migrant labourers, as the game seeks to leave a positive legacy after the 2022 World Cup. The international players’ union, Fifpro, in conjunction with the Building and Wood Workers’ International, has led discussions with a number of stakeholders over the centre, where workers would be able to access legal advice and support. On Friday a key World Cup sponsor, Adidas, publicly declared its support for such a plan. “Employment conditions and human rights must continue to improve when the spotlight on Qatar has dimmed after the World Cup ends,” Fifpro’s general secretary, Jonas Baer-Hoffmann, said. “The centre … has the potential to give migrant workers a permanent place to seek help when necessary, and ensure they are not isolated or marginalised by employers.” In a statement released to the Guardian, Adidas said it supported the creation of a permanent office for the UN agency International Labour Organization in Qatar. The ILO has a technical cooperation programme with Qatar to ensure compliance with international labour conventions that runs until 2023. An Adidas spokesperson said: “For the past seven years, we have been engaged with our partners to improve the human rights situation in Qatar. This includes support for the establishment of an independent ILO office as an independent local monitoring body, strengthening the rights of foreign migrants and promoting a national minimum wage for all workers.” Informal conversations with Qatari representatives are believed to have taken place over a permanent workers’ centre, with Fifa and other World Cup sponsors involved. Discussions are said to be collaborative, with the aim of gaining support from the Qatari regime. The workers’ centre is one concrete idea as football’s attention turns to next year’s tournament and the legacy it will leave. Players from a number of international sides have, in the past year, protested in support of greater human rights in Qatar. This week Amnesty International published an assessment of the progress made by the Qatari authorities in securing protections and rights for migrant workers. It found that certain key changes – essentially relating to the freedom for workers to leave jobs and the country – were not being observed consistently, and that workers were still being denied wages. “Progress has stagnated,” the report concluded. The Qatari supreme committee, responsible for the delivery of the World Cup, has pledged to implement changes to labour laws as part of its “legacy contribution to workers’ rights in Qatar”. It rejected Amnesty’s conclusions, claiming the situation had improved for “hundreds of thousands” of workers. “Qatar has never shied away from acknowledging that its labour system is still a work in progress,” authorities said. The Amnesty report also called on football associations across the world to use their voice to “ensure that the rights of migrant workers are respected”. There is a growing interest in how the English FA will meet that challenge. The FA signed a memorandum of understanding with Qatar in 2018, with the then chairman, Greg Clarke, describing it as a partnership dedicated to sharing “knowledge and experience to support the development of football”. It is unclear whether the agreement extends beyond that. After England qualified for the World Cup Gareth Southgate said he and his team would “take the time to educate ourselves” over Qatar. “If we feel that there are areas that we can highlight and help, then clearly we’ve always tried to do that, and we would do that,” the manager said. The Guardian understands that the Professional Footballers’ Association will hold focus groups with club captains in each division to discuss the key issues relating to Qatar. Pressure will surely build on players in England to move from education to action. But the picture is likely to be complicated. The FA’s MOU with Qatar was brokered with the approval of the Conservative government and Southgate noted this week that “we as a nation do a lot of business” with Qatar and that the situation is “hugely complex”. An FA spokesperson said: “We are in dialogue with Amnesty International and also with Fifa, Uefa, other member associations and the Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office, and we are working closely with all to ensure that we approach our participation in the upcoming Fifa World Cup in a socially responsible manner. “From those discussions to date, we believe that there is evidence of substantial progress being made by Qatar in relation to workers’ rights. However we recognise there is still more to be done. Our view remains that change is best achieved by working collaboratively with others so that we can continue to ask the right questions, while always being mindful that we have our own challenges in this country.”After four years of legal struggle, the European court of human rights (ECHR) has ruled that Croatian police were responsible for the death of a six-year-old Afghan girl when they forced her family to return to Serbia via train tracks without giving them the opportunity to seek asylum. The little girl, named Madina Hussiny, was struck and killed by a train after being pushed back with her family by the Croatian authorities in 2017. Judges of the Strasbourg-based ECHR said on Thursday that the Republic of Croatia violated the girl’s right to life, treated children inhumanely by keeping them in detention, illegally deprived the whole family of their liberty, collectively expelled part of the family from Croatia, and ultimately prevented them from accessing their lawyer. “This is a big win for justice, after four years of gut-wrenching legal struggle,” said the volunteer-run media and advocacy group Are You Syrious (AYS), which, alongside the Centre for Peace Studies, a NGO promoting non-violence, has supported the Afghan family. “The verdict won’t bring the little girl back, but we hope it serves as some sort of closure for the family.’’ Madina and her family had made it into Croatia by scrambling across fields and over and under fences but that night, like many others, she was stopped by the Croatian police. According to her family, she was happy to see the officers at first, expecting to be taken to a police station to formally claim asylum, their right under European law. Instead, they were driven to the railway line and ordered to walk back towards Serbia. “I begged: ‘If you won’t accept us, please let us stay here tonight. In this weather we are already tired and cold, the children are little,’” Madina’s mother, Muslima, told the Guardian in 2017. “But they were inhuman.” Croatian border guards had initially denied that Madina and her family had set foot in their country before her death. However, four years later, the ECHR ruled that authorities in Zagreb played a role in her death by denying her family’s claim for asylum, and consequently putting the six-year-old in the path of the train. “The European court concluded that Croatia collectively expelled the mother and her six children from Croatian territory in the middle of the night outside of any legal procedure and without considering their individual situation,” said Antonia Pindulić, legal officer of the Centre for Peace Studies, which, alongside AYS and Border Violence Monitoring Network intervened in the case as a third party. Charities said that the ECHR was the last resort to seek justice after Croatian institutions failed to carry out an effective investigation on the circumstances that led to the six-year-old girl’s death. The recordings of thermal imaging cameras, as key evidence available to the police, had mysteriously disappeared. “We expect Prime Minister [Andrej] Plenković to urgently dismiss those responsible for the death of a child at our borders due to the actions of institutions that we, the citizens of Croatia, finance,” the Centre for Peace Studies and AYS said at a press conference in front of the Croatian government. “This verdict must not be limited to the Republic of Croatia paying €40,000 (£33,000) in non-pecuniary damage to Madina’s family from the state budget,’’ said Tajana Tadić from AYS. For all the victims in our borders, for the people who died there, as well as for all the activists who have been intimidated to keep quiet about it, it is time to bring to justice those who enable and cover up this violence, and that responsibility must be sought at the top of the Ministry of the Interior.” Hundreds of migrants walk the snowy paths of the Balkan route daily, in an attempt to reach central Europe. Most are stopped by Croatian police, searched, often allegedly robbed, sexually assaulted and violently pushed back into Bosnia, where, for months, thousands of asylum seekers have been stranded in freezing temperatures. Last October, leading European media outlets released footage showing a masked Croatian police officer beating up young asylum-seekers with a stick at the country’s border with Bosnia. On Friday, the interior minister, Davor Božinović, said that he would not resign after the ECHR ruling. Božinović said the death of Madina was a tragic event. “However,” he added, “I ask you not to underestimate the situation in which the Republic of Croatia found itself. There are groups of people, families who are coming to Europe. The Republic of Croatia can either prevent illegal entry into its territory or become the so-called hotspot to a large number of migrants from other parts of the world. “It is least in my interest, both as a man and as a minister, to avoid answering questions when we talk about victims, about human victims, about the death of a child,” he said. “However, we must pursue a policy of acting in accordance with the law and fulfilling our obligations as a state.”Narendra Modi has announced he will repeal three contentious farm laws that prompted a year of protests and unrest in India, in one of the most significant concessions made by his government. In a huge victory for India’s farmers, who had fought hard for the repeal of what they called the “black laws”, the prime minister announced in an address on Friday morning that “we have taken the laws back”. “We have decided to repeal all three farm laws. We will start the constitutional process to repeal all the three laws in the parliament session that starts at the end of this month,” said Modi, in a surprise announcement. While Modi remained adamant in his speech that the laws were necessary reforms, he acknowledged that they were unfeasible given the fierce opposition from farmers. “I appeal to all the farmers who are part of the protest … to now return to your home, to your loved ones, to your farms, and family. Let’s make a fresh start and move forward,” he added. Modi had passed the three farm laws in 2020 in an attempt to overhaul India’s archaic agriculture sector by rolling back farm subsidies and price regulation on crops. The agriculture sector still employs about 60% of India’s workforce, but is riddled with issues of poverty, debt and inefficiency. However, they quickly became a major source of contention among India’s millions of farmers, who accused the government of passing the laws without consultation. They said the reforms put their livelihoods and farms at risk and gave private corporations control over the pricing of their crops, which could crush smallholder farmers. After the government refused to repeal the laws last year, hundreds of thousands of farmers marched to Delhi’s borders, met on the way with barricades, teargas and water cannon, and set up protest camps along the main highways into the capital. Tens of thousands of farmers have remained at the several camps around Delhi borders ever since, maintaining one of the most sustained challenges to the Modi government, even through the harsh winters, baking summers and the brutal second wave of Covid-19. They found support in huge swathes of India, as well as internationally, with figures including Rihanna and Greta Thunberg speaking out in support of their actions, much to the chagrin of the government. The protests turned violent in February when the farmers stormed into the centre of Delhi and briefly took over the historic Red Fort in the old city centre. The government had made concerted efforts to crush the farmer protest movement over the past year. Farmers and supportive activists were arrested and police made several threats to clear the protest camps around Delhi, before briefly resorting to barricading in the farmers with concrete barriers and spikes. Those leading the protests were regularly cast as terrorists and anti-nationals conspiring against India. After several rounds of negotiations failed, the government agreed to suspend the laws earlier this year, but the farmers, who have the backing of powerful unions, said they would not budge until the laws were repealed entirely. On Friday, farmer leader Rakesh Tikait said the farmers would still not disband their protest camps and rallies until the act of repealing the laws had been carried out in parliament. He also emphasised that more than 700 farmers had died over the past year during the protests against the farm laws. “At last, all of our hard work paid off … I salute the farmer brothers who were martyred in this battle,” said Tikait. Previously the Modi government had said it would not bow down to pressure from the farmers over the farm laws. Modi, a strongman prime minister, has until now been unyielding to all mass protests and challenges to his government. However, it is thought that Modi’s decision to rollback the laws and make a rare public apology is tied to upcoming crucial state elections in Uttar Pradesh and Punjab, where farmers make up a crucial proportion of the “vote bank” and farmers’ unions hold significant power and influence. The farm laws had caused a lot of anger in the north Indian states that are the heartland of Modi’s ruling Bharatiya Janata party (BJP). Ashutosh Varshney, director of the Centre for Contemporary South Asia at Brown University, said it was the Uttar Pradesh elections “pure and simple” that had motivated the decision. “If the BJP loses Uttar Pradesh in March, it will open up politics in a way that can have huge implications in 2024 [the general election].” Varshney said the rollback made Modi look “potentially vulnerable, not yet decidedly weak”, adding: “This is his first reversal when faced with a movement. “It will encourage other movements but Modi will back down only if the protest threatens the BJP electorally. Otherwise Modi can ride it out.” An opposition MP, Palaniappan Chidambaram, said in a tweet: “PM’s announcement on the withdrawal of the three farm laws is not inspired by a change of policy or a change of heart. It is impelled by fear of elections!” In his speech, Modi said he was repealing the laws because he lamented that the government had been “unable to convince farmers”. “Whatever I did was for farmers,” the prime minister said. “What I am doing is for the country.” Amarinder Singh, former chief minister of Punjab state, which is home to many of the protesting farmers, tweeted: “Thankful to PM Narendra Modi … for acceding to the demands of every Punjabi.”A ban on child marriage in England and Wales came a step closer Friday with cross-party support for a new bill in the House of Commons. The marriage and civil partnership (minimum age) bill had its second reading in parliament, with government and opposition MPs supporting the private member’s bill brought by Conservative MP Pauline Latham. The vote was welcomed by campaigners and survivors of child marriage who have been lobbying against the current legislation, which allows 16 and 17-year-olds to wed with parental consent. The bill would raise the minimum age of marriage and civil partnership to 18, but also criminalise any marriage, including non-legalised religious marriages, under that age, making “any conduct causing” such a union an offence. Crucially, campaigners say, this would take the onus away from a child to prove their marriage is forced, and strengthen the responsibility of professionals in safeguarding children. Many cases of child marriage in the UK are unregistered and “invisible”, campaigners say, taking place in religious or traditional family settings at ages lower than 16. “As a child bride myself, I celebrate with tears of pain and of joy, as we are one step closer to ending child marriages,” said Ruby Marie, 38, from Wales, who was forced to marry at 15. She now works as an ambassador for Karma Nirvana, a UK charity supporting victims of forced marriage and “honour”-based abuse. She said that the “child abuse” of underage marriage can cause lifelong trauma. “You get PTSD [post-traumatic stress disorder],” said Marie, whose father and uncles took her to Bangladesh to marry and kept her there until she got pregnant, months later. “I was lost for a very long time. I was a child, with the body of a child. I was raped by a man twice my age. I felt I was being sold. I was mentally confused. I loved them, how would they do this to me? It is mental torture. This bill will help so many people.” In Britain, children as young as seven are at risk of child marriage, Karma Nirvana said. This year the group supported 78 children in England and Wales facing the threat of forced marriage. Three were under 10 – the youngest, seven – while the majority, 52 children, were 16 and 17. Most were of British Pakistani heritage, but they also helped Kurdish, Romanian, Turkish and Afghan children born or living in the UK. Zeynep* came to London with her mother in 2016 from her homeland, where she had already survived a short-lived marriage to an abusive man. “In my country it happens to very young children,” Zaynep said. “It is a humiliating tradition. I was 12. My mother told me: ‘This is normal.’” “I want child marriage to be made illegal, because that way, when you ask for help you would get it,” she said. “I’m angry I didn’t get help and I don’t want that to happen to anyone else.” Fearing she would be remarried in the UK, Zeynab said she went to the police for protection four times before being taken seriously. She hopes a change in the law would improve police protection for victims. Officers came to her house and initially removed her from her family, but after two days she was returned to them. “My family denied everything. They said I was crazy and I told lies. I was so disappointed. It was a huge step for me to go to the police.” At the age of 15, she was married to a 26-year-old man in the UK. “One day, he told everyone, my mother-in-law, father-in-law, to leave the house. My mother came on the phone and said now you need to have sex with him and prove you are a virgin. He locked the door. I was so scared. He raped me.” Last year Zeynep gained police protection and now lives with a foster family and is supported by the Iranian and Kurdish Women’s Rights Organisation (IKWRO), which has long campaigned to ban child marriage. “Many bad things have happened to me,” she said. “But having supportive people around me has helped me, given me strength. I feel powerful.” “I thought about going to the police for months,” Zaynep said, of her first attempt to get help in London, at 13. “I didn’t know the number, so I Googled it. I was so scared. And then, they sent me back to my family, who denied everything. My mum threatened to kill me.” *Zaynep is not her real name. • In the UK, the NSPCC offers support to children on 0800 1111, and adults concerned about a child on 0808 800 5000. The National Association for People Abused in Childhood (Napac) offers support for adult survivors on 0808 801 0331. In the US, call or text the Childhelp abuse hotline on 800-422-4453. In Australia, children, young adults, parents and teachers can contact the Kids Helpline on 1800 55 1800; adult survivors can seek help at Blue Knot Foundation on 1300 657 380. Other sources of help can be found at Child Helplines International. • In the UK and Ireland, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org or jo@samaritans.ie. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is at 800-273-8255 or chat for support. You can also text HOME to 741741 to connect with a crisis text line counselor. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.orgRare and unseen live footage of David Bowie is to be the basis of a new film by documentary film-maker Brett Morgen. According to Variety, the US director has drawn on thousands of hours’ worth of footage for his Bowie film – which does not yet have a title – and will also write, edit and produce the project. Morgen has already made a widely praised music film, Kurt Cobain: Montage of Heck (2015), acclaimed for its use of intimate home-video footage mixed with animation, talking heads and Cobain’s artwork to tell the story of the Nirvana frontman. Rolling Stone described it as “the most intimate rock doc ever”. Other Morgen films include The Kid Stays in the Picture, about the colourful, cocaine-trafficking Hollywood film producer Robert Evans; and Jane, about British primatologist Jane Goodall. The latter film won two Emmy awards in 2018, including one for Morgen for directing non-fiction programming. Variety quotes a source close to the Bowie film, who calls it: “neither documentary nor biography but an immersive cinematic experience.” Tony Visconti, who produced numerous Bowie albums, is music producer on the project, which has the blessing of the Bowie estate. The Oscar-winning sound team behind Queen biopic Bohemian Rhapsody are also working with Morgen on the film. The keepers of Bowie’s estate remain adamant that a Bohemian Rhapsody-type biopic will not be made about him. Earlier this month, his widow Iman said: “People say things like, ‘Your love story should be made into a movie.’ Oh, dear God, no! It’s just so private. Also, it’s a family decision. It’s always a no. We always ask each other, ‘Would he do it?’ He wouldn’t. We want to honour his decision.” Stardust, a 2020 drama that charted Bowie’s creation of his Ziggy Stardust persona, with Johnny Flynn playing the singer, had to be made without the use of any Bowie music after the estate refused its use. “Its omission is noticeably awkward, with Flynn doing inert versions of tracks Bowie covered, such as Jacques Brel’s My Death, as a clumsy workaround,” wrote the Observer’s Simran Hans in a one-star review.Labour has written to the government to query why emergency Covid procurement rules, under which companies were given contracts worth tens or hundreds of millions of pounds without the usual scrutiny or competition, have still not been reversed. In March last year the Cabinet Office published what is known as a procurement policy note, which said that given the emergency, “in exceptional circumstances, authorities may need to procure goods, services and works with extreme urgency and without competition”. But in a letter to the Crown Commercial Service, the arm of the Cabinet Office which leads on policy connected to purchasing and associated areas, Labour queried why the instruction had yet to be rescinded. Writing to Simon Tse, the chief executive of the Crown Commercial Service, Jack Dromey, the shadow paymaster general, said that while there had been a reason to introduce the procedures at the peak of the emergency, they brought a risk of conflicts of interest and unsuitable suppliers being used. The issue has been highlighted in recent weeks by coverage of the lobbying and outside commercial work of some MPs, such as Owen Paterson. The healthcare company Randox paid Paterson – who has now resigned as a Tory backbencher – £100,000 a year as a consultant. The group was awarded hundreds of millions of pounds in contracts for Covid testing without any competitive bidding. This week, the government said it had lost a formal note about a meeting between former health minister James Bethell, Paterson and Randox. In August it emerged Bethell had replaced his mobile phone before it could be searched for information relevant to how £85m of deals for personal protective equipment (PPE) and tests were allocated at the height of the pandemic. Other controversies about the way contracts were awarded include the use of a “VIP channel” for well-connected people to try to secure PPE contracts, and the awarding of a £30m contract to produce test tubes to a former publican and neighbour of the then health secretary, Matt Hancock, despite a lack of experience in the area. In his letter, Dromey said the scale of the threat posed by Covid last year justified the emergency regulations. He added: “However, as the country has overcome the tragedy of the initial waves of the pandemic, it is less clear whether such regulations should continue to be the basis of procurement guidance to public bodies. “Following recent revelations regarding the awarding of public contracts during the pandemic and the role of cabinet ministers in this process, I am concerned that such inadequate procurement processes should not be allowed to continue. While coronavirus remains an ongoing threat to the health and wellbeing of the country, the exceptional circumstances of last March are no longer apparent. “I would therefore be grateful if you could confirm if official guidance continues to allow for emergency procurement procedures, and if so, what justification there is for this guidance and when will it be withdrawn?” The Cabinet Office, which is in charge of such purchasing regulations, said the actual rules had been in place since 2015, for use in any emergency situation, and that the procurement policy note “simply pointed authorities to longstanding procedures”. A spokesperson said: “We have also been clear from the outset that public authorities must achieve value for money, use good commercial judgment and follow all due diligence processes when awarding all contracts.”Any hope of this season’s Formula One world championship playing the Queensberry game have surely now disappeared in the rancorous conflict of the title run-in. Both Lewis Hamilton’s Mercedes and Max Verstappen’s Red Bull have been boxing hard but it seems this has now turned into a cage fight. On Friday Mercedes lost their request for a review of Hamilton and Verstappen’s clash at the Brazilian Grand Prix but that was only one salvo in an exchange of broadsides thundering across the desert before this weekend’s Qatar Grand Prix. From Verstappen’s perspective, the stewards rejecting the review questioning the Dutchman’s driving in pushing Hamilton wide in Brazil will be welcomed. He could have lost points or grid places had it gone against him. Instead at the Losail circuit in Doha he maintains his 14-point lead over Hamilton with three races remaining. The two drivers remain civil but their team principals are in a furious scrap. They sat barely four feet apart at their press conference in Qatar but the distance was a chasm as Mercedes’ Toto Wolff and Red Bull’s Christian Horner staked their claims while resolutely avoiding eye contact. Was there any respect, any relationship left between the two teams after a campaign that has been fiercely fought for 19 rounds and included accusations of wrongdoing across both sides, on and off track? “There is no relationship, there’s a competition,” Horner replied bluntly. “It’s interesting to see how people react under pressure, how they react when they’re challenged. “It’s by far the most intense political title fight we’ve been involved in in our time in this sport. Relationships and respect are different things. I don’t need to go to dinner with Toto or anything like that.” Wolff, who said he had expected the review to be rejected but wanted to put Verstappen’s driving under the spotlight so that in the remaining races it stood as a precedent, was unequivocal in how he now viewed the contest. “What started as Olympic boxing went to pro boxing, and it’s now MMA,” he said. “We are in the ring there, trying to do the best job possible. Elbows are out now because the rules say so and gloves are off. Nothing else is to be expected.” Both said they respected their competitor’s team members while pointedly not offering the same approbation to their direct opposite number. Nor was this merely verbal sparring. Both teams have made it clear that this is, as Horner noted, a “political” fight as much as it is one between Hamilton and Verstappen on track. Horner was explicit that he would protest against the Mercedes rear wing used in Mexico and Brazil he believes is flexing illegally and delivering a significant straightline speed advantage, if Mercedes employ it again. “If we see [the wing] on the car here, it will be protested,” he said. That is unlikely in Qatar given the nature of the track but almost certain at the final two rounds in Saudi Arabia and Abu Dhabi, where the wing could make a major difference. Wolff was robust in his conviction it was completely legal. These are tense times and they are personal. So much so that having averted their gazes for so long, in an almost unheard of moment of confrontation in front of the media, Horner turned directly to Wolff and demanded he explain the “score marks” Red Bull had apparently observed on the rear wing endplate. Wolff dismissed it as perfectly legal but the stewards may be as busy as the drivers in these final three races. On track for the first F1 race in Qatar, Verstappen was quickest in first practice with Hamilton in fourth. However, in the more representative night running of FP2, Hamilton’s teammate Valtteri Bottas was on top, with Verstappen in third and Hamilton in fourth.Andrew Marr’s Sunday morning programme on BBC One has been essential viewing for years for people following Westminster’s machinations. His departure leaves a vacancy for one of the most high-profile jobs in political journalism. Here are some of the contenders to replace him: Mishal Husain One of the presenters of BBC Radio 4’s flagship news programme Today, Husain is a major player and is respected for her forensic and persistent, yet patient, interviewing style. She also has years of experience reporting and presenting news on BBC television and is responsible for some of the broadcaster’s more memorable interviews with political figures from around the world. Emily Maitlis The presenter of Newsnight has won acclaim for her high-profile interviews with the Duke of York, Donald Trump and Bill Clinton, and would be a sparring partner to be reckoned with when sitting down with political leaders. Laura Kuenssberg The BBC’s political editor is likely to be among the frontrunners for the job. It was previously reported that Kuenssberg was negotiating stepping away from her role of the past six years to join the Today programme as part of a major reshuffle of the BBC’s on-air staff. Zeinab Badawi The presenter of BBC Global Questions and Hardtalk has hosted Marr’s show before, so she would be a familiar face to his regular viewers. Clive Myrie A regular presenter of BBC News at Six and Ten since 2010, the newsreader has previously worked as the BBC’s correspondent in Asia, Africa, Washington, Paris and Brussels. Earlier this year, he replaced John Humphrys as the host of Mastermind when the veteran journalist stepped down after 18 years in the role. Nick Robinson The former BBC political editor, who has also filled in for Marr before, is currently a presenter of the Today programme and Political Thinking. Victoria Derbyshire The award-winning broadcaster has presented some of the BBC’s biggest programmes, including Newsnight and Panorama, and fronted her own current affairs show. When plans to axe her acclaimed self-titled BBC Two programme were leaked, Derbyshire said she was “absolutely devastated”. Andrew Neil It has been mooted that the former longtime BBC presenter could return to the fold after he stepped down from his roles as the chairman and host of a primetime show on GB News. Neil has since said it was a “huge mistake” for him to become the face of the fledgling channel and hinted he is keen for another job in TV, saying: “I don’t want GB News to be the full stop in my broadcasting career.” Sophie Raworth The BBC newsreader, another who has covered for Marr in the past, is one of the main presenters of the BBC News at Six and Ten. She has also presented election night coverage, as well as Watchdog, Crimewatch and coverage of the Chelsea flower show. Amol Rajan The BBC’s media editor is a presenter of Today, as well as Start the Week on Radio 4. He is also a restaurant critic and makes regular appearances on television as a guest on the judging panel of MasterChef.It is not customary to look forward to Monday mornings but, in the heyday of the Guardian’s print sales in the late 1970s and 80s, many readers relished Monday’s paper more than anything else. On a features page would be Posy Simmonds’ weekly dissection of middle-class life. And, further back, stretched across the width of the main sports page, David Lacey would offer his weekly dissection of football. Like Posy’s cartoon strip, this was one of the great institutions of British journalism. Lacey, who has died aged 83, was an institution in himself. His first Guardian match reports appeared in the winter of 1964-65 and already, in a downbeat report on Portsmouth versus the old, fatalistic, Manchester City, one could detect flecks of gold in his prose. By the time he replaced the ailing Bert Barham as chief football correspondent in 1973, he had hit the motherlode that would sustain him for 30 seasons in the job and another decade as an emeritus columnist. His writing was the antithesis of the sports pages’ other star turn, his almost exact contemporary Frank Keating. Whereas Keating was a cavalier, full of thrilling thrusts and parries while sometimes falling off his horse, Lacey was more Cromwellian; he wrote with precision, quiet elegance and sly wit. And the Monday column was his showcase. He would attend the match of his choice on Saturday, watch Match of the Day, and next morning pull together his thoughts on the weekend and the state of the game crisply and analytically, slipping in discursive similes, metaphors and cultural references without ever troubling Pseuds Corner. In one piece, Lacey noticed Ron Atkinson drinking gin and tonic out of a papier-mache cup (“like Beau Brummell visiting the 50-shilling tailor”); compared West Bromwich Albion’s relationship with Liverpool to a man in the Avon Gorge staring up at the Clifton Suspension Bridge; and threw in the Battle of Lepanto in 1571 for good measure. And it all worked. The Sunday duty sports subeditors had two problems. One was to find any flaw in the copy to justify their existence. A misplaced comma? Hardly. The other was to write a headline to do the piece justice. “Lace the Ace,” he was called in the office. Sadly, the switch of big games to Sundays in 1992 ruined the symmetry of these pieces and he was obliged to do match reports for Monday’s papers. He was ace at those too but they attracted partisans more than the neutrals who previously read Lacey for his own sake. The sport section was never quite as rich again. Lacey was born into newspapers. He was the oldest of three sons of Les Lacey, editor of the Lewes-based Sussex Express, and Hilda (nee Roberts), a librarian and then full-time mother. His two brothers, Jeremy and Roger (who had a spell on the Guardian), also went into journalism. Aged 16, David went straight from Lewes county grammar school to the Brighton Evening Argus, where he soon found himself reporting Brighton’s modest adventures before joining the Guardian. Aside from national service in the RAF, he never worked for anyone else, and may never have contemplated it. In 1966 he was assigned the north-east group at the World Cup in England and thus saw Pak Doo-ik’s unforgettable goal at long-gone Ayresome Park that enabled North Korea to put paid to Italy. (“One would have thought Middlesbrough had won the FA Cup.”) Four years later he went to Mexico as Barham’s No 2. He covered 10 World Cups in all, and for the other eight he was the unassailable No 1. Within football, the tabloids attracted more attention but he had a small but elite fanclub among the more thoughtful managers – Bobby Robson, Ron Greenwood, Dave Sexton, Bill Dodgin – who read him avidly. Before becoming Liverpool manager, Joe Fagan borrowed a copy of the Guardian to while away an idle moment: “I didn’t even know there was football writing like this,” he said. What was also noticeable was the awe that attended Lacey from his colleagues within the press box. As well as being revered as a writer, he was also – in the days before ubiquitous replays made concentration an optional extra – the go-to man to resolve, say, a complex sequence of passes. “He had an icy brain,” said Patrick Barclay, who was his deputy for a decade. “He loved precision. He would find a new route to Villa Park or the Dell that would shave two minutes off the journey, and you had to follow it. He was a GPS system years ahead of his time.” “After a game I would always say ‘What did you make of it, David?’,” said the Mail on Sunday columnist Pat Collins. “He’d give me six phrases and two verdicts and I’d walk away wishing I could rewrite what I’d already sent.” He did not do news stories: managerial speculation and what the desk dismissively called “groin-strain journalism”. Someone else could chase that stuff; he would make his judgment on what he saw. But his territory was very much his, and he did not relish the company of other fancy Guardian writers at big games. “I’m coming to the Cup final with you, David,” Keating told him cheerily one day. “Very nice for you, Frank,” was the reply. He could be far more withering than that. In 1986, the passionate and voluble Barclay told the calm and composed Lacey that he was leaving, having finally been offered the No 1 football job elsewhere. “It’s the end of an earache, Paddy,” he replied. (This is Paddy’s story, by the way.) The only wobble in his own tenure was an offer, circa 1981, to switch to cricket, a game he relished and played socially. He decided against, though he did love to spend a couple of summer weeks covering county games, preferably in Sussex. Lewes grammar played rugby, and his active football was largely confined to refereeing. He also retained an enthusiasm for ice hockey, which he covered in Brighton. And he adored old films, which informed a good many of his gags. But chance and choice meant he applied his genius to football; he could have written as well on almost anything. Lacey lived alone, surrounded by his football programmes. Though always enigmatic and self-contained, there was fun as well as barbed wit. During the 1978 World Cup, he was applauded by a bar-room packed with raucous Argentinians for his wine-fuelled rendition of “Sussex By the Sea”. In his last years, he moved close to Jeremy’s family in Cambridgeshire, delighting in being Uncle David. Later he moved to a care home where, his short-term memory fading, he could still reminisce about the Matthews final, Pak Doo-ik, and much more about the game he himself adorned. Belatedly, he won two sports journalist of the year awards, which is as if Liverpool had only ever been granted two League titles. Jeremy, a financial journalist, predeceased him. He is survived by Roger, a niece and three nephews. • David Edward Charles Lacey, sports writer, born 4 January 1938; died 15 November 2021Joe Biden has hailed the US House of Representatives for passing a $1.75tn social and climate spending bill, a central pillar of his agenda that must now go before the Senate. The Democratic majority in the House approved the Build Back Better Act on Friday despite fierce opposition from Republicans. The bill represents “a giant step forward”, the president said in a statement. “Above all, it puts us on the path to build our economy back better than before by rebuilding the backbone of America: working people and the middle class.” After months of fits and starts, gridlock and intra-party warring, Democrats leveraged their thin House majority to pass the most sweeping expansion of the social safety net since the 1960s.. The vote went almost wholly along party lines, 220 to 213, with Jared Golden of Maine the sole Democrat to oppose it. Republican minority leader Kevin McCarthy had derailed the schedule to vote on Thursday by delivering a marathon overnight speech of eight hours 32 minutes. It was the longest speech ever made on the House floor but could only delay rather than deny the inevitable. The House speaker, Nancy Pelosi, triumphantly brought down her gavel to mark the bill’s passage to enthusiastic applause throughout the chamber from Democratic members. There were chants of, “Build Back Better! Build Back Better!” “The Build Back Better Act is passed,” Pelosi announced minutes later, smiling with arm aloft, to more cheering and chants of “Nancy! Nancy! Nancy!” Soon after, a triumphant Pelosi said at a press conference: “We will be telling our children and grandchildren that we were here this day.” The bill is “monumental, it’s historic, it’s transformative, it’s bigger than anything we’ve ever done,” she added. On climate crisis action, Pelosi said: “If you care about the planet and how we pass it on, this bill is for you.” The Build Back Better Act provides hundreds of billions to new social programs and action to mitigate the effects and worsening of the climate crisis. Outside the US Capitol, progressive leader and Democratic congresswoman Pramila Jayapal said there was not agreement on every element of the bill but that she was pleased with the overwhelming support. She called the bill “a very strong vote to send to the Senate”. South Carolina congressman James Clyburn, who was instrumental in shepherding Black voters to support Joe Biden when he was struggling in the primaries during the 2020 campaign, eventually seeing him win the nomination and the White House, spoke of “a good day” as he appeared alongside Pelosi after Friday’s vote. The bill now goes to the Senate, where it faces total opposition from Republicans and an uphill battle, in its current form, against centrist Democratic senators Joe Manchin of West Virginia and Kyrsten Sinema of Arizona. The Senate majority leader, Chuck Schumer, has indicated that he wants the bill to pass the Senate, return to the House and be on the president’s desk by Christmas for signing, a tall order with more fierce debate yet to come and a crowded legislative calendar on Capitol Hill in December. The huge bill will use the reconciliation process for budgetary-related legislation, meaning it can be passed in the Senate with a simple majority, rather than a 60-vote threshold, so that Democrats alone can see it through the chamber if they support it. But in a hint of the wrangling to come, Bernie Sanders, an independent senator for Vermont, said: “The Senate has an opportunity to make this a truly historic piece of legislation. We will listen to the demands of the American people and strengthen the Build Back Better Act.” The package is ambitious: it aims to dramatically reduce childcare costs, provide universal pre-kindergarten for children, lower the cost of prescription drugs for seniors, expand Medicare to cover hearing aids, extend work permits to millions of undocumented immigrants and provide the largest-ever investment in efforts to combat the climate crisis. The House version of the legislation also includes four weeks of paid family and medical leave, though the provision faces opposition from Manchin. Pelosi told reporters: “We had so much agreement within the bill … and then whatever comes out in the Senate, we’ll be working together with them so that we have agreement when it comes back to us. The biggest challenge was to meet the vision of President Biden.” Five days ago Biden signed the bipartisan $1.2tn infrastructure bill into law at the White House, dealing with rebuilding America’s roads and bridges and spreading broadband internet. The president is attending Walter Reed hospital for a routine medical check on Friday, the day before his 79th birthday. His medical required a colonoscopy, which required going under anesthesia. As such, he briefly transferred power to the vice-president, Kamala Harris, the first time the US has had, albeit briefly, a woman as acting president. Jen Psaki, the White House press secretary, tweeted that Biden had spoken to Harris at about 11.35am, adding:“@POTUS was in good spirits and at that time resumed his duties. He will remain at Walter Reed as he completes the rest of his routine physical.”Swathes of central Manchester could be blighted by viaducts looming over the homes of thousands of people because the government has refused to fund an underground station in the city centre, Andy Burnham has warned. This week the government said it would build a new surface station in Manchester for HS2 and Northern Powerhouse Rail, a partly new line to Leeds via Huddersfield. It will be situated next door to the existing Piccadilly station, which does not have platforms long enough to accommodate HS2’s 400-metre trains. Burnham, the mayor of Greater Manchester, had asked the government for a multistorey interchange with underground platforms, which would allow trains to travel through the station. This was refused, with the government saying it would cost £4-£5bn more than a surface station and take seven years longer to build. Instead, the new station will operate as a “turnback”, meaning an HS2 train may arrive from London and the driver would change ends to leave the station for the onward journey. “Several of the busiest through stations on Europe’s high speed networks, including the main stations in Frankfurt, Stuttgart, Zurich, Milan and Rome, operate on the same principle, with hundreds of high speed through-trains each week reversing in their platforms during their journeys,” the government’s Integrated Rail Plan said. Burnham said he would fight the decision. “The government said [building an underground station] would delay HS2 by seven years. I don’t know if that’s true, but assuming it is, we would rather wait seven years and get something which is right for the next 100 years and more.” He demanded the government clarify how it planned to build the new section of NPR track, which is to run from Warrington to Marsden in West Yorkshire, stopping at the new Manchester station. HS2 comes into Greater Manchester through a tunnel from the airport, which runs under south Manchester and surfaces on a viaduct in the Ardwick district. Burnham fears further viaducts will need to be built to carry the new NPR track out of the city towards Yorkshire, causing massive disruption to thousands of people and taking up acres of prime real estate. “It’s the sort of thing they build in China for brand new cities, but the difference is they are building on empty land. East Manchester is home to long-established communities of thousands of people who would be underneath this line,” he said. Graham Stringer, Labour MP for the Manchester seat of Blackley and Broughton, said the government’s new plan amounted to “putting HS2 on stilts through Manchester”. He asked Grant Shapps, the transport secretary: “Will he do an assessment of the impact that putting HS2 on stilts through Manchester will have on potential regeneration? HS2 will bring regeneration, but if we put it in the air like that, it is most likely to sterilise the areas on either side. He would not have put Crossrail on stilts in Greater London.” Defending the Manchester plans, Shapps said: “If we spend £6bn or £7bn building the station underground at Manchester, we will take away from Liverpool, Leeds, Hull or some of the other places that are calling for money … Manchester is a principal beneficiary of this entire programme and we wish his constituents well in their new journey times.”I will leave you with a recap of some of today’s football pieces. Thanks for reading and commenting, and good luck this weekend. Bye! “The Monday column was his showcase. He would attend the match of his choice on Saturday, watch Match of the Day, and next morning pull together his thoughts on the weekend and the state of the game crisply and analytically, slipping in discursive similes, metaphors and cultural references without ever troubling Pseuds Corner.” Matthew Engel writes David Lacey’s obituary: Some reader letters here about the great David Lacey, including this one from Graham Russell: “Thank you for your double-page spread celebrating some of the wonderful journalism of David Lacey (Report, 17 November). One day in the late 1960s, while at university in London, I was reading the Daily Telegraph sports section in the university refectory. A fellow student put the Guardian down in front of me, open at one of David’s match reports. He told me to read it and assured me that, having read it, I would only buy the Guardian in future. Fifty-four years later, I’m still buying the Guardian every day.” Plans are being developed within football for the creation of a permanent workers’ centre in Qatar that would support the rights of migrant labourers, as the game seeks to leave a positive legacy after the 2022 World Cup. Louise Taylor previews Newcastle v Brentford. Can Eddie Howe unlock Joelinton’s talent? Fancy a Watford v Manchester United match preview? Here you go, then: The Everton manager Rafael Benítez is looking for improvements in the way injuries are managed after the departure of the club’s director of medical services Dan Donachie. The Spaniard’s first few months in charge have been hampered by the absence of last season’s leading scorer, Dominic Calvert-Lewin, with a thigh injury since the end of August. In addition Yerry Mina has not played for over a month due to a hamstring injury, Andre Gomes (calf) has made just five appearances and Fabian Delph has just returned after 10 weeks out with a shoulder problem. “We try to manage the players in another way. I wish Dan all the best,” said Benítez, who last month brought in Cristian Fernández as first-team rehabilitation fitness coach, having worked with him at Newcastle. “We want to improve every department and the way we want to do things is maybe a little bit different. From the beginning I was impressed with the attitude of the staff [but] different managers have different visions and we are trying to do that. The main thing is communication and we are talking with everyone in every department and I am happy with the things I am seeing at the moment.” Midfielder Abdoulaye Doucoure could return within the next fortnight after a broken metatarsal but Calvert-Lewin faces “at least” two to three weeks more on the sidelines. Mina, Gomes and Tom Davies (knee) have no date set for their return to action. (PA) It’s only the sports quiz of the week – get stuck in: A below-the-line comment from this morning, from lancaster43: “Although I probably missed the relevant article I’d like to express my sadness at the death of Gerald Sinstadt. As a football mad kid growing up in Granadaland in the 70s, his voice and presence on the box were a welcome part of my childhood.” And a reply from Chorleycake113: “I was also saddened by the death of Gerald Sinstadt, being from your neck of the woods too. But the news of the death of David Lacey hit me even harder and I would like to say that his writings were something that became an important part of my weekly life. First thing I’d do after the weekend would turn to his report in the paper. I feel that I’ve lost a dear friend. RIP David and thank you.” Read Richard Williams’ excellent tribute to David Lacey here: Meanwhile, Sunday’s WSL fixtures are as follows: Manchester United v Arsenal (12.15pm) Chelsea v Birmingham City (2pm) Leicester City v Everton (2pm) Reading v Brighton &amp; Hove Albion (2pm) West Ham v Tottenham (3pm) There is one Women’s Super League match taking place tomorrow: Manchester City meet Aston Villa Women, kicking off at 11.30am. The City manager insists he and his players can turn around their poor form: “I’m working tremendously hard trying to shut myself away from that negative talk,” he told Sky Sports. “I try to deal with it in a manner that protects the players and I will continue to do so ... I have real belief in myself and the group we have here, and I believe we will turn things around.” On the latest team news, Taylor told the official City site: “Alanna Kennedy is progressing quite well, after the initial blow of losing her between Chelsea and United. “Outside of that I think everyone has come back well over the last couple of days so we are similar to where we were. Lauren [Hemp] was carrying a shin injury from the clash she had in the Chelsea game. We have had to manage that accordingly. She has come through that so she is in contention. “[For Janine Beckie] It’s just a period of trying to help her get back to full fitness. She could have gone away but she has had an ongoing problem for some time that needs looking at. I think there will be some treatment administered and that gives her some recovery time.” On Esme Morgan and Ellie Roebuck, he said: “Esme is going to be the new year and quite a way into the new year.” The Wolves manager Bruno Lage has called for Adama Traoré to be more consistent. The 25-year-old winger made a promising start to the season but his form has dipped since, and he has been on the bench in recent weeks. “I would like to see from Adama what he did in the first three games, and what I saw in the last two weeks,” said Lage. “That’s the Adama I want to see in the pitch. I want Adama to be more consistent, not just game by game, but also in the game. “He’s the kind of player who, when you have the ball, can do something special. But I want more Adama during the game, not just when you have the ball. He needs to be there more time in the game. When he works from outside, he’s very dangerous. He’s working very hard to understand the inside game, he’s doing well, the last two weeks it was very good, and if you remember, the first three games, what he did was very good. “I was very happy with the way he pressed, the way he created chances, the way he linked with the players. What I want is that and Adama knows he needs to fight with [Hee Chan] Hwang, Daniel [Podence] and [Francisco] Trinçao, because the four guys are in a good way, and that’s good for me.” Traoré will be pushing for a return to the team when Wolves resume their Premier League campaign against West Ham at Molineux on Saturday. The full-back Fernando Marçal is in contention to feature for the first time since October 16 after recovering from a calf injury, although Rayan Aït-Nouri is set to keep his place. Lage said that he will “take the best decision” on Raul Jiménez’s availability after the striker returned from international duty with Mexico on Thursday. (PA) The Atlético Madrid forward Antoine Griezmann’s two-match European ban has been reduced to one following a successful appeal, governing body Uefa said in a statement on Friday. Griezmann, 30, was sent off in Atlético’s 3-2 defeat at home by Liverpool in the Champions League last month and was given a one-match ban that was later extended. The France international missed the reverse fixture against Liverpool, a 2-0 defeat, meaning he has already served his suspension and will be available for the group stage meeting with AC Milan on Wednesday. The Spanish side are third in Group B with four points from as many games, eight points behind leaders Liverpool. Porto are second on five points. (Reuters) The Newcastle managing director Lee Charnley has left the club as the new owners look to appoint a chief executive officer in his place. Charnley, who has been at St James’ Park for 22 years, stayed on during a handover period following October’s takeover. A club statement said: “Newcastle United can confirm that its managing director, Lee Charnley, has left the club following a handover period with the new ownership group. Lee has been with the club for 22 years, the last seven of which were as the Magpies’ managing director. “Newcastle United was acquired by an investment group led by PIF, PCP Capital Partners and RB Sports and Media in October. The club’s new board will continue to oversee all operations. The club has also begun a formal recruitment process to appoint a CEO and will make an announcement in due course.” (PA) It’s Friday – it’s past 4pm – it must be time for The Fiver! Gregg Bakowski has been beavering away on a sideways glance at Newcastle and Eddie Howe, including the new manager’s insistence that Joelinton is an ‘incredible technician’, among other things: The titans of Crystal Palace meet the giants of Burnley tomorrow, to see who wins that. Graham Searles has the match preview right here: The new Barcelona manager, Xavi Hernandez, has issued a rallying cry to the club’s fans, asking them to get behind the team during his first match in charge against Espanyol in La Liga on Saturday. Barça are ninth on 17 points, 10 points behind Real Madrid and 11 adrift of leaders Real Sociedad and Xavi - who took charge this month after Ronald Koeman’s sacking - said his team needed their fans now more than ever. “Here I stand asking our people to be on our side,” Xavi said. “There won’t be a lack of attitude. You can be sure we’ll give it our all. We ask you to come help us. We’re Barça, we need to stick together. If you give your all like you did the day I was presented, it’s good for me.” “There will be a lot of tension and we need to control our nerves ... I told the boys they need to stay calm on the pitch because they’ll face rivals who are well prepared,” Xavi added. “I’m less nervous now as a coach than I used to be when I was a player. I’m happy to be home and I’m looking forward to the game.” (Reuters) QPR meet Luton this evening to kick off the weekend’s Championship action. Rangers are sixth, and could overtake Stoke and move fifth with a win. Luton are 11th, but just two points behind tonight’s opponents, so a victory for them would vault them up to sixth. All to play for. Some pre-match thoughts here courtesy of the official QPR website: QPR manager Mark Warburton: “Luton are a very good team, but we just have to focus on ourselves and be ready for each game. This league is unique but hopefully, if we can reach the levels we know we’re capable of, we’ll be in a good place.” Nathan Jones, Luton Town Manager: “QPR are a fantastic club with history, we know it’s a difficult game. They have a great squad and I expect them to be very strong and pose a huge threat to us and be a very good test.” What do you mean, you haven’t read ‘10 things to look out for in the Premier League this weekend’?? Remedy that immediately by clicking this link: It’s being reported that Manchester City have suspended their partnership with the cryptocurrency start-up, 3Key, pending further investigations. More on that as we get it – here’s our story from yesterday in the meantime: The West Ham United defender Angelo Ogbonna will miss the rest of the season with a cruciate knee ligament injury, manager David Moyes confirmed on Friday. Ogbonna was injured in the 3-2 victory over Liverpool two weeks ago and requires surgery. “We think surgery will take place over the next couple of days and that is really sad, he has done a great job for us, he is a great boy, a great team player,” Moyes said before Saturday’s meeting with Wolverhampton Wanderers. “He is someone we love having around and more importantly his performances have been excellent for us so it is a real sad moment for him and us. Most people who know about injuries and cruciate ligament injuries know they tend to take somewhere around about nine months. “You look at (Virgil) Van Dijk and people of that ilk and how long it takes for recovery. There is not a quick return from cruciates, there is a period which has to be taken for recovery time. So I would probably say yes it will be hard for Angelo to play again this season.” Moyes also believes there is more to come from his side. “If the season finished now I would be ecstatic, drinking champagne because of how good the team has done but we have another 20 or more games to go so we just have to continue how we have been playing and keep the players pushing on,” he said. “But I think we can play better, there is more to come and players who can step up again.” (Reuters) On this day in 2001: A 4-4 Premier League draw between Charlton and West Ham, featuring a couple of bits of Paolo Di Canio magic: Any MLS fans in today? Here, from a little earlier, are our playoff predictions ... Shortly before 4am on Thursday morning, a private chartered plane touched down on a freezing London runway. On board were 130 exhausted, nervous but extremely relieved female footballers and their families, whose dramatic journey to the UK from Afghanistan started more than four months ago, before Kabul fell to the Taliban and triggered an exodus. What’s your favourite Kevin Muscat memory? You can email email me or tweet about that, or anything else, within reason. Random football memory alert: I saw France, under Lemerre, play a ‘friendly’ against Australia at the MCG in 2001. It was a 1-1 draw, and largely unmemorable, aside from Kevin Muscat going in studs up on Christophe Dugarry. “Football isn’t a game of skittles,” Lemerre observed of Muscat’s challenge. “What happened to Dugarry is something I regret bitterly … brutality is something I cannot accept.” I thought the story about alleged fake vaccination certificates in Germany was from left-field, but this is also oddly eye-catching in its own way: Roger Lemerre, who managed France to the European Championship in 2000, has returned to coaching at the age of 80 at Etoile Sahel, the Tunisian club confirmed on Friday. The club have only four points from four games this season and have a place in the group stage of the African Champions League, starting in February. It will be Lemerre’s third stint at the club and a return to a country where he is revered after guiding Tunisia to their only African Cup of Nations title in 2004. The former France international took over as coach of his country’s national team after they won the 1998 World Cup and led them to Euro 2000 success but quit after their group-stage flop at the 2002 World Cup. He then won the Cup of Nations with Tunisia for a unique double of continental titles. (Reuters) The Blackpool head coach Neil Critchley has signed a new four-and-a-half-year deal to keep him at the club until June 2026. Critchley joined the Seasiders in March 2020 from Liverpool, and steered the side to promotion from League One into the Championship in his first full season in charge. On signing his new deal, Critchley told the club website: “I am absolutely delighted. It has been an immensely happy time for me at Blackpool. I’ve enjoyed every second of being here. I’m thankful to Simon [Sadler] and the club for showing their commitment towards me. I get to work with a great group of staff and a fantastic group of players who are hungry to improve. “We have already shared some success, however we are ambitious and I feel that we still have further development to come. With the support of our incredible fans, I’m hopeful that we can share some more happy times together in the future.” Blackpool are 10th in the Championship before Saturday’s clash with Swansea. The Chelsea Supporter’s Trust has issued a statement criticising the club for proposed ticket price increases from the 2022/23 season. According to the statement, some season tickets will increase ‘to over the triple the existing price’: Can Dean Smith kick off his Norwich tenure with a win against Southampton? Graham Searles investigates in our latest match preview: Much obliged David, thanks. To kick off the afternoon session, how about a smattering of Serie A news from Italy, via Reuters: Massimiliano Allegri has urged Juventus to do their talking on the pitch when they travel to face Lazio on Saturday in a key clash in the Serie A top-four race. The Turin club ended a three-match winless league run by beating Fiorentina before the international break. But a sluggish start to the season left them eighth after 12 matches, three points behind Lazio in fifth and 14 points adrift of joint-leaders Napoli and AC Milan. “In this moment we must act, not think. We are lagging behind in the table, four points from fourth place, and gossiping about it is no use to anyone,” Allegri said on Friday. “We need to just think about looking to slowly but surely improve in the attacking and defensive phases, as well as our league position.” Allegri confirmed that striker Paulo Dybala is doubtful due to a calf injury, while Aaron Ramsey has also sustained a knock. And after my brief co-pilot stint, I’ll hand you back to today’s main plane driver, Captain Luke McLaughlin. Claudio Ranieri has looked to the skies again in his latest press conference. This time he’s compared football management to, erm, skydiving. From the man who once said, “I say my team is like the RAF, it’s fantastic - whoosh whoosh!”, comes this: “A manager is like a parachutist – you don’t know if the parachute will open or not. And sometimes, people don’t even give you the parachute! “When you take a decision, you are alone. But of course when you think about it, you think ‘I am alone for the decision’, but of course there’s a club behind you, there’s players who can express your idea. “That’s it, there is satisfaction also. But of course the manager is a man alone.” So there. Appropriately, Watford host the Red Devils on Saturday. A few more details on Kevin De Bruyne’s positive Covid-19 test here. Everton manager Rafael Benitez says key men Dominic Calvert-Lewin and Abdoulaye Doucoure are still a little while away from being fit. Calvert-Lewin has not played since the end of August due to a thigh problem, while Doucoure has been out for a month after breaking his metatarsal. In addition, Everton are without Yerry Mina (hamstring), Andre Gomes (calf) and Tom Davies (knee) for the trip to Manchester City on Sunday (2pm). “All are progressing well but none are ready yet,” said Benitez. “Doucoure is a metatarsal, so the bone has to heal. One week, two weeks maximum he will be fine. Dominic, two to three weeks.” Manchester United travel to Watford on Saturday (3pm) and it’s fair to say their form is a mixed bag. United’s last nine results in all competitions show a noticeable lack of consecutive letters. LWDLWLWDL Here’s Ole: “We know the poor run of form puts ourselves under pressure but that pressure should be a joy, it should be something that makes us a better team and makes every player perform at their best level.” Elsewhere in Manchester, Ole Solskjær is fielding questions about his future and how safe he feels. Despite the international break offering some brief respite, it hasn’t been forgotten how City totally outplayed United in one of the most comprehensive 2-0 wins in Premier League history last time. “The players, the staff, myself and the club, we are all working towards one goal and that’s for this team to improve and get better results,” said the Norwegian. “The fans are still supporting the team and the club. They’ve been through this period and backed this team through the rebuild. “You know when you lose a game you’re always disappointed and under pressure. We’ve communicated well and openly and honestly. There’s one game now that matters but also there’s what goes on after that. We’re all refreshed, this week has been really good in training and we’re ready for tomorrow.” More from Pep. Here he is with some plus and minus points of the international break. “As a club manager it is a dream because I got a one week holiday to look at my tan - much better than the United game. “But I am concerned because we are unlucky, we always have problems when players come back from international break. This is not an exception.” Kevin De Bruyne will miss Manchester City’s trip to Everton on Sunday after testing positive for Covid-19. The Belgium became infected during the international break and Pep Guardiola explained in his press conference: “Kevin got positive from Covid. He will be 10 days isolated.” Pep could be short of playmaker options, with Jack Grealish a major doubt and Phil Foden not certain to feature. Grealish picked up a knock that forced him to pull out of the England squad for Monday’s World Cup qualifier in San Marino while Foden has a leg issue. Guardiola said: “Jack is getting better, Phil Foden came back with a problem in his leg. Jack I don’t think (will be available), Phil maybe.” Some Tottenham v Leeds team news for you. This one is Sunday’s 4.30pm kick-off. Tottenham will be forced to make changes for the visit of Leeds with Cristian Romero and Oliver Skipp unavailable for Sunday’s Premier League fixture. Romero sustained an unspecified injury while away with Argentina and Skipp has a one-match suspension to serve after he received a fifth booking of the season at Everton two weeks ago. Giovani Lo Celso is another who has to be assessed following a knock picked up on international duty. Pierre-Emile Hojbjerg is expected to be fit and Antonio Conte has also been boosted by Ryan Sessegnon and Bryan Gil being able to return to training after recent hamstring issues. Leeds will be without Patrick Bamford again, with the striker set to miss his ninth game in all competitions due to an ankle injury. Teenage striker Joe Gelhardt is not likely to feature after withdrawing from the England Under-20 squad through injury. Defenders Luke Ayling, Robin Koch (both knee) and Junior Firpo (muscle strain) are still unavailable and Jamie Shackleton remains doubtful. (PA) Thanks very much Luke. I’ve just been reading Max Rushden’s well explained and yet still baffling piece on cryptocurrency. If I bought a piece of football/art history, I reckon I’d go for Clodoaldo’s stepover and dribble against Italy in the 1970 World Cup final. For some reason I’m obsessed by this piece of jinkery and, with most bidders going for the end product - Carlos Alberto’s (ball gets lucky bounce) thumping drive to make it 4-1 - maybe I’d pick it up on the cheap. Now, the time has come for me to grab a spot of lunch, and I will hand you over to Friday football countdown legend David Tindall to guide you through the next hour. Eddie Howe has indicated he intends to rebuild Newcastle United around Jonjo Shelvey. The midfielder, undeniably gifted and blessed with a stellar passing range, has spent significant periods of his St James’ Park career on the sidelines after being dropped at times by Rafael Benítez and, more recently, Steve Bruce. Following on from Thomas Tuchel’s earlier press conference, Ed Aarons reports on his praise for Conor Gallagher, Chelsea’s on-loan midfielder at Crystal Palace: A story from earlier this week on the EFL, looking ahead to next season and the World Cup in Qatar: To accommodate the bizarrely-positioned tournament, the domestic season will begin on 30 July, one week before the Premier League. The Wolves legend, George Berry, turns 64 today. Happy Birthday to you sir. The Celtic manager Ange Postecoglou is bracing himself for a St Johnstone struggle at Hampden Park on Saturday. The sides meet in the semi-final of the Premier Sports Cup for the chance to play Rangers or Hibernian, who meet at the national stadium on Sunday, in the December final. The former Australia manager said of the Perth side: “They had a fantastic season last year, they won two trophies and they showed that in the big games they are up to the task and they are not going to fear anyone. “From our perspective, we are expecting a tough challenge but to be fair whoever you play in the semi-final of a tournament, you know it is not going to be an easy game. It is going to be a struggle, an arm-wrestle, it is going to be competitive, there is going to be some nervousness in both sides because you know the consequences of success and failure, everything is decided on the day. “It is going to be a typical cup game where both sides will put their best foot forward and from our perspective it is about making sure we play our football as we have been, we have been in good form, home, away, in all competitions.” The Werder Bremen coach, Markus Anfang, has denied using a fake Covid-19 vaccination certificate after an investigation was launched by German authorities, the club said. Werder, playing in Germany’s second division, said an investigation was under way but the coach denied allegations he used a fake certificate following a meeting with club bosses late on Thursday evening. “On Thursday evening the management of SV Werder Bremen was informed of an ongoing investigation into an alleged use of a forged vaccination certificate by Markus Anfang,” a club statement said. “In a personal discussion with the management Markus Anfang vehemently rejected the accusations and assured them he was fully vaccinated and had not made use of a fake vaccination certificate.” The coach said he had been vaccinated twice at an official vaccination centre. “Just like any other double-jabbed citizen I got my two vaccination shots at an official vaccination centre and received the stickers to put on my yellow vaccination passport,” Anfang said in a club statement. “I then digitised it at a pharmacy and obviously assumed that all was in order. I very much hope this issue is cleared up quickly.” The vaccination of players and team staff has been an issue for months in German football. Bayern Munich midfielder Joshua Kimmich is the most high-profile player to refuse inoculation, citing concerns over the long-term effects of the vaccine. (Reuters) The Crystal Palace manager Patrick Vieira has given an upbeat bulletin on Eberechi Eze, who is nearing a return to first-team action after a long injury layoff: “He’s doing really well ... He played two games, 90 minutes, and has been training with the team,” Vieira said. “He will be part of the group who will travel to Burnley. Obviously he’s a talented player, but he is still a long way to go from his best. We have to remind ourselves he will need time to get back to where he was ... but he will get there ... he is improving, but I think we have to give him time to where he was before his injuries.” And if you missed it, here’s Ben Fisher interviewing the Swansea head coach, Russell Martin: Here’s an hour-long film from Eli Mengem and Copa90 on Scotland at Euro 2020 entitled “It’s Shite Being Scottish”. Enjoy: Former Rangers players and coaches were among those to attend a public memorial service for Walter Smith on Friday. Ex-Rangers players Derek McInnes, Andy Goram and Charlie Miller were among the first to arrive at Glasgow Cathedral. Kris Boyd was also in attendance. Jim Stewart and Kenny McDowall, who were on Smith’s coaching staff during his second spell in charge of Rangers, also arrived ahead of the service. Smith died aged 73 last month and a private family funeral was held earlier this month. (PA) Fitness-wise, at the start of the press conference, the Liverpool manager Klopp said that Jordan Henderson and Andy Robertson haven’t trained since coming back from international duty, and are not certain to be in shape to start against Arsenal tomorrow evening. On the plus side he said Sadio Mané is ‘good’ and Fabinho is hopeful of training later today. What messages did Klopp send to Steven Gerrard after his appointment at Aston Villa? “What we wrote ... it’s completely fine if that stays private.” Klopp on Arsenal’s improvement: “I’m not surprised ... with the quality of Arsenal, there was never a chance they would stay where they were at the start of the season ... they are good ... they know they were lucky in one or two games, where it could have been different, for instance Crystal Palace played an incredible game against them and they equalised very late ... but these kind of things you need. They won a lot of games, and that’s where they are ... we are not surprised that Arsenal are a really good football team, but we are a really good football team as well.” Klopp’s having words now before the match against Arsenal: “Title race? It’s a bit early for that. To stay up there [in the table] ... you need results, and we didn’t have enough good results in the last few weeks ... we lost at West Ham, but even if we had drawn there, the situation would not be massively different. We know we have to perform, we have to fight ... Arsenal is a really good football team, but we are at Anfield, and we need to show that ... I’m looking forward to it, can’t wait to start.” Was it a good time for the international break, Klopp is asked? “No. I hate international breaks. And it didn’t help from an injury point of view ... it was not helpful, I would have loved to play the weekend after.” A touch more Tuchel here, from PA: Thomas Tuchel expects “good news” on a potential contract extension for Chelsea’s Denmark defender Andreas Christensen. “For Andreas, from my point of view, everybody wants the same thing, the coach wants the same thing, the club wants the same thing and the player wants the same thing,” said Tuchel. “So, hopefully and obviously I expect some good news in the next days, but every case is different. And you can end up in situations like this, but the situations are handled from all sides very carefully, very professionally and in a very mature manner. And so during the process we can produce performances that we need to fulfil our goals and that’s the most important thing. Things are very mature, very respectful and very clear.” Jürgen Klopp is also going to have a chat soon, so that’s nice. I’ll write up some quotes from his press conference ASAP. The Southampton manager Ralph Hasenhuttl wants more protection from referees for his attacking full-back Tino Livramento. The former Chelsea player Livramento is one of the most fouled players in the Premier League, and pulled out of England Under-21 duty following a bruising encounter with Aston Villa a fortnight ago. The 19-year-old has emerged as one of the Premier League’s brightest talents, and Hasenhüttl said: “That means that he doesn’t stop going one-on-one when he has the chance to do it. He is super-quick when he has the ball and when he is passing the players, the only chance they have is to sometimes make a foul because otherwise he’s gone. “This is a big strength of ours this season, and we have to use him as often as possible. It’s always a good sign that he’s lively and hard to stop. As long as he’s not injured after this, it’s OK. We must take care of him and the referees should also take care of him when there is a situation like the last game when his opponent should have been sent off after 30 minutes. “They must have open eyes for these situations. But, for him, I’m not scared because he likes to do this and he has all the ability to do this. It’s what I want to see.” Hasenhuttl confirmed Livramento will be fit to face Norwich on Saturday despite pulling out of England duty. James Ward-Prowse had to withdraw from the senior England squad through illness but he is also available. (PA) Patrick Vieira is speaking now-ish, but it appears to be premium content on the Crystal Palace site, so sadly I can’t watch live. Quotes to follow soon, though. The previews are dropping thick and fast. Here’s Leicester v Chelsea: It’s match preview time! Graham Searles takes a look at Villa v Brighton: PadraigOHooligan comments BTL: “Tuchel on Conor Gallagher: “he finishes maybe in the shower, that’s the earliest moment when he finishes running and stealing balls”. “He does WHAT in the shower? Sounds hazardous and incredibly painful. No wonder they’ve sent him out on loan.” I was waiting for that. Tuchel was riffing on that joke about the defender who keeps marking the opposition striker in the bar after the match. The showers/balls things was bound to raise eyebrows. Now, back to our regular programming. Yesterday marked a year until the World Cup begins in Qatar. Sean Ingle took a look at what fans travelling to the tournament can expect – The Arsenal head coach, Mikel Arteta, says his players are aware of the challenge of playing at Liverpool with the London club looking to end a nine-year winless streak at Anfield in the Premier League on Saturday. Arsenal were bottom of the table in August after losing their first three league games but Arteta’s side have jumped to fifth with an unbeaten run of eight. They have not won a league game at Anfield since 2012, however, when Arteta was still playing for them. “It is a test,” Arteta said on Friday. “Anfield is a fascinating stadium to play football. You have to be at your best and raise your level to the maximum standards emotionally, physically, technically and tactically because if you don’t you will get exposed. To go to Anfield is always a test. But again if you are able to do that as well, there are not that many grounds as good to feel that you are a proper footballer.” Arteta said his in-form side are keen to maintain their momentum by playing at the “highest level” against Liverpool, who are a spot above them in the table on 22 points. “Jürgen [Klopp] and his staff have managed to bring the club to the best moments in their history and sustained it which is the hardest thing to do,” Arteta said. “They have transformed the energy around the place, what they have created in the stadium is something special and they have been extremely successful.” Arteta said that Thomas Partey and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang will be assessed before the match due to injury issues, while Sead Kolasinac (left ankle) and Granit Xhaka (right knee) are still recovering. (Reuters) Matthew Hall reports on reports of abuse in women’s football in Canada. Sandi Leroux, Sydney Leroux’s mother, says the allegations of bullying and abuse around the Vancouver Whitecaps and Canada’s youth teams were well known – and not dealt with: A few more lines from Antonio Conte’s press conference here, including a Twitter video. The Italian says he likes what he’s seen at the club so far, behind the scenes: “I have a positive sensation ... all the people that work here are totally involved ... this must be very important, because, also, what happens around the pitch can bring points, can add points on the table ... in my managerial career, to involve all the people, to give them the right importance, is the right way ... every single person that works at Tottenham has to feel that they are an important person. The sense of belonging is this ... you must be involved with your heart, with your passion.” Can you feel the love? “Eddie Howe has been hugely impressive since his arrival and it tells you so much about the previous lot that his arrival at the training ground before dawn brought an outpouring of love from the fans,” comments Newcastle fan faddy1966 below the line. “Having said that, when the new owners decided to wash the windows at St James’ Park it evoked a similar response, and they say we demand too much on Tyneside.” Antonio Conte has warned Tottenham’s record signing Tanguy Ndombele to adapt quickly to his demands and learn to play “for the best of the team”. The France midfielder has shown only flashes of his ability since joining from Lyon in 2019 for £55m, starting 45 Premier League matches, and is under his fifth Spurs manager, including the caretaker Ryan Mason. Ndombele has been used in a variety of midfield roles and Conte believes that harnessing the 24-year-old’s talent could be crucial to reviving Tottenham’s fortunes. Full story: The Brentford head coach Thomas Frank says Newcastle’s change of manager is “terrible timing” for his side. The Bees, on a run of four successive Premier League defeats, travel to St James’ Park for Eddie Howe’s first match in charge. With a sell-out crowd ready to roar on the new regime and players keen to impress their new manager Frank is wary of what might lie in store for his side with little useful analysis to fall back on. “It’s impossible to predict. It’s terrible timing for us because normally when you are going to all the other games you played - maybe except for the first one against Arsenal - we can analyse their last games,” Frank said. “Now there is a new manager coming in with a new style of play so we actually haven’t looked that much at Newcastle, more what Eddie did at Bournemouth. “I think he is an extremely talented manager. He is one of the most interesting, young English managers and I’m very surprised he’s not had a job for 16 months. He stands for progressive football, front-foot pressing and wants to dominate on the ball and did a top job at Bournemouth, a job I admired a lot. I can’t be 100 per cent sure on (Newcastle’s) shape but I expect them to come flying out pressing us.” (PA) The cryptocurrency world is targeting football fans in a major way and, while it may enrich some, it comes with major risks, writes Max Rushden: The Paris Saint-Germain manager, Mauricio Pochettino, has said coaching the Ligue 1 side with “the best players in the world” is not easy because he has to manage their emotions as well as their entourages. PSG have an embarrassment of riches in attack with Lionel Messi joining forces with Neymar and Kylian Mbappé while Ángel Di María, Mauro Icardi and Julian Draxler are also options, leaving Pochettino with selection problems every week. “We manage people with emotions, everyone’s behaviour is not a flat line. It’s a succession of ups and downs - one is happy, another is hurt, one is performing well, another not,” Pochettino told L’Equipe. “I think the most important thing for the staff is to try to balance the moods. We must not forget that we have in our hands the best players in the world, but also their families, their media entourages, their followers. It’s not easy.” PSG, who are 10 points clear at the top of Ligue 1 and play Nantes at home on Saturday, failed to defend the league title last season and fell at the semi-final stage in the Champions League. “PSG wants to win,” Pochettino added. “To win the Champions League, the Championship, the Cup - all the matches. They didn’t come looking for us to build a project, asking us what we needed to develop our ideas, or what we like,” he said. (Reuters) And here’s Nick Ames again, with some analysis on Gerrard’s task at Villa Park: Steven Gerrard, the new Aston Villa manager, spoke to the media yesterday and insisted his new job is not merely a stepping stone to managing Liverpool. Nick Ames reports: Tuchel is also asked about Conor Gallagher, who is impressing on loan at Crystal Palace, and if he thinks his future is at Chelsea: “It’s too early to talk about it, and it’s way too early to talk about it in public, before we talk about it, and what his goals are. This will happen in summer ... as a teammate I would loved to have play with him, because he is a helper, and he starts on minute one, and he finishes maybe in the shower, that’s the earliest moment when he finishes running and stealing balls ... it’s up to him to keep on going, keep the feet on the ground, and the rest we will discuss not in a rush ... He deserves the very best because he’s such a nice guy and a top player.” Tuchel is asked about preparing the squad after the international break – specifically when players have had different experiences and disappointments, such as Jorginho missing a penalty for Italy: “If there is a guy who has enough personality to handle disappointment, it’s Jorgi,” Tuchel says. “The most important thing is when he arrives here in Cobham, he feels safe, that everybody will support him no matter what happened outside this building ... he’s not the first one to miss an important penalty and he will not be the last one. He has enough difficulties in his career, if you know the story from Jorgi ... this is a bump in the road and not more ... he can continue to play at the highest level. “In general, it’s a demanding one to prepare 12.30 matches, we are not used to it ... it’s such an early time to eat, to prepare, and have a calm preparation ... I don’t think you will find a lot of coaches who like it – to have the full squad on Friday and to play 12.30 Saturday – but it’s a challenge, there are no excuses, and we will not start opening the dicussion about excuses ... it’s on us to show how strong we are tomorrow.” Before tomorrow’s meeting with Leicester, the Chelsea head coach Thomas Tuchel is asked for an injury update on Mateo Kovacic, Romelu Lukaku and others: “I can tell you that Mateo and Romelu are still out for the game in Leicester. Romelu is very close to team training, so he will join the squad on Sunday, let’s see how this works out ... he’s trying hard to come back as soon as possible ... Mateo will take some more days ... Timo is in team training since yesterday so let’s see, we have another training in two hours, then we will decide if it makes sense if he’s even in the squad or on the bench ... Christian Pulisic feels fine ... Thiago Silva will be in the training, he did not play [on international duty] but he has some travel in his body, so let’s see how this works out ... Mason [Mount] is back in training and looking hungry and fresh and in a good spirit. But we need to evaluate, he did this week training sessions, looks good, but we need to see if he could start or play 90 minutes.” “Newport Pagnell Town v Leighton Town in the FA Vase for me tomorrow,” comments hennessy below the line. “Localish derby, watching the game with pint in hand and only a 10 minute drive home.” The waiting is nearly over. Sounds like fun – enjoy. In fitness news for Norwich and Southampton, who play tomorrow at 3pm, Dean Smith has no fresh injury concerns. Mathias Normann and Teemu Pukki missed training on Thursday having returned from international duty but are available to play. Sam Byram is set to make a major step forward in putting his injury nightmare behind him by playing for the under-23s on Friday but the full-back, who has not played first-team football for 20 months, is still some way off a return. Christoph Zimmermann remains out following ankle surgery last month, while fellow defender Grant Hanley has recently been struggling with a groin problem. James Ward-Prowse is fit for Southampton despite pulling out of England duty through illness. Defender Tino Livramento and forward Armando Broja are also available, having missed their stints on international duty as well. Defender Jack Stephens is the only absentee with a knee injury. Let’s take a look at La Liga, where Xavi begins his reign as Barcelona head coach against Espanyol tomorrow night. Can he turn the club around? Philipp Lahm writes that it’s going to be difficult, however impressive his CV as a player: Norwich and Dean Smith have gone nice and early with today’s press conference, too: in fact he was speaking to bleary-eyed journalists at 9am. He believes Norwich have the quality in the squad to avoid relegation from the Premier League. “I must say I’ve been really pleased, myself and (assistant) Craig Shakespeare with the quality, the facilities, the people at the training ground but then the players as well,” Smith said. “The attitude in training yesterday was excellent and the quality hasn’t disappointed for sure. “The reason I’m in this seat obviously is because somebody lost their job because results weren’t happening and the performances weren’t getting results,” Smith added, referring to Daniel Farke. “We all know this is a tough league to get points in but from what we’ve seen early doors on the training ground, there is enough quality to get enough points. Players just need to have that belief. I’m fortunate in that not many managers get to walk into a football club on the back of a win but this is what we’ve done. We beat Brentford in Daniel’s last game and now we need to build on that.” The new Newcastle manager Howe added that he does not expect to lose any sleep as he prepares for his first game in charge. Asked how he was feeling ahead of the Premier League fixture, Howe said: “Do you know, I don’t tend to struggle to sleep. I’ll have to let you know tomorrow whether my sleep is affected tonight. “As long as training is done as I want it to, as long as I feel I’ve given my best, that’s all I can do and I think I will sleep well in the knowledge that I’ve given everything I can for the team and for the club. Then, as always with football, you have to let the game roll. Obviously you can influence the game through subs and everything else, but you just hope that your work is good enough.” Newcastle’s social media team have kindly published some quotes from the new manager Eddie Howe on Twitter, before the meeting with Brentford at St James’ Park tomorrow: “I’m looking forward to the challenge. I’m under no illusions about our current situation and what we need to do,” Howe said. “Tomorrow is a massive day for the football club and the atmosphere will be a brilliant thing for us all to experience. “I’d like to think you’ll see a team playing in the way I want them to and in a way befitting of what the supporters want to see. I like to think you’ll see a team playing for the supporters, the badge &amp; doing the city proud. “The players have responded really well to what we’ve asked them to do. It’s been intense but I don’t think we’ve over-worked the players. We’ve tried to implement our philosophy in a steady way and shape the team in the way we want to going forward. “We need the players to play in a natural way but in a way that we want them to. I think that’s a very delicate balance to get into and that’s where your training becomes so important because everything should be done in a way that it becomes the norm for the players. “We’ve tried to implement what we feel the players can grasp quickly and leave a few things for the future. It has to be a gradual process so the players aren’t taking to the pitch overloaded with information.” The American broadcaster NBC has renewed its television deal with the Premier League in a new six-year agreement worth £2bn. That is almost double what the company, the home of Premier League coverage in the United States since 2013, paid for their current contract in 2016. Chelsea Women were made to work hard for victory in Champions League Group A last night: Sam Kerr scored the only goal in the second half against Servette, a side they’d hammered 7-0 last week. Here’s Suzanne Wrack’s report: Good morning and welcome. With the inconvenience of international football out of the way for the next few months, and after the latest round of managerial musical chairs, there will be plenty to get our teeth into over the next eight hours or so. Eddie Howe at Newcastle, Steven Gerrard at Aston Villa and Dean Smith at Norwich are all preparing to lead their new teams into battle for the first time so there will be no shortage of attention on those pre-match press conferences – and of course there’s a full programme lined up across the Premier League, Championship, WSL, Football League, in the Scottish Leagues and across Europe. We’ll bring you all the big news, along with some of the medium-sized and small news from across the leagues as the day unfolds. But what better to place to start than 10 things to look out for in the Premier League this weekend:After what will no doubt prove to be a brutal and toxic rerun of the most recent World Cup final on Saturday, Amazon Prime customers might be forgiven for switching over to the Wheel of Time for their Saturday evening entertainment. But, nestled between England v South Africa and the late-night headliner of France v New Zealand, Amazon has one other “exclusive original” drama – it’s Wales v Australia. When the schedules were being drawn up, this might have set the pulses racing like Rosamund Pike with a bow and arrow. Wales are Six Nations champions, and Australia had risen to No 3 in the world on the back of five wins in a row, two of them against the world champions themselves. Neither side has enjoyed an uplifting autumn. Wales, for all their recent success, are wallowing in ninth place in the rankings, while Australia have lost to Scotland and England so far on their tour of Europe. Michael Hooper, Australia’s captain and centurion, is out with a foot injury, making this only the eighth Test he has missed since his debut nine years and 118 caps ago. Punters would be forgiven for seeing his absence as a gaping hole where the Wallabies’ heart and soul should be. Meanwhile, Wales have suffered a scourge in personnel and, more obviously, experience. They finished the Six Nations with a starting team of more than 1,000 caps; the side that will start this weekend has fewer than 500. This need not be a negative, such is the natural renewal required of any team, but casual punters might well consider this an Amazon drama of understudies. Alun Wyn Jones exited stage left early in the opening game of the autumn – a horrible defeat to the All Blacks – clutching his troublesome shoulder and his 161 caps, only 50 shy of the total of Wales’s entire pack against Australia. Now Wayne Pivac has chosen to dispense with another 93 caps by leaving Jonathan Davies, his captain in the defeat to South Africa the week after the one to New Zealand, out of the squad altogether for this. Other absentees this autumn include Ken Owens, Justin Tipuric, Leigh Halfpenny and George North, laden with caps, all of them. But from out of the wreckage steps Ellis Jenkins. One unqualified boon of Wales’s autumn is his return from a nightmarish injury that cost him three years of international rugby. If it is possible to find leaders to replace those of the calibre of Jones and his predecessor, Sam Warburton, Wales have long thought that in Jenkins they might find that man, which made that long absence all the more galling. He has not disappointed since his return in the defeat to South Africa a fortnight ago, which was Wales’s most gratifying and promising performance of the autumn. Last week, the captaincy which he had held before that knee injury in 2018 was returned to him for the win over Fiji. Now his retention of it for the Wallabies game feels more like a permanent appointment. “I don’t feel any extra pressure,” he says of his leadership of a team missing so much experience. “My job is to play well first and foremost. Alun and Foxy [Davies] are big voices for us, but there’s lots of those throughout the team. We’ve got to get on with it. Rather than view it as a big loss, we’ve got to see it as an opportunity for someone else.” Wales are boosted by the return of Wyn Jones and Tomas Francis on either side of the front row, while Jack Adams resumes on the wing and Willis Halaholo assumes the place normally reserved for Davies at centre. In the back row, Aaron Wainwright returns alongside Jenkins and another flanker who has had a fine autumn, Taine Basham. Wales are placing their faith – and possibly future direction – in a light but flexible back five of the pack. Their suitability will be tested this weekend by a bruising Wallaby outfit, in which Pete Samu replaces Hooper, further spiced up by the inclusion of the “Tongan Thor”, Taniela Tupou, as ferocious a prop with ball in hand as rugby currently knows. He could certainly pass as a character in an Amazon Prime fantasy epic. Maybe punters should not turn over quite so soon.The double child killer and rapist Colin Pitchfork has been arrested and recalled to prison two months after he was released, the Ministry of Justice has said. It is understood he was returned to custody on Friday over a breach of his licence conditions – which he had agreed to observe on his release – and his rerelease will be a matter for the Parole Board. It is understood his behaviour was a cause for concern for probation officers who were monitoring him under a strict regime. Pitchfork, now in his early 60s, was the first man convicted of murder on the basis of DNA evidence in 1988 when he confessed to the rape and murder of two schoolgirls. He received a life sentence for raping and killing Lynda Mann and Dawn Ashworth, both 15, in Leicestershire in 1983 and 1986. A Probation Service spokesperson said: “Protecting the public is our No 1 priority so when offenders breach the conditions of their release and potentially pose an increased risk, we don’t hesitate to return them to custody.” There was an outcry when Pitchfork was released from prison in September following an unsuccessful campaign to keep him behind bars. It is understood the breach of his licence conditions did not involve a fresh criminal act and nor did it require police to become involved, other than to arrest him so he could be returned to prison. Officials declined to say what the concerning behaviour was and it is understood the families of his victims were being contacted to be briefed. Typical licence conditions for a serious offender such as Pitchfork include regular reporting to police and probation, restrictions on where they can go and declaring all electronic devices in their possession. At the time of his release, Dawn’s mother, Barbara Ashworth, spoke out against the decision to free him, saying: “Life should have meant life.” On Friday, she told the PA Media news agency: “I’m pleased that he’s been put away and women and girls are safe and protected from him now. It’s a safer place when he’s behind bars and I won’t have to worry about other people being hurt by him for the time being. But there’s always the worry that he might get out again, he seems to have a lot of people on his side who give him the benefit of the doubt. But for now, I have to be pleased about the news.” Pitchfork was caught after the world’s first mass screening for DNA, when 5,000 men in three villages were asked to volunteer blood or saliva samples, although he initially evaded justice by getting a colleague to take the test for him. The Parole Board ruled he was “suitable for release” at a hearing in March despite this being denied in 2016 and 2018. He was placed on the sex offender register and was subject to other licence conditions. In July the Parole Board rejected calls from the government to reconsider the decision. Robert Buckland, the then justice secretary, had formally asked it to reconsider the move on the grounds there was an arguable case the decision was “irrational”. The government plans to overhaul the parole system, with the findings of a review expected later this year. It has also sought to change legislation so child killers face life behind bars without parole.